S/PV.9381

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9381st meeting

Tuesday, 18 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cleverly/Dame Barbara Woodward. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Takei
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Gonçalves
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Sharaf
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Artificial intelligence: opportunities and risks for international peace
and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21049 (E)
*2321049*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Artificial intelligence: opportunities and risks
for international peace and security
The President: I warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral and the high-level representatives. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jack Clark,
co-Founder of Anthropic; and Mr. Yi Zeng, Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/528, which contains the text
of a letter dated 14 July 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom for convening the first debate on artificial
intelligence (AI) ever held in the Security Council.
I have been following the development of AI for
some time. Indeed, I told the General Assembly six
years ago that AI would have a dramatic impact on
sustainable development, the world of work and the
social fabric. But like everyone here, I have been shocked
and impressed by the newest form of AI — generative
AI — which is a radical advance in its capabilities.
The speed and reach of this new technology in all its
forms are utterly unprecedented. It has been compared
to the introduction of the printing press. But while it
took more than 50 years for printed books to become
widely available across Europe, ChatGPT reached
100 million users in just two months. The finance
industry estimates that AI could contribute between
$10 and $15 trillion dollars to the global economy
2/23

18/07/2023

by 2030. Almost every Government, large company and
organization in the world is working on an AI strategy.
But even its own designers have no idea where their
stunning technological breakthrough may lead.
It is clear that AI will have an impact on every
area of our lives, including the three pillars of the
United Nations. It has the potential to turbocharge
global development, from monitoring the climate crisis
to breakthroughs in medical research. It offers new
potential to realize human rights, particularly on health
and education. But the High Commissioner for Human
Rights has expressed alarm over evidence that AI can
amplify bias, reinforce discrimination and enable new
levels of authoritarian surveillance.
Today’s debate is an opportunity to consider the
impact of artificial intelligence on peace and security,
where it is already raising political, legal, ethical and
humanitarian concerns. I urge the Council to approach
this technology with a sense of urgency, a global lens
and a learner’s mindset — because what we have seen
is just the beginning. Never again will technological
innovation move as slowly as today.
AI is being put to work in connection with peace
and security, including by the United Nations. It is
increasingly being used to identify patterns of violence,
to monitor ceasefires and more, helping to strengthen
our peacekeeping, mediation and humanitarian efforts.
But AI tools can also be used by those with malicious
intent. AI models can help people to harm themselves
and each other, at massive scale.
Let us be clear: the malicious use of AI systems for
terrorist, criminal or State purposes could cause horrific
levels of death and destruction, widespread trauma
and deep psychological damage on an unimaginable
scale. AI-enabled cyberattacks are already targeting
critical infrastructure and our own peacekeeping
and humanitarian operations, causing great human
suffering. The technical and financial barriers to access
are low, including for criminals and terrorists.
Both military and non-military applications of AI
could have very serious consequences for global peace
and security. The advent of generative AI could be a
defining moment for disinformation and hate speech,
undermining truth, facts and safety, adding a new
dimension to the manipulation of human behaviour
and contributing to polarization and instability on a
vast scale. Deepfakes are just one new AI-enabled tool
that, if unchecked, could have serious implications for
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9381

peace and stability. And the unforeseen consequences
of some AI-enabled systems could create security risks
by accident.

experts, the private sector, United Nations agencies and
Governments around efforts to ensure that AI serves
the common good.

Look no further than social media. Tools and
platforms that were designed to enhance human
connection are now used to undermine elections, spread
conspiracy theories and incite hatred and violence.
Malfunctioning AI systems are another huge area for
concern. And the interaction between AI and nuclear
weapons, biotechnology, neurotechnology and robotics
is deeply alarming.

(spoke in English)

Generative AI has enormous potential for good and
evil at scale. Its creators themselves have warned that
much bigger, potentially catastrophic and existential
risks lie ahead. Without action to address those risks,
we are derelict in our responsibilities to present and
future generations.
(spoke in French)
The international community has a long history
of responding to new technologies with the potential
to disrupt our societies and economies. We have come
together at the United Nations to set new international
rules, sign new treaties and establish new global
agencies. While many countries have called for different
measures and initiatives around the governance of AI,
that requires a universal approach. And questions of
governance will be complex for several reasons.
First, powerful AI models are already widely
available to the general public. Secondly, unlike nuclear
material and chemical and biological agents, AI tools
can be moved around the world while leaving very little
trace. And thirdly, the private sector’s leading role in
AI has few parallels in other strategic technologies.
But we already have entry points. One is the 2018—
2019 guiding principles on lethal autonomous weapons
systems, agreed through the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons. I agree with the large number
of experts who have recommended the prohibition of
lethal autonomous weapons without human control.
A second is the 2021 recommendations on the ethics
of artificial intelligence agreed through UNESCO.
The Office of Counter-Terrorism, working with the
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, has
provided recommendations on how Member States can
tackle the potential use of AI for terrorist purposes. And
the AI for Good summits, hosted by the International
Telecommunications Union, have brought together

The best approach would address existing challenges
while also creating the capacity to monitor and respond
to future risks. It should be flexible and adaptable and
consider technical, social and legal questions. It should
integrate the private sector, civil society, independent
scientists and all those driving AI innovation. The need
for global standards and approaches makes the United
Nations the ideal place for that to happen. The Charter’s
emphasis on protecting succeeding generations gives
us a clear mandate to bring all stakeholders together
around the collective mitigation of long-term global
risks. AI poses just such a risk.
I therefore welcome calls from some Member
States for the creation of a new United Nations entity to
support collective efforts to govern this extraordinary
technology, inspired by such models as the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the International Civil
Aviation Organization and the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. The overarching goal of that body
would be to support countries to maximize the benefits
of AI for good, to mitigate existing and potential risks
and to establish and administer internationally agreed
mechanisms of monitoring and governance.
Let us be honest: there is a huge skills gap
around AI in Governments and other administrative
and security structures that must be addressed at the
national and global levels. A new United Nations
entity would gather expertise and put it at the disposal
of the international community. And it could support
collaboration on the research and development of AI
tools to accelerate sustainable development. As a first
step, I am convening a multistakeholder high-level
advisory board for artificial intelligence that will report
back on the options for global AI governance by the
end of this year. My upcoming policy brief on A New
Agenda for Peace will also make recommendations on
AI governance to Member States.
First, it will recommend that Member States
develop national strategies on the responsible design,
development and use of AI, consistent with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

23-210493/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, it will call on Member States to engage
in a multilateral process to develop norms, rules and
principles around military applications of AI, while
ensuring the engagement of other relevant stakeholders.
Thirdly, it will call on Member States to agree on a
global framework to regulate and strengthen oversight
mechanisms for the use of data-driven technology,
including artificial intelligence, for counterterrorism purposes.
The policy brief on a New Agenda for Peace will
also call for negotiations to be concluded by 2026 on a
legally binding instrument to prohibit lethal autonomous
weapons systems that function without human control
or oversight, and which cannot be used in compliance
with international humanitarian law.
I hope Member States will debate those options and
decide on the best course of action to establish the AI
governance mechanisms that are so urgently needed.
In addition to the recommendations of the New
Agenda for Peace, I urge agreement on the general
principle that human agency and control are essential
for nuclear weapons and should never be withdrawn.
The Summit of the Future, to be held next year, will
be an ideal opportunity for decisions on many of these
inter-related issues.
I urge the Council to exercise leadership with
regard to artificial intelligence and show the way
towards common measures we can take to ensure
the transparency, accountability and oversight of AI
systems. We must work together for AI that can bridge
social, digital and economic divides rather than push
us further apart. I urge Council members to join forces
and build trust for peace and security. We need a race to
develop AI for good, AI that is reliable and safe, that can
end poverty, banish hunger, cure cancer, supercharge
climate action and propel us towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. That is the race we
need, and it is a race that is possible and achievable.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Clark.
Mr. Clark: I am here today to offer a brief overview
of why artificial intelligence (AI) has become a subject
of concern for the world’s nations, what the next few
years hold for the development of the technology and
some ideas on how policymakers may choose to respond
4/23

18/07/2023

to a historic opportunity. The main takeaway from my
remarks should be that we cannot leave the development
of artificial intelligence solely to private-sector actors.
The Governments of the world must come together,
develop State capacity and make the development of
powerful AI systems a shared endeavour across all
parts of society, rather than one dictated solely by a
small number of firms competing with one another in
the marketplace.
Why am I making this statement? It helps to have
a sense of recent history. A decade ago, a company
in England called DeepMind published research
that showed how to teach an AI system to play old
computer games like Space Invaders and Pong. Fastforward to 2023, and the same techniques that were
used in that research are now being used to create AI
systems that can beat military pilots in air-fighting
simulations, stabilize the plasma in fusion reactors
and even design the components of next-generation
semiconductors. Similar trends have played out in
computer vision. A decade ago, scientists were able to
create basic image classifiers and generate very crude,
pixelated images. Today image classification is used
across the world to inspect goods on production lines,
analyse satellite imagery and improve State security.
And AI models that are drawing attention today, such
as OpenAI’s ChatGPT, Google’s Bard and my own
company Anthropic’s Claude, are themselves also being
developed by corporate interests. A lot has therefore
happened in 10 years, and we can expect new and even
more powerful systems in the coming years. We can
expect those trends to continue. Across the world, it
is private-sector actors that have the sophisticated
computers and large pools of data and capital resources
to build such systems, and it therefore seems likely
that private-sector actors will continue to define their
development. While that will bring huge benefits to
humans across the world, it also poses potential threats
to peace, security and global stability.
Those threats stem from two essential qualities
of AI systems. The first is their potential for misuse,
and the second is their unpredictability, as well as
the fragility inherent in the fact that they are being
developed by such a narrow set of actors. With regard
to misuse, AI systems have an increasingly broad
set of capabilities, and some beneficial capabilities
sit alongside others that can pose threats of profound
misuse. For example, an AI system that can help us in
understanding the science of biology may also be one that
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

can be used to create biological weapons. With regard
to unpredictability, a fundamental sense surrounding
AI is that we do not understand its systems. It is as
though we are building engines without understanding
the science of combustion. That means that once AI
systems are developed and deployed, people identify
new uses for them that were not anticipated by their
developers. Many of them will be positive, but some, as
I have mentioned, could be misuses. And the problem
of chaotic or unpredictable behaviour is even more
challenging. Once deployed, an AI system may exhibit
subtle problems that were not identified during its
development. We should therefore think very carefully
about how to ensure that developers of such systems
can be held accountable so that they build and deploy
safe and reliable systems that do not compromise
global security.
In order to dramatize the issue, it may be helpful
to use an analogy. I want to challenge everyone
listening to this briefing not to think of AI as a specific
technology but rather as a type of human labour that
can be bought and sold at the speed of a computer and
that is getting cheaper and more capable over time. As
I have described, it is a form of labour that is being
developed by one narrow class of actors — companies.
We should be clear-eyed about the immense political
leverage that affords. If you can create a substitute
or augmentation for human labour and sell it into the
world, you will become more influential over time.
Many of the challenges of AI policy seem simpler to
think about if we look at them this way. How should
the nations of the world react to the fact that anyone
who has enough money and data can now easily create
an artificial expert in a given domain? Who should
have access to that power? How should Governments
regulate that power? Who should be the actors able
to create and sell those so-called experts? And what
kinds of experts can we allow to be created? Those are
huge questions.
Based on my experience, I think that a useful thing
that we can do is to work on developing ways to test
for capabilities, misuses and potential safety flaws in
these systems. If we are creating and distributing new
types of workers that will go into the global economy,
it stands to reason that we would like to be able to
characterize them, evaluate their capabilities and
understand their failings. After all, humans go through
rigorous evaluation and on-the-job testing for many

S/PV.9381

critical roles, ranging from the emergency services to
the military. Why not the same for AI?
For that reason, it has been encouraging to see many
countries emphasize the importance of safety testing
and evaluation in their various AI policy proposals,
ranging from the European Union’s AI framework to
China’s recently announced generative AI rules, and
from the Risk Management Framework for AI systems
of the National Institute of Standards and Technologies
of the United States to the upcoming AI Summit London
on AI and AI safety. All of these different AI policy
proposals and events rely in some form on testing and
evaluating AI systems so that the Governments of the
world can invest in the area. Right now, there are no
standards or even best practices for how to test frontier
systems for issues such as discrimination, misuse and
safety. And because there are no best practices, it is hard
for Governments to create policies that can create more
accountability for the actors developing the systems.
Correspondingly, it means that the private-sector
actors enjoy an information advantage when dealing
with Governments.
In conclusion, any sensible approach to regulation
will start with having the ability to evaluate an AI
system for a given capability or flaw. Any failed
approach will start with grand policy ideas that are not
supported by effective measurements and evaluations.
It will be through the development of robust and reliable
evaluation systems that Governments will be able to
hold companies accountable and companies will be able
to earn the trust of the world into which they want to
deploy their AI systems. If we do not invest in that, we
run the risk of regulatory capture compromising global
security and handing over the future to a narrow set of
private-sector actors. If we can rise to that challenge,
however, I believe we can reap the benefits of AI as a
global community and ensure that there is a balance of
power between the developers of AI and the citizens of
the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Clark for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yi Zeng.
Mr. Yi Zeng: My name is Yi Zeng. I would like
to take this opportunity to share with the Security
Council my personal view of artificial intelligence
(AI) as a force for good in terms of international peace
and security. I hope it will be useful in promoting the
discussion and understanding of the necessity of global
governance for AI.

23-210495/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/07/2023

There can be no doubt that AI is a powerful
enabling
technology
for
advancing
global
sustainable development. When investigating the use
of AI for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
we have found that most of the efforts focus on AI
for quality education and for health care, while very
few efforts have been put forward on many other
important topics such as AI for biodiversity, climate
action or peace. However, I think those are topics of
fundamental importance for the future of humankind,
and Governments should definitely work together to
address them.

that it could exploit and amplify human limitations
and weaknesses such as deception and distrust to
create bigger or even catastrophic risks for humans.
It is strange, misleading and even irresponsible that
dialogue systems powered by generative AI always
use expressions such as “I think” and “I suggest” in
their arguments when there is no “I” or even “me” in
AI models. I therefore want to emphasize again that
AI should never, ever pretend to be human, take the
place of a human or mislead humans into having wrong
perceptions. We should use generative AI to assist us
but never trust it to replace human decision-making.

Military AI and AI for peace and security,
while closely related, are fundamentally different
in important aspects. We should advance the use of
AI for international peace as an essential pillar of
the Sustainable Development Goals, with a view to
reducing security and safety risks rather than increasing
them. When we are thinking about AI for good from a
perspective of peace and security, rather than seeking
ways to create disinformation for military and political
purposes, it would be much better to work on using
AI to identify disinformation and misunderstandings
among different countries and political bodies, and to
use it not to attack networks but to defend them.

We must ensure human control of all AI-enabled
weapon systems, and that human control has to be
adequate, effective and responsible. For example,
cognitive overload during human-AI interactions must
be avoided. We must prevent the proliferation of AIenabled weapon systems, since the related technology is
very likely to be abused or used maliciously. Both nearterm and long-term AI carry a risk of causing human
extinction, simply because we have not yet found a
way to protect ourselves from the possibility that AI
can exploit human weaknesses — and if AI were to do
that, it would not even know what we mean by humans,
death and life. As for the long term, we have not given
super-intelligence any practical reasons why it should
protect humankind, and the solution to that may take
decades to find. Our preliminary research suggests that
we may need to change the way we interact with one
another and with other species, our ecology and the
environment. That may require decision-making across
the entire human species, and we will all need to work
together deeply and thought-provokingly in that regard.

AI should be used to connect people and cultures
rather than disconnecting them. That is why we created
an AI-enabled culture-interaction engine that finds
commonalities and diversities among various UNESCO
World Heritage Sites. Those World Heritage Sites have
shown us that we are not so divided in terms of culture
as we may think, and the commonalities serve as roots
and hands that reach out, helping us to appreciate,
understand and even learn from the diversities in
various cultures.
The current examples of AI, including, more
recently, generative AI, are all information-processing
tools that seem intelligent but have no real understanding
and are therefore not truly intelligent. That is of course
why they cannot be trusted as responsible agents to
help humans make decisions. For example, although the
world has yet to reach a sufficiently broad consensus on
lethal autonomous weapon systems, it is at least clear
that AI should not be used directly to make life-anddeath decisions for humans. Effective and responsible
human control must be applied in order to ensure
appropriate human-AI interactions. Nor should AI be
used to automate diplomatic tasks, especially foreign
negotiations between countries, since it is possible
6/23

Considering those near-term and long-term
challenges, while I am quite sure that we cannot solve
the issue of AI for peace and security today, this
discussion, though challenging, may nonetheless be a
good starting point for Member States. In that regard,
I would suggest that the Security Council consider the
possibility of establishing a working group on AI for
peace and security, working on near-term and longterm challenges, because at the expert level it would be
more flexible and scientific to work together, and easier
to reach a consensus from a scientific and technical
point of view and to provide assistance and support
to Council members in their decision-making. The
Council should set a good example for other countries
and play a significant role in this important issue.
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

AI is supposed to help humans solve problems, not
create them. A boy once asked me if an AI-assisted
nuclear bomb — apart from being a feature in science
fiction — could be used to save our lives by blowing up
an asteroid attacking Earth or altering its trajectory to
prevent a collision with Earth. While that idea may not
be scientifically solid and would be very risky at this
point, it is at least about using AI to solve a problem
for humankind, which is much better than empowering
AI to help us attack one another with nuclear weapons
on our planet, creating problems for human society
and potentially posing catastrophic risks for us, the
next generation or even human civilization as a whole.
In my view, humans should always maintain and be
responsible for final decision-making on the use of
nuclear weapons. And we have already affirmed that a
nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
Many countries — including but not limited to the five
permanent members of the Council — have announced
their own strategy and opinions regarding the use of
AI for security and governance in general, and we can
see there are commonalities that can serve as important
inputs for international consensus, but that is still not
enough. The United Nations must play a central role
in setting up a framework on AI for development and
governance in order to ensure global peace and security.
In the context of a shared future for all, we all need to
set up that agenda and framework together, leaving no
one behind.
The President: I thank Mr. Yi Zeng for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
This is the first-ever discussion of artificial
intelligence (AI) in the Security Council, and a
historic meeting. Since the early development of
artificial intelligence by pioneers such as Alan
Turing and Christopher Strachey, the technology has
advanced with ever greater speed. Yet the biggest
AI-induced transformations are still to come. While
their scale is impossible for us to comprehend fully,
the gains for humankind will surely be immense.
AI will fundamentally alter every aspect of human
life. Groundbreaking discoveries in medicine may
be just around the corner. The productivity boosts to
our economies may be vast. AI could help us adapt
to climate change, beat corruption, revolutionize
education, deliver the Sustainable Development Goals
and reduce violent conflict.

S/PV.9381

But we are here today because AI will affect
the work of the Council. It could enhance or disrupt
global strategic stability. It challenges our fundamental
assumptions about defence and deterrence. It poses
moral questions about accountability for lethal
decisions on the battlefield. There can already be no
doubt that AI is changing the speed, scale and spread of
disinformation, with hugely harmful consequences for
democracy and stability.
AI could aid the reckless quest for weapons of
mass destruction by State and non-State actors alike.
But it could also help us stop proliferation. That is
why we urgently need to shape the global governance
of transformative technologies — because AI knows
no borders.
The United Kingdom’s vision is founded on
four irreducible principles. It should be open — AI
should support freedom and democracy. It should be
responsible — AI should be consistent with the rule
of law and human rights. It should be secure —AI
should be safe and predictable by design, safeguarding
property rights, privacy and national security. It should
be resilient — AI should be trusted by the public, and
critical systems must be protected.
The United Kingdom’s approach builds on existing
multilateral initiatives, such as the AI for Good
Global Summit, in Geneva, or the work of UNESCO,
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and the Group of 20. Such institutions as
the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence, the
Group of Seven’s Hiroshima AI Process, the Council
of Europe, and the International Telecommunication
Union are all important partners. Pioneering AI
companies will also need to work with us so we can
capture the gains and minimize the risks to humanity.
No country will be untouched by AI, so we must involve
and engage the widest coalition of international actors
from all sectors.
The United Kingdom is home to many of the
world’s trail-blazing AI developers and foremost AI
safety researchers. That is why, this autumn, the United
Kingdom plans to bring world leaders together for the
first major global summit on AI safety. Our shared goal
will be to consider the risks of AI and decide how they
can be reduced through coordinated action.
Momentous opportunities on a scale that we can
barely imagine lie before us. We must seize these
opportunities and grasp the challenges of AI — including

23-210497/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/07/2023

those for international peace and security — decisively,
optimistically and from a position of global unity on
essential principles.

Research Institute. Japan is also proud to have launched
the Group of Seven Hiroshima AI Process this year and
to contribute to the global discussion on generative AI.

“There is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken
at the flood, leads to fortune.” In that spirit, let us work
together to ensure peace and security as we pass across
the threshold of an unfamiliar world.

The Security Council and the United Nations can
update their existing toolkits through the use of AI.
First, we should consider how the active use of AI can
enhance the efficiency and transparency of the Council
in its decision-making and working methods. We
welcome the efforts of the Secretariat to utilize AI for
mediation and peacebuilding activities. Moreover, we
can make the United Nations work more efficiently and
effectively through AI-based early-warning systems
for conflicts, sanctions-implementation monitoring
and counter-measures against disinformation on
peace operations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the State Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan.
Mr. Takei (Japan): I commend the United
Kingdom’s initiative to take up artificial intelligence
(AI) in the Security Council. This will be a good
beginning for future global discussions. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the other briefers.
AI is changing the world. AI has transformed
human life. Its speed, potential and risks go beyond
our imaginations and national borders. We are being
tested at this historical juncture: can we have the selfdiscipline to control it?
My political belief is “instead of worrying, deal
with it”. I believe that the key to taking on the challenge
is two-fold: AI must be human-centric and trustworthy.
Human beings can and should control AI to enhance
human potential, not the other way around. Let me
make two points.
First, as to human-centric AI, the development of
AI should be consistent with our democratic values
and fundamental human rights. AI should not be a tool
for rulers; it should be placed under the rule of law.
The military use of AI is a case in point. It should be
responsible, transparent and based on international law.
Accordingly, Japan will continue to contribute to the
international rule-making process on lethal autonomous
weapons systems in the context of the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons.
Secondly, as to trustworthy AI, AI can be more
trustworthy with a wide range of stakeholders being
included in the rule-making process. I believe that this
is where the convening power of the United Nations
can make a difference and bring together wisdom from
around the world. Last month, Japan led discussions at
the United Nations on the misuse of AI by terrorists by
hosting a side event with the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
8/23

Let me conclude by expressing our willingness
to actively participate in the discussions on AI at the
United Nations and beyond.
The President: I now call on the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic
of Mozambique.
Mr. Gonçalves (Mozambique): Mozambique
warmly congratulates the United Kingdom for its
excellent presidency and for convening today’s timely
and important debate on artificial intelligence (AI),
with a focus on the opportunities and risks it presents
for international peace and security”.
We wish to convey our gratitude to His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, for his insightful remarks. We thank the
briefers for their thoughtful and pertinent contributions.
Allow me to begin with a candid disclosure: this
statement was made solely by humans and not by a
generative artificial-intelligence model, such as the
well-known ChatGPT. This disclosure is important.
It reveals some of the anxieties surrounding the
rapid advancements in AI, specifically that we are
approaching a point where digital machines can execute
tasks that, for the majority of human existence, were
exclusively within the realm of human intelligence.
The recent acceleration in both the power and
visibility of AI systems, along with the increasing
awareness of their capabilities and limitations, has
sparked concerns that the technology is advancing
at such a rapid pace that it may no longer be
safely controllable. That caution is warranted.
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

While recent advancements in AI present immense
opportunities to enhance various fields such as
speech-making, medicine and warfare through the
democratization of innovation, certain models have also
exhibited capabilities that surpass the understanding
and control of their creators. That poses risks of various
kinds, including the potential for catastrophic outcomes.
Indeed, we should take heed of the cautionary tale of
the “Sorcerer’s Apprentice.”
As AI engines increasingly and convincingly
imitate, and in some cases even surpass, various
behaviours associated with human beings, they
become an ideal tool for spreading misinformation,
scamming individuals, engaging in academic cheating,
deceitfully initiating conflicts, recruiting terrorists,
sowing division and perpetrating numerous other
nefarious activities.
AI models have evolved into self-programming
machines capable of automating their learning processes
through a continuous loop of self-improvement. That
necessitates the establishment of robust governance
structures that aim to mitigate the risks of accidents and
misuse, while still fostering innovation and harnessing
the potential for positive outcomes.
As accurately stated in the concept note for this
briefing, artificial intelligence technologies possess the
potential to profoundly transform our societies, yielding
a multitude of positive effects. AI can contribute to
eradicating diseases, combating climate change and
accurately predicting natural disasters, making it a
valuable ally for the global South.
Similarly, by leveraging the extensive database
generated by organizations such as the Social Conflict
Analysis Database, regional institutions and the wider
United Nations system, which adhere to rigorous
standards of quality control, sourcing and Member State
involvement, we have the potential to enhance early
warning capabilities, customize mediation efforts and
strengthen strategic communication in peacekeeping,
among various other examples. AI can be a valuable
tool in harnessing that vast data for the benefit of
those endeavours.
Faced with the opportunities and threats posed
by the use of artificial intelligence, the Republic of
Mozambique recognizes the importance, as a Member
State of the United Nations, of adopting a balanced
approach that encompasses the following aspects.

S/PV.9381

First, in the event that credible evidence emerges
indicating that AI poses an existential risk, it is crucial
to negotiate an intergovernmental treaty to govern and
monitor its use.
Secondly, it is essential to develop relevant
regulations and appropriate legislation to safeguard
privacy and data security. That entails ensuring that all
relevant actors, including Governments and companies
providing digital technology, utilize artificial
intelligence in an ethical and responsible manner,
while respecting the principles outlined in article 12
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
Thirdly, a global digital pact should be promoted,
facilitating the sharing of technological knowledge
between advanced countries and those in the early
stages of AI development. That collaborative effort
between AI specialists, Governments, companies and
civil society aims to mitigate the risks of misuse and
foster responsible AI practices.
In conclusion, it is important to recognize that
the inputs required for AI are not disconnected from
the real world. The necessary resources such as data,
computing power, electricity, skills and technological
infrastructure are not evenly distributed across the
globe. By striking a balance between the advantages of
AI and the essential safeguards in place, we can ensure
that AI does not become a source of conflicts that
reinforces inequalities and asymmetries, potentially
posing threats to global peace and security. That
approach aims to harness the potential of AI while
actively mitigating any negative consequences that
may arise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation for Advanced Science and Technology of
the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Sharaf (United Arab Emirates): I will begin by
thanking Secretary-General Guterres for his attentive
remarks today. I thank you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom presidency for bringing such a salient topic to
the Council for discussion. I would also like to thank
our other briefers for their illuminating statements.
How we negotiate the threats and opportunities
of artificial intelligence (AI) is fast becoming one of
the defining questions of our time. Five years ago, the

23-210499/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Arab Emirates and Switzerland brought forward
a proposal to Secretary-General Guterres to establish
a deliberative group to consider that very question.
Under the Secretary-General’s leadership, the HighLevel Panel on Digital Cooperation was created, and
it was clear from their deliberations that technologies
such as AI could no longer go unchecked.
Computation processing power has followed
Moore’s Law — doubling every 18 months — since
the dawn of the computer age. That is no longer the
case. AI development is now outpacing Moore’s law
and moving at breakneck speed and Governments are
unable to keep up. That is the wake up-call we need.
It is time to be optimistic realists when it comes to AI,
not just for assessing the threats the technology poses
to international peace and security, but to harness the
opportunities it offers.
To that end, I will make four brief points today.
First, we must establish the rules of the road. There
is a brief window of opportunity available now where
key stakeholders are willing to unite and consider the
guard-rails for this technology. Member States should
pick up the mantel from the Secretary-General and
establish commonly agreed upon rules to govern AI
before it is too late. That should include mechanisms to
prevent AI tools from promoting hatred, misinformation
and disinformation that can fuel extremism and
exacerbate conflict. As with other cybertechnologies,
the use of AI should be firmly guided by international
law, since international law continues to apply in
cyberspace. But we must also recognize that strategies
may need to be adopted so that we can effectively apply
the conventional principles of international law in the
rapidly evolving context of AI development.
Secondly, artificial intelligence should become a
tool to promote peacebuilding and the de-escalation
of conflicts, not a threat multiplier. AI-driven tools
have the potential to more effectively analyse vast
amounts of data, trends and patterns. That translates
to an increased ability to detect terrorist activity in real
time and predicting how the adverse effects of climate
change may impact peace and security. It also paves
the way for limiting the misattribution of attacks, as
well as ensuring responses in conflict settings are
proportionate. At the same time, we must be aware
of the potential misapplication of this technology in
targeting critical infrastructure and fabricating false
narratives to fuel tensions and incite violence.
10/23

18/07/2023

Thirdly, the biases of the real world should
not be replicated by AI. Decades of progress on
the fight against discrimination, especially gender
discrimination towards women and girls, as well as
against persons with disabilities, will be undermined if
we do not ensure an AI that is inclusive.
The High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation was
clear in stating that an inclusive digital economy and
society was a priority action for immediate attention.
Any opportunity that AI offers can be a true opportunity
only if it is based on the principle of equality, both in its
design and access.
Fourthly, we must avoid overregulating AI in a way
that hinders innovation. The creativity, research and
development activities occurring in the context of AI
and taking place in emerging nations are critical for the
sustainable growth and development of those nations.
To maintain that, emerging countries need flexibility
and agile regulation. We should nurture a sector
that encourages responsible behaviour using smart,
effective and efficient regulations and guidelines and
avoid overly rigid rules that can hamper the evolution
of this technology.
Throughout history, major shifts and leaps forward
have often followed moments of major crises. The
creation of the United Nations and the Security Council
following the Second World War speaks to that very
fact. When it comes to AI, let us not wait for the moment
of crisis. It is high time to get ahead of the curve and
shape an AI arena that is geared towards preserving
international peace and security.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes His Excellency in presiding over today’s
Security Council meeting and thanks SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his briefing. Many of his proposals
deserve our study. I would also like to thank Professor
Yi Zeng and Mr. Jack Clark for their briefings. Their
insights can help us better understand and handle issues
related to artificial intelligence (AI).
In recent years, the world has witnessed a rapid
development and wide application of AI, with complex
effects constantly emerging. On the one hand, the
empowering role of AI in areas such as scientific
research, health care, autonomous driving and smart
decision-making, is becoming increasingly prominent,
generating huge technological dividends. On the other
hand, the scope of AI application has been constantly
expanding, causing increasing concerns in areas such as
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

data privacy, spreading false information, exacerbating
social inequality and disrupting employment structures.
In particular, the misuse or abuse of AI by terrorist
or extremist forces will pose a significant threat to
international peace and security.
At present, as a cutting-edge technology, AI
is still in its early stages of development. As a
double-edged sword, whether it is good or evil,
depends on how humankind utilizes it, regulates it
and balances scientific development and security. The
international community should uphold the spirit of
true multilateralism, engage in extensive dialogue,
constantly seek consensus and explore the development
of guiding principles for AI governance. We support
the central coordinating role of the United Nations in
that regard and support the efforts of Secretary-General
Guterres to hold in-depth discussions among all parties.
We also support the full participation of all countries,
especially developing countries, in this cause and
appreciate their contributions.
I
would
now
like
preliminary observations.

to

make

some

First, we should adhere to the principle of putting
ethics first. The potential impacts of AI may exceed
human cognitive boundaries. To ensure that this
technology always benefits humankind, it is necessary
to posit “AI for good” and a people-centred approach as
the basic principles to regulate the development of AI
and to prevent that technology from running away from
us like a wild horse. Based on those two guidelines,
efforts should be made to gradually establish and
improve ethical norms, laws, regulations and policy
systems for AI, while allowing countries to establish
AI governance systems that are in line with their own
national conditions, based on their own development
stages and social and cultural characteristics.
Secondly, we must commit to safety and
controllability. There are many uncertainties in
the development and application of AI-related
technologies, and safety is the bottom line that must be
upheld. The international community needs to enhance
risk awareness, establish effective risk warning and
response mechanisms, ensure that risks beyond human
control do not occur and that autonomous machine
killing does not occur. We need to strengthen the
detection and evaluation of the entire life cycle of AI,
ensuring that humankind has the ability to press the
pause button at critical moments. Leading technology

S/PV.9381

enterprises should clarify the responsible parties,
establish a sound accountability mechanism and avoid
developing or using risky technologies that may have
serious negative consequences.
Thirdly, we must adhere to fairness and
inclusiveness. The impact of AI on science and
technology is worldwide and revolutionary. Equal
access and utilization of AI technology products
and services by developing countries are crucial to
bridging the technological, digital and development
divides between the North and the South. The
international community should work together to
ensure that developing countries equally enjoy the
development dividends brought by AI technology and
continuously enhance their representation, voice and
decision-making power in this field. Certain developed
countries, in seeking technological hegemony, make
efforts to build their exclusive small clubs, take various
actions under different pretexts to maliciously obstruct
the technological development of other countries and
artificially create technological barriers. China firmly
opposes those behaviours.
Fourthly, we should adhere to openness and
inclusiveness. The development of science and
technology needs to achieve a relative balance between
technological progress and safe applications. The
best path is to maintain open cooperation, encourage
interdisciplinary, inter-industrial, inter-regional and
cross-border exchanges and dialogues and oppose
various forms of exclusive clubs, decoupling and
disconnection. We need to promote coordination
and interaction among international organizations,
Government departments, research and educational
institutions, enterprises and the public in the field of AI
development and governance under the United Nations
framework and jointly create an open, inclusive, just
and non-discriminatory environment for scientific and
technological development.
Fifthly, we should be committed to the peaceful
utilization of AI. The fundamental purpose of
developing AI technologies is to enhance the common
well-being of humankind. It is therefore necessary to
focus on exploring the potential of AI in promoting
sustainable development, promoting cross-disciplinary
integration and innovation and better empowering the
global development cause. The Security Council could
conduct in-depth studies on the application and impact
of AI in conflict situations and take measures to enrich
the toolkit of the United Nations for peace. AI in the

23-2104911/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

military field may lead to major changes in the way
of warfare and the format of war. All countries should
uphold a responsible defence policy, oppose the use
of AI to seek military hegemony or to undermine the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of other countries
and avoid the abuse, unintentional misuse or even
malicious use of AI-weapon systems.
Today’s discussion of AI highlights the importance,
necessity and urgency of building a community of
a shared future for humankind. China adheres to
the concept of a community of a shared future for
humankind and has actively explored the scientific
path of AI development and governance in every
area. In 2017 the Chinese Government issued a newgeneration AI development plan that clearly laid out
basic principles regarding issues such as technology,
leadership, systemic layout, market leadership, open
sources and openness. In recent years, China has worked
to continually improve relevant laws and regulations,
ethical norms, intellectual property standards and
safety monitoring and evaluation measures in order
to ensure the healthy and orderly development of AI.
China has always maintained a highly responsible
attitude in its participation in global cooperation on AI
governance. As early as 2021, China hosted an Arria
Formula meeting during its presidency of the Security
Council on the impact of emerging technologies on
international peace and security, bringing emerging
technologies such as AI to the Council’s attention for the
first time. China has submitted two position papers on
military applications of AI and its ethical governance in
United Nations forums, offering systematic proposals
from a perspective of strategic security, military policy,
legal ethics, technological security, rule-making and
international cooperation.
In February, the Chinese Government released
its Global Security Initiative concept paper, which
states clearly that China is willing to strengthen its
communication and exchanges with the international
community on AI security governance, promote
the establishment of an international mechanism
for universal participation and form a governance
framework and standards based on a broad consensus.
We stand ready to work with the international community
to actively implement the Global Development, Global
Security and Global Civilization Initiatives that
President Xi Jinping has proposed. In the field of AI,
we will continue to prioritize development, maintain
common security, promote cross-cultural exchanges
12/23

18/07/2023

and cooperation and work with other countries to
share the benefits of AI, while jointly preventing and
responding to risks and challenges.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank the United Kingdom for convening this
discussion, and I also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Clark and Mr. Yi Zeng for their valuable insights.
Artificial intelligence (AI) offers incredible
promise for addressing global challenges such as
those related to food security, education and medicine.
Automated systems are already helping us to grow
food more efficiently, predict the paths of storms and
identify diseases in patients. Used appropriately, AI
can therefore accelerate our progress towards achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. However, it also
has the potential to compound threats and intensify
conflicts, including by spreading misinformation
and disinformation, amplifying bias and inequality,
enhancing malicious cyberoperations and exacerbating
human rights abuses. We therefore welcome this
discussion with a view to understanding how the
Council can find the right balance between maximizing
AI’s benefits while mitigating its risks.
The Council already has experience in addressing
dual-use capabilities and integrating transformative
technologies into our efforts to maintain international
peace and security. As those experiences have taught
us, success comes from working with a range of actors,
including Member States, technology companies and
civil-society activists, through the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies and in both formal
and informal settings. The United States is committed
to doing just that and has already begun such efforts
at home. On 4 May, President Biden met with
leading AI companies to underscore the fundamental
responsibility we all have to ensure that AI systems are
safe and trustworthy. Those efforts build on the work
of the United States National Institute of Standards
and Technology, which recently released an AI
framework providing organizations with a voluntary
set of guidelines for managing risks from AI systems.
Through the White House’s October 2022 blueprint for
an AI bill of rights, we are also identifying principles
to guide the design, use and deployment of automated
systems so that rights, opportunities and access related
to critical resources and services are enjoyed equally
and are fully protected. We are now working with a
broad group of stakeholders to identify and address AIrelated human rights risks that threaten to undermine
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security. No Member State should use AI to
censor, constrain, repress or disempower people.
The military use of AI can and should be ethical
and responsible and enhance international security.
Earlier this year, the United States released a proposed
political declaration on the responsible military use
of AI and autonomy, which elaborates principles on
how to develop and use AI in the military domain in
compliance with applicable international law. The
proposed declaration emphasizes that the military
use of AI capabilities must be accountable to a human
chain of command and that States should take steps to
minimize unintended bias and accidents. We encourage
all Member States to endorse the proposed declaration.
Here at the United Nations, we welcome efforts
to develop and apply AI tools that improve our joint
efforts to deliver humanitarian assistance, provide
early warnings of issues as diverse as climate change
and conflict and further other shared goals. The
International Telecommunication Union’s recent
Artificial Intelligence for Good Global Summit
represents one step in that direction. Within the
Security Council, we welcome continued discussions
on how to manage technological advances, including
when and how to take action to address Governments’
or non-State actors’ misuse of AI technologies to
undermine international peace and security. We must
also work together to ensure that AI and other emerging
technologies are not used primarily as weapons or tools
of oppression but rather as tools to enhance human
dignity and help us achieve our highest aspirations,
including for a more secure and peaceful world. The
United States looks forward to working with all relevant
parties to ensure that the responsible development and
use of trustworthy AI systems serves the global good.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing today and for joining our
meeting. I also thank Mr. Clark and Mr. Yi Zeng for
their statements.
The rapid development of artificial intelligence
(AI) holds immense potential for bolstering our global
security architecture, augmenting decision-making
processes and enhancing humanitarian efforts. We
must also address the multifaceted potential challenges
it poses, including in the areas of autonomous
weapons, cyberthreats and the exacerbation of
existing inequalities. As we embark on this crucial
discussion, let us seek a comprehensive understanding

S/PV.9381

of the risks and opportunities associated with AI and
work to harness its potential for the greater benefit of
humankind while ensuring the preservation of peace,
stability and human rights.
The paragraph I just read was entirely written
through ChatGPT. Although it has conceptual
imprecisions, it shows how sophisticated such tools
have become. The technology is developing so fast
that even our best researchers are still unable to assess
the full scale of the challenges that await us and the
benefits such new technologies can provide. Any
discussion today must start from a basis of humility and
an awareness that we do not fully know what it is that
we do not know about AI. What we know for sure is that
artificial intelligence is not human intelligence. Most
AI relies on large amounts of data, and through complex
algorithms establishes patterns and relationships that
allow it to generate contextually appropriate results.
The outcomes are therefore crucially dependent on the
inputs. Human oversight is essential to avoiding bias
and errors. Otherwise, we are running the risk that the
saying “garbage in, garbage out” will become a selffulfilling prophecy.
Unlike other innovations with potential implications
for security, AI has been developed mostly as a civilian
application. It would therefore be premature to see it
primarily through a lens of international peace and
security, as the most significant effects on our societies
are likely to be produced by its peaceful uses. We can
nevertheless predict with certainty that its applications
will be extended to the military arena, with relevant
consequences for peace and security.
While the Council should remain vigilant and
ready to respond to any incidents involving the use of
AI, we should also be careful not to overly securitize
the topic by concentrating discussions in this Chamber.
Due to the intrinsically multidisciplinary nature of AI,
which deals with every aspect of life, our international
discussions of it should remain open and inclusive.
Only a wide and diverse range of views will enable
us to scratch the surface and start to make sense of
the different facets of AI. Today’s briefing is a good
start for bringing in various views on its development
and use.
Nevertheless, in the light of AI’s wide-ranging
implications and impacts, the General Assembly, with
its universal composition, is the forum best suited
to a structured, long-term discussion on artificial

23-2104913/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

intelligence. AI is a crucial topic among the various
subjects that come under the mandate of the ongoing
Open-ended Working Group on Security of and in the
Use of Information and Communications Technologies
2021–2025, which will hold its fifth substantive session
next week. The Working Group, which is open to all
Member States, has been able to make progress on
gradually developing global, common understandings
on information and communications technologies
issues related to international peace and security,
despite challenging geopolitical circumstances.
Considering their particular nature, that is what we
should aim for when discussing challenges arising
from cybertechnologies.
The military applications of AI, especially with
regard to the use of force, should strictly abide by
international humanitarian law, as enshrined in the
Geneva Conventions and other pertinent international
commitments. Brazil has been consistently guided
by the concept of meaningful human control. As
approved in 2019 by the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, guiding
principle (b) indicates that
“[h]uman responsibility for decisions on the
use of weapons systems must be retained since
accountability cannot be transferred to machines”
(CCW/MSP/2019/9, annex III).
The centrality of the human element in any autonomous
system is essential to the establishment of ethics
standards and to full compliance with international
humanitarian law. There can be no substitute for human
judgment and accountability.
Military applications of AI must be based on
transparency and accountability throughout their
life cycle, from development to deployment and use.
Moreover, weapon systems with autonomous functions
should eliminate bias in their system’s operations.
We must move ahead swiftly with the progressive
development of regulations and norms governing the
use of autonomous weapon systems via robust norms to
prevent biases and abuse and to guarantee compliance
with international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Compliance
with international law is mandatory in States’ use of
AI technologies, as well as in any use the Council may
wish to make of them in its peacekeeping missions or its
broader mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
14/23

18/07/2023

Beyond the challenges posed by conventional
weapons with autonomous functions, we should not
shy away from issuing a very stern warning regarding
the inherent risks posed by the interaction of AI and
weapons of mass destruction. We have noted with alarm
the news that AI-assisted computer systems are capable
of developing new poisonous chemical compounds in
a matter of hours and of designing new pathogens and
molecules. Nor should we allow the possibility that
nuclear weapons might be linked to AI at the risk of our
common future.
AI has tremendous potential to both remake and
break our societies in the coming years. Navigating
between the two will require a broad and concerted
international effort, which will include but is in no way
limited to the Security Council. The United Nations
remains the only organization capable of promoting the
global coordination needed to oversee and shape the
development of AI so that it works for the betterment of
humankind and in accordance with the shared purposes
and principles that have brought us here.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We are grateful to Secretary-General António Guterres
for his participation in this important debate. My thanks
also go to Mr. Clark and Mr. Yi Zeng for their valuable
and impressive contributions.
(spoke in English)
“I believe it is only a matter of time before we
see thousands of robots like me out there making
a difference”.
(spoke in French)
Those words were uttered by the robot Ameca,
speaking to a journalist at the Artificial Intelligence
for Good Global Summit mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral, which was organized by the International
Telecommunication Union and Switzerland and held in
Geneva two weeks ago.
While it can represent a challenge because of its
speed and apparent omniscience, artificial intelligence
(AI) can and must also serve peace and security. As we
look ahead to a New Agenda for Peace, we have it in
our hands to ensure that AI makes a difference to the
benefit, and not the detriment, of humankind. Against
that backdrop, let us seize the opportunity to pave the
way for AI for good by working closely with cuttingedge research. To that end, the Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology in Zurich is developing a prototype AI23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

assisted analysis tool for the United Nations Crisis and
Operations Centre. That tool will explore the potential of
AI for peacekeeping, and particularly for the protection
of civilians and peacekeepers. In addition, Switzerland
recently launched a call for a trust and transparency
initiative in which academia, the private sector and
diplomacy can jointly seek practical and rapid solutions
to the risks associated with AI.
The Council, too, must work to counter the risks
that AI poses to peace. That is why we are very
grateful to the United Kingdom for organizing this
important debate. Let us consider cyberoperations
and disinformation as an example. False narratives
undermine people’s trust in Governments and peace
missions. In that respect, AI is a double-edged sword.
While it accentuates disinformation, it can also be
used to detect false narratives and hate speech. So how
can we reap the benefits of AI for peace and security
while minimizing the risks? I would like to propose
three pathways.
First, we need a common framework, shared by all
the players involved in the development and application
of such technology — Governments, businesses, civil
society and research organizations — which I think
Mr. Clark made very clear in his briefing. AI does not
exist in a normative vacuum. Existing international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations,
international humanitarian law and human rights,
apply to it. Switzerland is committed to all United
Nations processes that serve to reaffirm and clarify
the international legal framework for AI, and in the
case of lethal autonomous weapon systems, to develop
prohibitions and restrictions.
Secondly, AI must be human-centred, or, as
Mr. Zeng put it earlier,
(spoke in English)
“AI should never, ever pretend to be human”.
(spoke in French)
We call for the development, deployment and use
of AI to always be guided by ethical and inclusive
considerations. Clear responsibility and accountability
must be maintained for Governments, companies and
individuals alike.
Finally, the relatively early stage of AI development
gives us the opportunity to ensure equality and
inclusion, and to counteract discriminatory stereotypes.

S/PV.9381

AI is only as good and reliable as the data with which
we provide it. If that data reflects prejudices and
stereotypes — for example, of gender — or if it is
simply not representative of its operating environment,
AI will offer us bad advice in maintaining peace and
security. It is the responsibility of developers and users,
both governmental and non-governmental, to ensure
that AI does not reproduce the harmful societal biases
we are striving to overcome.
The Security Council has a responsibility to
proactively monitor developments around AI and the
threat it may pose to the maintenance of international
peace and security. It should be guided by the results
emanating from the General Assembly on the related
legal framework. The Council must also use its powers
to ensure that AI serves peace by anticipating risks and
opportunities or by encouraging the Secretariat and
peace missions to use this technology in innovative and
responsible ways.
My delegation used AI for our first debate under
our presidency, on futureproofing trust for sustaining
peace (see S/PV.9315), as well as in the context of
an exhibition in collaboration with the International
Committee of the Red Cross on digital dilemmas. We
were able to recognize the impressive potential of this
technology to serve peace. We therefore look forward
to making “AI for Good” an integral part of the New
Agenda for Peace.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank the United Kingdom
for convening this high-level debate on artificial
intelligence (AI) and Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his important briefing to the Security
Council this morning. We are equally grateful for the
expert views provided in this meeting by Mr. Jack Clark
and Mr. Zeng Yi.
The emerging dominance of artificial intelligence as
a pervasive fabric of our societies is one that could have
positive impacts on several vistas, including beneficial
applications for medicine, agriculture, environmental
management, research and development, the realm of
arts and culture, and trade. While we see opportunities
on the horizon to enhance outcomes in different areas
of life by embracing the further application of artificial
intelligence, we can also already see dangers that must
motivate all of us to work quickly and collaboratively
to avert risks that could be detrimental to our
common humanity.

23-2104915/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

Artificial intelligence, especially in peace and
security, must be guided by a common determination
not to replicate the risks that powerful technologies
have created for the world by their ability to unleash
disaster of global proportions. We must constrain the
excesses of individual national ambitions for combative
dominance and commit to working towards the
development of principles and frameworks that would
govern AI technologies for peaceful purposes.
For Ghana, we see opportunities in the development
and application of AI technologies for identifying earlywarning signs of conflicts and defining responses that
have a higher rate of success and that may also be more
cost-effective. Such technologies can facilitate the
coordination of humanitarian assistance and improve
risk assessment. Their application for law enforcement
is already well appreciated in many jurisdictions, and
where law enforcement has been effective, risks of
conflict are usually low.
Moreover, the application of AI technologies for
peace mediation and negotiation efforts has revealed
remarkable early outcomes that must be pursued for
the cause of peace. The deployment of AI technologies
in determining the Libyan population’s reaction to
policies, for instance, has facilitated the peace as
reflected in the improvement in that country’s ranking
in the 2022 Global Peace Index. We also see in similar
contexts, and within the intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance functions of peacekeeping missions,
an opportunity to enhance the safety and security of
peacekeepers and the protection of civilian populations
through the responsible deployment of AI technologies.
Despite these encouraging developments, we see
risks with AI technologies from the perspective of
both State actors and non-State actors. The integration
of AI technologies into autonomous weapons systems
is a foremost source of concern. While States seeking
to develop such weapons systems may be genuinely
interested in reducing the human cost of their
involvement in conflicts, it belies their commitment
to a pacific world. The history of our experience with
humankind’s mastery in atomic manipulation shows
that should such desires persist, they only generate,
in equal measure, efforts by other States to cancel the
advantage that such deterrence seeks to create. The
additional danger of non-human control over these
weapons systems is also a risk that the world cannot
afford or ignore.
16/23

18/07/2023

The increasingly digitalized world and the creation
of virtual reality means that the capacity to tell the
difference between what is real and what is made up
is diminishing by the day. This can create unchecked
platforms that non-State actors in particular could,
using AI technologies, instrumentalize to destabilize
societies or cause friction between or among States.
While AI technologies can be used to counter
misinformation, disinformation and hate speech, they
also have the capacity to be used by negative forces to
pursue the campaigns of those forces’ nefarious agenda.
However, the potential of AI technologies for good
should lead us to work towards its peaceful uses. As
indicated earlier, some principles and frameworks need
to be developed, keeping in mind that we do not yet
have a full sense of the evolution of AI technologies.
Still, such a process should not be the preserve of the
Security Council but of the wider membership of the
United Nations, which has an equal stake in how we
guide the further evolution of AI technologies. Without
global consensus it would be difficult to limit the
flourishing of AI technologies.
Since a significant part of the developments on
AI technologies presently occurs within the private
sector and academia, it is important to also broaden the
dialogue beyond governments to ensure that, in filling
industry gaps, there can be no diversion and misuse of
AI technologies, including of unarmed aerial vehicles,
whose negative consequences for peace and security,
including on the African continent, where terrorist
groups may be experimenting with such technologies,
should be anticipated and abated.
In recognition of the fact that AI technologies can
create disruptions in military balance, it is important
that States deliberately pursue confidence-building
measures that rest on a shared interest in preventing
conflicts that are not deliberately intended. This
can be done through setting standards for voluntary
information-sharing and notifications concerning AIenabled systems, strategies, policies and programmes
implemented by States. We hope that in considering
the Secretary-General’s upcoming policy brief on the
New Agenda for Peace, Member States will be able to
advance durable solutions to address new threats to
international peace and security. We wish to indicate
our support for the Secretary-General’s efforts in
this regard.
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9381

In the process, we must also deepen work on
such existing initiatives and ongoing processes as the
Secretary-General’s Roadmap on Digital Cooperation,
the ongoing negotiations on a global convention on
countering the use of information and communications
technology for criminal purposes, and the Openended Working Group on security of and in the use
of information and communications technologies.
Equally, we encourage the Security Council’s
further engagement with the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping under
the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. During the
upcoming United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
Meeting in Accra, Ghana would welcome conversations
on how AI can be deployed to enhance peacekeeping
operations under the relevant themes. In Africa, the
African Union Digital Transformation Strategy (2020–
2030) would also continue to be an important ancillary
to the African Continental Free Trade Area, which is an
anchor for addressing many of the underlying security
challenges on the continent and in silencing the guns
in Africa.

AI can help us to prevent natural hazards by providing
more accurate weather forecasts. It can also support the
implementation of the commitments made in the Paris
Agreement to reduce greenhouse gases.

Finally, I affirm Ghana’s commitment to advancing
constructive discussions on AI technologies for the
peace and security of our world. We highlight the need
for a whole-of-society approach that leverages the
potential of the private sector, especially the technology
giants, and retains the human rights of citizens at the
core of all ethical principles.

Above all, generative artificial intelligence can
intensify information warfare through the inexpensive
mass propagation of artificial content or messages
modulated according to the recipient. We need only
look at the massive disinformation campaigns under
way in the Central African Republic and Mali or those
accompanying Russia’s war against Ukraine. Foreign
electoral interference campaigns destabilize countries
and call into question the foundations of democracies.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Jack Clark and
Mr. Yi Zeng for their briefings.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the revolution of the
twenty-first century. At a time when we are facing a
tougher world, marked by competition and hybrid wars,
it is essential to make artificial intelligence a tool in the
service of peace.
France is convinced that AI can play a decisive
role in maintaining peace. These technologies can
contribute to the safety of peacekeepers and the
performance of operations, in particular by improving
the protection of civilians. They can also help resolve
conflicts by mobilizing civil society and perhaps, in
future, by facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Artificial intelligence can also serve the
Sustainable Development Goals. That is the thrust of
our contribution to the Secretary-General’s Global
Digital Compact. In the fight against climate change,

The development of artificial intelligence also
entails risks, which we need to face head on. AI is likely
to increase the cyberthreat as it enables malicious actors
to carry out increasingly sophisticated cyberattacks.
Artificial-intelligence systems themselves can be
vulnerable to cyberattacks. Ensuring their security is
therefore of paramount importance.
In the military sphere, artificial intelligence could
profoundly change the nature of conflicts. We must
therefore continue our efforts, within the Group of
Governmental Experts on lethal autonomous weapons
systems under the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, to develop a framework applicable to
such systems. That framework would need to ensure
that tomorrow’s conflicts respect international
humanitarian law.

France is committed to promoting an ethical and
responsible approach to artificial intelligence. That is
the aim of the global partnership we launched in 2020.
Within the European Union and the Council of Europe,
France is working on rules to govern and support the
development of AI.
In the face of that revolution, the United Nations
offers an irreplaceable framework. We welcome the
ongoing work of the New Agenda for Peace and the
forthcoming Summit of the Future, which will enable
us to reflect collectively on those issues and draw up
the standards of tomorrow. France will do its utmost
to put artificial intelligence at the service of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
“The first obligation of intelligence is to distrust
itself,” said the Polish writer Stanisław Lem. But that

23-2104917/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

element is something we cannot expect from artificial
intelligence (AI).
I therefore stress the relevance of the theme that
brings us together, at the initiative of the United
Kingdom, and I am grateful for the briefings made
by Secretary-General António Guterres and the
other speakers.
The question cannot be whether or not we support
the development of artificial intelligence. In the context
of rapid technological change, AI has already developed
at breakneck speed and will continue to do so.
Like any other technology, AI is a tool that can
contribute to peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
or it can be used to undermine those goals. AI can
contribute to conflict prevention and the moderation
of dialogue in complex contexts, such as coronavirus
disease. Emerging technologies were essential in
overcoming the obstacles posed by the pandemic.
Artificial intelligence can support the protection of
humanitarian personnel, allowing for expanded access
and action, including through predictive analytics.
Preparedness, early warning and timely reaction can
benefit from this tool. Technological solutions can help
United Nations peacekeeping operations to fulfil their
mandates more effectively, including by facilitating
adaptation to changing conflict dynamics.
On 30 March 2020, Ecuador co-sponsored resolution
2518 (2020) supporting the more integrated use of new
technologies with a view to improving the situational
awareness of personnel and their capabilities, which
was reiterated in the presidential statement of 24 May
2021 (S/PRST/2021/11). That must include artificial
intelligence, for its ability to improve camp and convoy
security, with conflict monitoring and analysis.
As an Organization, we cannot achieve greater
efficiency if we are not equipped with the tools to
overcome new security challenges. Our responsibility
is to promote and harness technological development
as an enabler of peace. That must be done in strict
accordance with public international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We cannot ignore the threats posed by the misuse or
abuse of AI for malicious or terrorist purposes. An AI
system also carries other risks, such as discrimination
or mass surveillance.
Furthermore, Ecuador rejects the militarization or
placement of AI weapons. We reiterate the risks posed
18/23

18/07/2023

by lethal autonomous weapon systems and the need
for all weapons systems to respond to human decision,
control and judgment, under the only viable framework
of responsibility and accountability.
Ethical principles and responsible behaviour
are indispensable but not sufficient. The answer to
harnessing artificial intelligence without exacerbating
the threats arising from it is the establishment of a
legally binding international framework, as Ecuador
will continue to advocate. Moreover, in cases where it
is not possible to ensure sufficient human control over
lethal autonomous weapons, as well as the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, they should
be prohibited.
I share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the alarming potential link between AI and nuclear
weapons. We welcome the recommendations made
today with regard to the New Agenda for Peace and
agree on the need to bridge the digital divide and to
promote partnerships and associations that enable us
to harness existing technologies for peaceful ends.
In addition to ethical considerations, the robotization
of conflicts poses a major challenge to disarmament
efforts and an existential challenge that the Council
cannot neglect.
AI researchers today speak of the problem of
alignment, that is, how can we ensure that AI’s
discoveries will serve us rather than destroy us? That is
a question that scientists such as Einstein, Oppenheimer
and Von Neumann asked themselves, in turn. That is
the challenge that lies ahead of us today.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank the presidency of
the United Kingdom for holding today’s briefing on
this highly topical issue. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for enriching our discussion with his thoughts
and insights.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is reshaping the way we
work, interact and live. Peaceful applications of AI can
help achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
support United Nations peacekeeping efforts. Such
efforts include the use of drones for humanitarian
assistance deliveries, monitoring and surveillance.
On the other hand, the proliferation of AI
technologies raises significant risks that demand
our attention. The potential misuse or unintended
consequences of AI, if not carefully managed, could pose
threats to international peace and security. Malicious
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

actors could exploit AI for cyberattacks, disinformation
and misinformation campaigns or autonomous weapon
systems, leading to increased vulnerabilities and
geopolitical tensions. There can also be negative human
rights consequences associated with AI, including
through discriminatory algorithmic decision-making.
We must address those risks collectively through
international cooperation, frameworks and norms.
Malta believes that the cooperation of multiple
stakeholders across the various levels and sectors
of international, regional and national communities
is essential for implementing ethical frameworks
regarding AI around the world. In that regard, the
international community needs to develop universal
instruments that focus not only on the articulation
of values and principles but also on their practical
realization, with a strong emphasis on the rule of law,
human rights, gender equality and the protection of the
environment. As governmental and non-governmental
actors race to be first in the development of AI,
governance and control practices must be developed at
a comparable pace for safeguarding international peace
and security. Therefore, the Security Council must
push for strong AI governance and ensure its inclusive,
safe and responsible deployment through the sharing of
experiences and governmental frameworks.
Since 2019, Malta has been developing an ethical
AI framework, in alignment with the Ethics Guidelines
for Trustworthy AI of the European Union (EU). The
framework is based on four guiding principles: first,
build on a human-centric approach; secondly, respect
for all applicable laws and regulations, human rights
and democratic values; thirdly, maximize the benefits
of AI systems while preventing and minimizing their
risks; and fourthly, align with emerging international
standards and norms around AI ethics. Malta is ready to
work hand in hand on AI with all stakeholders involved
to develop a global agreement on common standards
for the responsible use of AI. Moreover, within the EU,
we are working on an artificial intelligence act, which
seeks to ensure that citizens can trust what AI has to
offer. It takes a human-centric and innovation-friendly
approach to AI, based on fundamental rights and the
rule of law.
In that line, Malta strongly supports the work of
the open-ended working group on security of and in the
use of information and communications technologies
2021–2025 and underlines that confidence-building
measures are essential to increase the level of dialogue

S/PV.9381

and trust for more transparency in the use of AI to
ensure better accountability.
Malta expresses its concern regarding the use of
AI systems in military operations, since machines
cannot make human-like decisions involving the
legal principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution. We believe that lethal autonomous weapon
systems currently exploiting AI should be banned and
only those weapons systems that are in full respect
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law should be regulated. Likewise, the integration
of AI into national security, counter-terrorism and
law enforcement systems raises fundamental human
rights, transparency and privacy concerns, which must
be addressed.
In conclusion, Malta believes that the Security
Council has an important anticipatory role to play
on this issue. We have the responsibility to monitor
developments closely and address any threats to
international peace and security that may arise in a
timely manner. It is only by promoting responsible
governance, international cooperation and ethical
considerations that we can harness the transformative
power of AI while mitigating potential risks.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing
this debate on artificial intelligence (AI) at a time when
technological innovations are constantly increasing and
revolutionizing our societies and having an impact on
international security. I also thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, Professor Yi Zeng and Mr. Jack
Clark for their briefings.
Artificial intelligence is as fascinating as it is
bewildering. In recent years, it has revolutionized
our ways of life, modes of production and ways of
thinking and has expanded the boundaries of our
reality. Thanks to their precision and ability to solve
complex problems, AI systems stand out from more
conventional information technology mechanisms
and offer numerous opportunities for maintaining
international peace and security.
For years, the maintenance of international peace
and security has relied on a robust technological
ecosystem that not only enhances crisis management
and prevention capabilities, but also promotes greater
understanding of situations on the ground, while
improving the protection of civilians, especially in
complex environments.

23-2104919/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

Artificial intelligence is making its own specific
contribution by multiplying the analysis capabilities of
early warning systems. It is now faster and easier to
detect emerging threats by analysing vast quantities of
data from a variety of sources in a very short period
of time. Thanks to AI, the operational systems of the
United Nations peace missions are becoming ever more
effective. Indeed, the use of drones, night vision and
geolocation systems, for example, makes it possible
to detect the activities of armed and terrorist groups,
to secure the delivery of humanitarian aid in hardto-reach areas and to improve ceasefire monitoring
and mine-detection missions on the ground. It also
strengthens the implementation of very complex
peacekeeping mandates, in particular the protection
of civilians.
AI also plays a major role in peacebuilding
processes, contributing to the reconstruction efforts
of States in post-conflict situations, and encourages
the implementation of quick-impact projects, while
offering employment opportunities to young people
and reintegration possibilities for former combatants.
However, in order to make the most of the benefits
of AI for peace and security, in particular when
deploying peacekeeping operations, it is essential that
local communities appropriate and absorb those new
technologies, so as to perpetuate their beneficial effects
after the withdrawal of international forces. If they are
not anchored at the local level, the benefits of AI are
likely to disappear and crises to re-emerge. States,
national and international organizations and local
populations must be educated in the manufacturing and
distribution processes, in order to strengthen trust in
and the legitimacy of the AI systems being used.
AI certainly contributes to strengthening
international peace and security, but it also poses
many risks which we must understand now. Terrorist
and criminal groups can take advantage of the many
opportunities offered by AI to pursue their illicit
activities. In recent years, hacker networks have
stepped up their cyberattacks, disinformation and theft
of sensitive data. The threats posed by the malicious
use of AI should be a wake-up call for the international
community and the starting point for greater control
over the development of new technologies. That
means strengthening transparency and international
governance, with the United Nations as a guarantor,
but also and above all, accountability. The United
Nations must bolster international cooperation to
20/23

18/07/2023

develop a regulatory framework with appropriate
control mechanisms and robust security systems.
Information-sharing and the establishment of ethical
standards will also help to prevent abuse and preserve
international peace and security.
Gabon remains committed to promoting the peaceful
and responsible use of new technologies, including
artificial intelligence. With that in mind, it is important
to encourage the sharing of best practices in the areas
of security and control, encourage States to adopt
national regulatory policies and start awareness-raising
programmes right now, especially for young people, on
the issues and challenges of artificial intelligence.
In conclusion, artificial intelligence clearly
offers a whole range of opportunities. It supports
sustainable development initiatives and helps to
prevent humanitarian and security crises and combat
climate change and its negative effects. However, in
the absence of reliable regulations and effective control
and management tools, AI can pose a genuine threat
to international peace and security. Our enthusiasm
for those increasingly sophisticated technologies must
therefore be tempered with caution and restraint.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important meeting
and for bringing the issue to the Security Council for a
first-ever debate on the matter.
Artificial intelligence (AI) has been around for
decades as part of the world’s scientific and technological
drive. The recent spike in its development has opened
vast avenues for its use in almost every sector of human
activity, as the Secretary-General, our briefers and
other colleagues have said. Everything indicates that it
is headed to a place that will be front and centre in an
era of revolutionary, never-before-seen technological
advances in the years to come. Our world is no stranger
to scientific evolution and disruptive technological
growth. It is part of the uninterrupted quest by humans
for progress, part of our genome and engraved in
human history. But there is something fundamentally
different about artificial intelligence. It stands out both
for its rate of progress and for the potential scope of it
applications, and holds great promise for transforming
the world as never before and automating processes on
a scale we cannot even imagine now.
While that technology advances at a mind-blowing
pace, we are caught between fascination and fear,
weighing benefits and worries, anticipating applications
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

that may transform the world but also aware of its other
side — the dark side, the potential risks that could have
an impact on our safety, privacy, economy and security.
Some, more alarmist, have gone as far as to warn about
the risks that AI may pose for our civilization. The
vertiginous rhythm of the development of a technology
with far-reaching consequences that we are not fully
able to grasp raises serious questions, and rightly.
It is because of the nature of technology, the lack of
transparency and accountability in how algorithms
reach their results and the fact that often not even the
scientists and engineers who design the AI models fully
understand how they arrive at the outputs they produce.
Depending on the data sets on which they are trained
or the way in which their algorithms are organized,
AI models and systems could lead to discrimination
on the basis of race, sex, age or disability. While
such issues can be prevented or corrected, it is far
more difficult to prevent the serious risks presented
by those who use the technology with the intention
to cause harm. The Internet and social media have
already shown how damaging such behaviours can
be. Some countries continually attempt to deliberately
create misleading information, distort facts, interfere
in the democratic processes of others, spread hatred,
promote discrimination and incite violence or conflict
by misusing digital technologies. Deepfakes and
doctored photos are being used to create convincing but
false information and narratives, produce convincing
conspiracy theories that undermine public trust and
democracy and even cause panic. For all those actors,
artificial intelligence will provide infinite possibilities
for malicious activities.
The misuse of AI could have a direct impact on
international peace and security, and it poses grave
security challenges for which we are currently ill
prepared. AI may be used to perpetuate bias through
large-scale disinformation attacks, develop new
cyberweapons, power autonomous weapons and design
advanced biological weapons.
As we reap the benefits of technological advances,
it is urgent that we make use of existing rules and
regulations, improve and update them and define
the ethics of the use of AI. We must also establish,
at the national and international level, the necessary
safeguards, governance frameworks and clear lines of
responsibility and authority to ensure that AI systems
are used appropriately, safely and responsibly for the
good of all, and that they do not infringe on human

S/PV.9381

rights and freedoms or affect peace and security. We
must promote standards for responsible State behaviour
and the applicability of international law in the use of
artificial intelligence and its technologies, but also in
the monitoring and assessment of risks and implications.
And that provides a role for the Security Council.
Albania will continue to promote open, free and safe
AI technologies where human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law are respected.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcomed the Secretary-General’s
participation in today’s meeting, and listened very
closely to his statement. We also thank the briefers for
their interesting observations.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the development of advanced technology that is
designed to serve the common good of humankind
and contribute to socioeconomic progress. Artificial
intelligence (AI) is a groundbreaking modern
technology that has unquestionably inspired
considerable scientific interest. However, its practical
significance and potential applications, not to mention
its hypothetical impact on political processes, have yet
to be fully assessed.
The impression left by the assessments we heard
from today’s briefers is that as a technology, artificial
intelligence is in the early stages of its development.
The unknowns are still far more numerous than the
knowns. The choice of the Security Council Chamber
as a platform for today’s discussion was therefore not
obvious to us. Even in the concept note (S/2023/528)
for today’s meeting, it is clear that there are no
concrete arguments that support the notion of organic
interconnections between AI and issues of international
peace and security, at least not yet. The concept note
only lists a disparate set of technological trends that
can be applied to any area one wants.
When I was preparing for today’s meeting, I decided
to ask the primary source — artificial intelligence
itself — if AI is a threat to international peace and
security. This was its reply.
“Artificial intelligence can pose certain threats
to international peace and security, but it can also
have a positive impact. Here are a few points that
should be considered.
“The first is cybersecurity. The development
of AI may cause new vulnerabilities and threats

23-2104921/23

S/PV.9381

Maintenance of international peace and security

in cyberspace. AI can be used to create powerful
cyberweapons,
automate
cyberattacks
and
circumvent existing defences.
“The second is autonomous weapon systems.
The development of AI-based autonomous weapon
systems could pose security risks, as such systems
could decide to use force without direct human
involvement. That could lead to unpredictable
consequences and exacerbate armed conflicts.
“The third and last is the spread of
disinformation. AI can be used to create and
spread disinformation and fake news, which can
undermine the credibility of information and
contribute to social and political tensions.”
We therefore believe attempts to establish a generic
connection between artificial intelligence and threats
to peace and security to be somewhat artificial. And as
we can see, artificial intelligence agrees with us.
To begin with, the international community should
determine the nature and character of possible risks and
threats, assess their scale and possible ways to respond
and so on. That requires a professional discussion,
based on scientific expertise, which is likely to take
years. It is already under way on specialized platforms.
Various military aspects of AI that may have an impact
on global and regional security are also being discussed
in specialized formats. The issue of lethal autonomous
systems falls under the purview of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Lethal Autonomous Weapons
Systems and the States parties to the Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons, also known as
the Inhumane Weapons Convention. Security issues
related to the use of information and communications
technologies are comprehensively discussed in the
Open-ended Working Group on Security of and in the
Use of Information and Communications Technologies
2021–2025, under the auspices of the General
Assembly. We believe that duplicating their work would
be counterproductive.
As with any form of advanced technology, AI
can have beneficial or destructive consequences for
humankind, depending on who controls it and the
purposes it is used for. Today we are unfortunately seeing
how the West, led by the United States, is undermining
trust in its own technological decisions and the
information-technology (IT) companies implementing
them. We are regularly seeing evidence of American
special services’ interference in the activities of major
22/23

18/07/2023

corporate players in the industry, manipulating contentmoderation algorithms and tracking users, including
through manufacturers’ built-in hardware and software
features. However, the West sees no ethical problems
with regard to deliberately allowing AI to ignore hate
speech on social network platforms if it adheres to
the political agenda that suits it, as in the case of the
extremist company Meta and the permission it gives for
posting calls for killing Russians. At the same time, the
algorithms learn to put out fakes and disinformation
and automatically block information that the owners of
social networks and their handlers in the intelligence
services believe is wrong — in other words, truths that
hurt. In the spirit of the notorious cancel culture, AI is
made to edit entire digital arrays on demand, thereby
generating false narratives. In brief, the primary source
of challenges and threats lies not with AI itself but with
the unscrupulous champions of AI among the so-called
advanced democracies. It is just as important to talk
about that as about the issues that the United Kingdom
presidency cited as reasons for convening this meeting.
There is a popular belief today that artificial
intelligence will create major prospects for emerging
new markets and sources of wealth. However, the
issue of the unequal distribution of such potential
benefits is carefully avoided. The Secretary-General
addressed those aspects in detail in his Roadmap for
Digital Cooperation report. The digital divide has
reached a point where 89 per cent of people in Europe
have Internet access, while in low-income countries
the number is only 25 per cent. Almost two thirds of
global commerce and services is conducted on digital
platforms, and yet the cost of a smartphone in South
Asia and sub-Saharan Africa represents more than
40 per cent of an average monthly income, while mobile
data charges for African users are more than three times
the global average. Finally, Government support aimed
at equipping citizens with digital skills is provided in
less than half of the world’s countries.
That is because the wealth created by innovation
is extremely unevenly distributed and dominated
by a handful of major platforms and States. Digital
technologies have resulted in a significant increase
in productivity and added value, but their benefits
have not led to shared prosperity. The United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development’s Technology
and Innovation Report 2023 warns that developed
countries will benefit the most from digital technologies,
including artificial intelligence. Digital technologies
23-21049

18/07/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

are helping to concentrate economic power in the hands
of an increasingly small group of elites and companies.
The combined wealth of tech billionaires in 2022 was
$2.1 trillion. Underlying that disparity is a massive
gap in governance, especially across borders, and in
public investment.
Historically, digital technologies have been
developed by the private sector, and Governments
have consistently lagged behind in regulating them
in the public interest. That trend must be reversed.
States should play a leadership role in developing
regulatory mechanisms for AI. Any self-regulatory
tools that the industry adopts should comply with
the national legislation of the countries where those
companies operate. We are opposed to establishing
supranational oversight bodies for AI. We also consider
the extraterritorial imposition of norms in that area
unacceptable. Reaching universal agreements in this
area is possible only on a basis of mutually respectful
dialogue, on an equal footing, among sovereign
members of the international community and with due
consideration of all the legitimate interests and concerns

S/PV.9381

of the participants in the negotiation process. Russia is
already contributing to that process. In our country, the
major IT companies have developed a national code of
ethics in the area of artificial intelligence, which sets
guidelines for the safe and ethical development and use
of AI systems. It does not establish any legal obligations
and is open to foreign specialized agencies, private
companies and academic and social entities. The code
was formulated in a national effort to contribute to the
implementation of UNESCO’s Recommendation on the
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that no AI
system should be allowed to put in question the moral
and intellectual autonomy of human beings. Developers
should regularly assess the risks associated with the use
of AI and take measures to minimize them.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I once again thank our technical experts for joining
us and our colleagues for their contributions today.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-2104923/23
