S/PV.7448

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7448th meeting

Tuesday, 26 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Ms. Davison
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/303)

15-15113 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1515113*

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/303)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/303, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: The first quarter of this year has been
an important one for Kosovo and for the South-East
European region. I wish to begin by commending the
new Pristina Government for its prudent and reasoned
approach to tackling the many inherited and new
challenges it faces and for its ambitious reform agenda.
Both Belgrade and Pristina stand at important
stages along their respective European paths. Their
demonstrated ability to work together on subjects of
common concern has been of fundamental importance
in overcoming the legacy of hostility and conflict. An
equally encouraging fact is that, over the recent months,
there have been increasing direct contacts at the

2/25

26/05/2015

local level, alongside the European Union-facilitated
dialogue at the higher political level.
Two meetings between Prime Minister Vučić of
Serbia and Kosovo’s new Prime Minister Mustafa, held
on 9 February and 21 April in the framework of the
Brussels dialogue, were further important milestones
that will, we hope, lead to concrete achievements.
Excuses should not be countenanced for procrastinating
in the remaining implementation steps of the April 2013
Agreement, nor, I believe, should older issues become
shackles on the stakeholders to embrace opportunities
to open new ground in this dialogue.
Along with our European Union (EU) and other
international partners on the ground, I continue to
encourage the political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina
to demonstrate creativity and foresight in identifying
areas of common interest. It is also important for
technical engagements at working levels to be free from
polemical haggling and focus on facilitating delivery of
tangible results that directly benefit people’s lives.
With regard to the vital processes of judicial
integration, it is encouraging that the recruitment of
judges and prosecutors has begun, with a number of
applications having been submitted for these positions
by yesterday’s deadline. I trust this process will
continue with flexibility and goodwill, particularly
regarding educational qualifications. I applaud the
initiative of Prime Ministers Vučić and Mustafa to
also communicate directly to resolve pressing issues.
Such direct engagements, which usefully complement
and help maintain the momentum of their structured
dialogue, should gradually become the norm, rather
than the headline-worthy exceptional event.
One of the core provisions of the April 2013
Agreement, namely the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, however,
remains unresolved. Steady leadership is required from
both Pristina and Belgrade in order to enable progress
during the technical discussions in Brussels scheduled
for today. While fully acknowledging the complexity
of issues and time required to establish a functional
association/community, it will be vital to demonstrate
good will in order to maintain the political momentum.
Equally firm support on the part of the international
community will also remain essential in this regard.
Turning to developments within Kosovo, on
23 April, after some two months, the representatives
of the main Kosovo Serb political platform, the Serbian

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

S/PV.7448

Civic Initiative, resumed their participation in the
Kosovo Government and Assembly. It is encouraging
that Kosovo Serb leaders, together with Prime
Minister Mustafa and others in his Cabinet, found
ways to overcome their differences and preserve the
integrity of the governing coalition. Additionally,.
a member of the Serbian Civic Initiative was also
appointed as Minister for Communities and Returns.
After protracted disagreements, on 24 April all four
municipal assemblies in northern Kosovo agreed to
adopt their budgets in line with Kosovo legislation,
which led to the effective unblocking of the municipal
bank accounts on 15 May.

from Kosovo towards the establishment of the court.
I had hoped to be able to report today that the relevant
constitutional and legislative steps had been completed.
The Assembly of Kosovo is seized of the urgency of
the matter, which is tentatively scheduled for action this
Friday. In that connection, I have also urged political
leaders in Pristina to work diligently to promote a
clearer public understanding of the importance of this
matter to Kosovo’s future. I am pleased to note growing
public acceptance of the court as a way to deal with the
past and focus on the future. In the meantime, the Chief
Prosecutor, Mr. David Schwendiman, has officially
assumed his functions last week.

I should also note the practical cooperation that
has been developing between the mayors of North
and South Mitrovica, Goran Rakić and Agim Bahtiri,
respectively. On 30 April, both attended the funeral
held in North Mitrovica for a Kosovo Albanian boy
whose body was found some three weeks after his
disappearance. The two mayors, in a meeting held on
21 May with the Kosovo Ministers for Communities
and Returns and Local Government Administration,
as well as representatives of the Kosovo Albanians in
the Kroi international Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood,
reached agreement on addressing the long-festering
issues of returns and residential construction in that
area through an interministerial working group. I
commend both mayors for their prudent leadership, and
believe that the success of such an inclusive approach
will serve as an instructive example on the way forward
for other issues that remain outstanding in that and
other regions of Kosovo.

With regard to progress on establishing the fate of
missing persons, a total of 1,653 persons are still listed
as missing as a result of the Kosovo conflict. Swift
progress on this issue is essential to help heal the wounds
of the conflict and alleviate the grief of the families of
the victims. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)continues to support and
encourage progress on this issue, which will largely
depend on disclosure of further information by all sides
regarding events leading to such disappearances.

The 24 May incident in the Leposaviq/Leposavić
municipality, in which a regular rotation convoy of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
suffered material damage, reportedly due to gunfire,
was unfortunate, and I hope the investigation into
that regrettable event will be prompt and enjoy the
cooperation of the local community.
A matter of pressing importance is the completion
of necessary steps towards the establishment of the
specialist court in order to try cases arising from the
findings of the EU Special Investigative Task Force, in
accordance with the highest standards of international
justice. In my meetings across the Kosovo political
establishment, I have underlined the clear expectations
of the international community, as well as of those
who may have been the victims of past crimes, that
there shall be no undue delays in the steps required

The pace of returns and reintegration of internally
displaced persons has further slackened, while the
continued occurrence of security incidents affecting
returnees and their properties further undermines
efforts aimed at promoting returns, reconciliation and
integration. The repeated incidents in recent weeks and
over this past weekend targeting returnees in Klinë/
Klina municipality, in western Kosovo are particularly
troubling. I have called for intensified efforts to bring
the perpetrators to justice, and am pleased to report that
several arrests have been made. We will follow up on
the investigation and look forward to the completion of
due process. At the same time, I welcome the initiative
to establish an interministerial group for return, led by
the Minister for Communities and Return, as well as
the temporary deployment of additional police officers
to Klinë/Klina.
With regard to UNMIK’s human rights-related
activity, let me take this opportunity to brief the
Council on the Mission’s Human Rights Advisory
Panel, established in 2006 to investigate individual
complaints of alleged human rights violations during
the early years of UNMIK’s deployment. The Panel
has received 527 complaints and closed 464 of them,
while 63 cases remain outstanding. The Panel has
consistently recommended compensation for moral

15-151133/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

damages. However, the relevant General Assembly
resolutions prohibit compensation by the United Nations
for non-economic loss resulting from peacekeeping
operations. Nonetheless, in my discussions with our
local and international interlocutors, I have been
advocating the establishment of a suitable mechanism
to compensate for moral damages, as well as for further
investigation by the appropriate judicial authorities of
inconclusive cases.
With regard to the preservation of cultural and
religious heritage, the draft law on cultural heritage
that was recently submitted to the Kosovo Assembly
has generated significant controversy. I welcome the
decision of the Government of Kosovo to withdraw the
draft law in order to allow for broader consultations,
which will lead to the early adoption of a consensual
law.
On 30 April, the European Commission adopted a
proposal for a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with Kosovo. The dynamic approach of the Government
of Kosovo contributed to that development. Political
leaders in Pristina have expressed their resolve to
redouble their efforts so that further progress can be
made in upholding the rule of law, stimulating economic
development and promoting democracy.
I should also note the regional cooperation within
the Western Balkans 6 forum, in which Kosovo
participates. The meeting, held at the prime-ministerial
level in Brussels on 21 April, demonstrated the potential
for enhanced regional cooperation and integration. The
forum should be used to facilitate agreements in the
future, such as on the construction of a Niš-Pristina
highway, the resumption of service on the MitrovicaPejë/Peć rail line, and the re-establishment of a direct
air link between Pristina and Belgrade.
The powerful potential for efficient regional
cooperation was also demonstrated in addressing the
recent phenomenon of irregular migration from Kosovo.
Similar efforts will be needed to tackle issues of violent
extremism. In that respect, the substantial efforts of the
Kosovo authorities, including the adoption of the law
on the prohibition of joining armed conflicts outside
Kosovo, in March, and the establishment of a Government
anti-radicalization task force, are particularly notable.
Kosovo’s law enforcement agencies and leaders of the
religious communities have also played a key role. We
have already seen concrete results of those measures,
most recently in the indictment of 32 people on charges

4/25

26/05/2015

related to violent extremism, and continuing active
investigation of other cases. Radicalization is a global
concern, and the Western Balkans is no exception
to it. I trust that outreach efforts and active regional
cooperation will continue so that adequate responses to
this transnational challenge are developed.
I would like to also add my voice to those of
the many regional and European leaders who have
expressed deep concern with regard the deadly armed
clashes with the police in Kumanovo, in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on 9 and 10 May.
The violent clashes involved several individuals from
Kosovo. I am pleased to note that regional leaders,
including the President and the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, denounced the violence and took great care
not to inflame tensions. Time should be permitted for
a transparent and comprehensive investigation by the
relevant authorities.
I conclude my remarks by expressing my deep
appreciation to you, Madam President, and other
members of the Security Council for your support for
UNMIK. I also wish to thank the membership of the
Council for its sustained and constructive engagement
with both parties. That engagement will remain
essential in encouraging the full implementation of
the April 2013 agreement and in supporting progress
on other challenging issues, such as the establishment
of the specialist court. UNMIK will continue working
closely with its local and international interlocutors
to support all vital processes in accordance with its
mandate.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
text provided by the delegation): I am very pleased to
address the Security Council on this occasion. As we
sit down to consider the most recent report (S/2015/303)
of the Secretary-General on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), I extend to the members of the Council my
gratitude for the continued attention they devote to the
question of Kosovo and Metohija, which is of paramount
importance for the Republic of Serbia. Drawing upon
the constructive cooperation that we have had ever since
the establishment of the provisional administration of
the United Nations in Kosovo and Metohija, I continue
to believe that our common endeavour based on
resolution 1244 (1999) will make it possible for us to

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

achieve a sustainable political solution for the question
of Kosovo and Metohija.
By its constructive approach, the Republic of Serbia
has made every effort to render a concrete contribution
to the achievement of the goal of transforming the
Western Balkans into a zone of lasting peace, stability
and prosperity. It is not in dispute that, after much
turbulence, substantial progress has been achieved in
the region, both with regard to the building of peace
and democracy and in the area of regional cooperation
and European integration. I concur with European
Union (EU) High Representative Federica Mogherini,
who said in her statement to this body at the meeting
convened to discuss cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
on 9 March that “the Balkans offer us all, today,
reasons to be proud and optimistic” (S/PV.7402, p. 6).
Yet the recent terrorist attacks in Zvornik, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Kumanovo, Macedonia, are a clear
demonstration of the fragility of stability in the region.
Therefore, all of us in the region, as well as the relevant
international stakeholders, should invest additional
efforts to preserve.
Those events have borne out the assertions I have
made repeatedly in the Council that the undiminished
presence of the United Nations Mission is of paramount
importance for stability and for the creation of conditions
conducive to a lasting and sustainable solution for
the question of Kosovo and Metohija. My country
appreciates very much the status-neutral UNMIK
engagement aimed at establishing preconditions for
a peaceful life together and for the security of all the
residents of its southern province and respect for their
human rights. We therefore expect that, proceeding
from resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK will continue to
carry out its mandate in the coming period as well, in
particular in the areas that are important for Serbs and
other non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija and that
are a precondition for their survival and normal life.
We appreciate the contributions made by other
international organizations that, through their missions
under the auspices of the United Nations, make up
part of international civilian and security presences in
Kosovo and Metohija. They include the Kosovo Force,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as specialized agencies of the United
Nations. In particular, we are appreciative of the efforts
made by Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the

S/PV.7448

Secretary-General of the United Nations, in monitoring
the implementation of the UNMIK mandate and
coordinating the international civilian and security
presences. We are well aware of the challenges he faces.
The formation of a Government in Prístina and
the continuation of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina at a high level are singled out as key political
developments in the report before us. The Government
of the Republic of Serbia is fully committed to the
dialogue, conducted with the facilitation of the European
Union, and expects that its resumption will solidify the
basis for the implementation of the agreements already
reached. The essence of the process of normalization
is to find mutually acceptable answers to questions
that burden the life of the people of the province and
prevent them from realizing their basic rights. That can
be achieved only through dialogue, based on a genuine
understanding of the needs and interests of the other side
and the readiness to compromise, clearly demonstrable
in practice. In that context, I am pleased to note that
the report also mentions the direct communication
initiated by Serbia’s Prime Minister, Aleksandar Vučić,
with Mr. Mustafa. Serbia approaches the dialogue with
Pristina openly, and is desirous of finding practical
solutions that will enable all the people of the province
to lead a normal life within a broader process of the
region’s integration in the European Union. There is no
doubt that the participation of Serbs in the political life
of Kosovo and Metohija is a contribution to that end.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia
fulfils — conscientiously, consistently and in a timely
manner — all its obligations under the agreements
reached thus far under the First Agreement on Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, initialled in
Brussels on 19 April 2013. I am pleased that the current
report recognizes the importance of the establishment
of the community of Serbian municipalities, which
is the key question for the Republic of Serbia in the
context of the direct continuation of the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement. Let me point out that, going
forward in the dialogue with Pristina, the key questions
for the Republic of Serbia continue to be the return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and property of the
Serbian Orthodox Church, and property issues.
I would also like to use this opportunity to emphasize
that the Government of the Republic of Serbia has taken
a constructive stance vis-à-vis the participation of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
and Metohija in the work of regional forums. Respectful

15-151135/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

of the agreements reached on regional representation
and cooperation, the Republic of Serbia has acquiesced
to Pristina’s participation in the Regional Cooperation
Council and the South-East European Cooperation
Process and in the activities of the Migration, Asylum,
Refugees Regional Initiative. That acquiescence has not
changed the position of the Republic of Serbia on the
status of Kosovo and Metohija, nor has Serbia desisted
from its views. However, there are attempts to include
Pristina’s representatives in the work of international
organizations outside that agreement. They are not
acceptable for the Republic of Serbia and do not help
preserve the positive atmosphere contributing to the
continuation of the dialogue at all. When, and if ever,
these questions are taken up, they should be discussed
in the framework of the dialogue. In that regard,
although, we continue to believe that the opening of
such questions at this moment is not in the interests
either of Belgrade or Pristina — or, for that matter,
of our international partners with whom we share an
interest in the stability of the Western Balkans.
Serbia welcomes the work of UNMIK carried
out in cooperation with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the missions of other
organizations present in Kosovo and Metohija on
monitoring the status of non-majority communities
in the province. The Government of the Republic of
Serbia attaches great importance to the quest for a
proper solution to the question of IDPs from Kosovo
and Metohia. Creating sustainable conditions for their
return is the key factor in the process of reconciliation.
Regrettably, even 16 years after the end of the conflict,
no conditions exist for a sustainable return of the IDPs
to Kosovo and Metohija, primarily due to the lack
of proper interest in this question by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina. This sad
fact is noted in the regular reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of UNMIK and in reports of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (UNHCR).
Only 1.9 per cent of the 220,000 persons who left
Kosovo and Metohija in 1999 have realized a sustainable
return over the last 15 years. About 204,000 of those
persons are still displaced in Serbia. The most recent
UNHCR data presented in the current report bear out
the decreasing trend: only 14 persons, it is reported,
returned to Kosovo and Metohija in the last four
months. Self-defeating statistics indeed. To achieve
lasting solutions, key obstacles to unencumbered and
sustainable return should be overcome, a consistent
6/25

26/05/2015

and fully implemented legal framework for return,
including protection of property rights and security,
should be ensured, and the obstruction of returns should
be eliminated, with full respect for the principle of the
responsibility of international and local actors engaged
in the process.
This is an occasion to recall once again the Serbia
ops the list of European countries by the number of
internally displaced persons in protracted displacement.
In that context, I call on the United Nations and other
representatives of the international Administration in
Kosovo and Metohija to help us overcome the problems
that prevent IDP returns and make the situation of
returnees ever more difficult, not least by ever more
frequently incidents. Surely, a contributing factor in
the delay of IDP returns has been physical insecurity,
as manifested in the continued attacks on Serbs and
their property and aggravated by the atmosphere of
impunity for crimes committed against Serbs. Such
attacks are widespread: one of them happened during
the Christmas visit of Serbs from Djakovica— 12,000
of whom lived in the town prior to 1999 — to the
Church of the Presentation of St. Mary in the Temple.
It demonstrated once again the intolerance and
non-acceptance of Serbs by the majority community
and provided ample evidence that, with displaced
Serbs unable to visit their places of worship freely and
safely and mark religious holidays in a dignified way,
the exhortations by Kosovar institutions to displaced
Serbs to return are disingenuous, and that capacities
to ensure safety and security to all in Kosovo and
Metohija, especially at the local level, are non-existent.
Under the anti-discrimination law and other rules and
regulations in force in Kosovo and Metohija in this area,
obstructing access to places of worship and preventing
religious practices for the purpose of preserving one’s
identity are violations of law. This problem calls for a
dedicated commitment if we are to overcome the present
situation. Such a commitment would also demonstrate
the goodwill and the serious intention of all the relevant
actors and serve the purpose of normalizing relations,
making life together possible and respecting the basic
rights and fundamental freedoms of all residents of
Kosovo and Metohija.
The decrease in the number of potentially ethnically
motivated incidents is noted in the report before
us, just as is the increase in the number of incidents
affecting unoccupied properties owned by non-majority
communities, and religious and cultural sites. Such
comparisons are unbecoming, since we cannot tolerate
15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

any attack on members of other communities. The
incidents are eloquent proof that much serious and
genuine work still has be done to achieve reconciliation
and approach this problem in an appropriate way, and
that appropriate records on them should be kept and
their perpetrators tried.
Creating conditions for Serbs and other non-Albanians
to enjoy basic human rights and the rights belonging
to them as non-majority populations in the province
without discrimination would certainly help improve
the general atmosphere for IDP returns. We regret
the fact that the recent closure of the Office of
the United Nations High Commission for Human
Rights in Pristina — justified by financial
constraints — was done without consultation with the
Republic of Serbia and, if anything, is unwarranted by
the situation of human rights in Kosovo and Metohija.
Last April, the Republic of Serbia submitted a
report on the implementation of the Convention against
Torture, in which it pointed out that it was unable to
report on the Convention’s implementation on part
of its territory under international administration. In
that regard, we welcome the recent decision by the
Committee against Torture to request information from
UNMIK on the implementation of the Convention in
Kosovo and Metohija.
We condemn each and every act of desecration of a
religious site of any religion. In that regard, the cause of
our deep concern is not only the desecration of a cultural
monument of world renown such as the Visoki Dečani
Monastery, but also the fact that it was desecrated with
graffiti glorifying the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and the “future Caliphate”, at the time when the
international community is investing enormous efforts
to suppress this scourge as the greatest threat to peace
and stability in the world.
As I did the last time I addressed the Council
(see S/PV.7377), it is with concern that I warn that the
desecration of Serbian churches and monasteries has
continued and that, last January, “UÇK” graffiti were
scribbled on the Orthodox church in Lipljan and on the
fence wall of the church in Djakovica, despite security
provided by the Kosovo Police Force. Those acts, let
me point out, present not only threats and insults to the
Serbian Orthodox Church and its clergy, but also a way
to intimidate the remaining Orthodox population in the
province, which is preponderantly Serb.

S/PV.7448

I take this opportunity to point to the need for
taking additional measures to protect the Serbian
cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohija.
Attacks on such sites are tantamount to attacks on the
identity of the Serbs, and influence in the direct way
their feelings of security and acceptance in the local
community. They call into question the commitment
of the competent authorities in the province to the
protection and preservation of the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage. At the same time, we are witness to
the parallel process of altering historic facts aimed at
marginalizing and eliminating the presence of Serbs
and Serbia in the history of Kosovo and Metohija.
In the context of the struggle against terrorist
threats and the rise of violent extremism globally,
the need for greater security has assumed an added
dimension. As a sponsor of resolution 2178 (2014),
the Republic of Serbia has taken all necessary steps
to suppress the financing and organizing of terrorism,
which are ever-more frequent phenomena related to the
recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters to join armed
terrorist organizations in the Middle East, such as the
Islamic State. Serbia will continue to act resolutely in
the efforts to suppress terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We expect the international missions
in Kosovo and Metohija and the local provisional
institutions of self-government to contribute within
their powers to our common struggle, which has global
importance.
In the context of the priority importance that the
Government of the Republic of Serbia attaches to the
solution of the property issues in Kosovo and Metohija,
let me draw the Council’s attention to the ongoing
privatization processes conducted by the Kosovo
privatization agency, contrary to international and
European conventions on human rights. UNMIK, too,
once assessed that the process is contrary to resolution
1244 (1999), since the agency was not established under
the laws in force in Kosovo and Metohija, in accordance
with the resolution. Much in evidence is the tendency
to privatize public and socially owned companies in
communities with Serbian majority populations. Those
companies are sold to persons of Albanian nationality.
The nationality of the persons coming into possession
of the companies is not in dispute; rather, it is the fact
that the unlawful measures being taken are motivated
by the destruction of the economic resources of Serbian
communities.

15-151137/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

I take this opportunity to point out the importance
of appropriately addressing the property issue of the
Trepca complex, mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report. Any other solution of the issue other than that
achieved through the Brussels dialogue, would be
unacceptable to Serbia. I am convinced that we all
are aware of the importance of respect for ownership
rights, irrespective of whether private or State property
is involved. In that sense, it is necessary to ensure
that all activities in Kosovo and Metohija relative to
privatization be returned to the valid legal framework,
in particular since such activities necessarily have
an ethnic connotation in the province, which is
inadmissible in the democratic world. I recall that the
protection of the property of economic entities and the
suspension of privatization in Serbian communities are
important items of the coalition Agreement on the basis
of which the representatives of the Serbian community
entered the Pristina Government. The Agreement was
reconfirmed at the meeting in Brussels on 21 April
2014.
The importance of the continued monitoring and
assessment of the work of Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, the judiciary and other agencies
and their readiness to take over the executive powers
now exercised by EULEX, as provided for in the June
2014 decision to extend and reconfigure its mandate,
cannot be emphasized strongly enough. On a number of
occasions, Serbia has pointed to the need for continuous
monitoring and for establishing objective criteria for
the assessment of the work of Provincial Institutions by
the relevant missions present in Kosovo and Metohija
under United Nations auspices. In its Kosovo Progress
Report 2014, the European Commission noted that much
remained to be done with respect to the functioning and
responsibility of the provincial judiciary. The report
also noted that concrete results were needed in the fight
against organized crime, corruption, money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism.
The current situation in the province bears out our
assessment that conditions have not been fulfilled for the
transfer of competencies to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government. The fact that those competencies
have been entrusted to EULEX does not diminish the
powers and responsibility of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I expect EULEX, within its
mandate, to continue to exercise its executive powers
in the field of the rule of law, against the backdrop of
the realistic assessment of the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija in that area.
8/25

26/05/2015

Serbia is committed to the process of reconciliation.
We consider it to be important for the process that we
confront our own past and, in that context, establish the
fate of the missing persons. That is important primarily
to the families of the missing persons and contributes
to the process of inter-ethnic reconciliation in the
province. In order to establish the fate of the missing
persons, the Serbian expert teams cooperate with
UNMIK and EULEX, as well as with the competent
authorities in Kosovo and Metohija. The process of
mutual reconciliation cannot be complete without the
prosecution of the former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army responsible for the persecution of
Serbs, Roma and other non-Albanians, as well as
their political opponents among Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians. We expect the necessary conditions to
be created to try those suspected of committing war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We attach special
importance to trying the cases arising from the findings
of the European Union Special Investigative Task
Force on the inhumane treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs. We expect the decision on
the establishment of the specialist court to be taken as
soon as possible.
In conclusion, let me point out once again that the
quest for a lasting and sustainable solution for Kosovo
and Metohija is a national priority for Serbia. Such a
solution can be arrived at only through negotiations
and dialogue with the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Pristina and in full respect for the
legitimate interests of the Albanian, Serbian and other
populations in Kosovo and Metohija, on the basis of
resolution 1244 (1999). The solution to the question
of Kosovo and Metohija must be in the interests of
our citizens, who should be able to live in normal
conditions, just as all communities should be ensured
a safe life together.
On our road to such a solution, we must achieve
mutual reconciliation. That will surely be helped by
the process of the adoption of European standards
and values that we have begun on the journey of our
entire region to European integration. We believe
that the commitment to European integration is the
principal driving force behind the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We expect the
European Union to also continue its active engagement
in facilitating our dialogue with Pristina. The
Government of the Republic of Serbia will certainly
continue its active engagement in the implementation

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

of the Brussels Agreement in the interest of peace,
economic progress and reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (interpretation from Albanian; English
text provided by delegation): The citizens of the
Republic of Kosovo deeply appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations and the Security Council in Kosovo,
which have been among the most successful United
Nations missions. As the United Nations begins to
celebrate its seventieth anniversary, it is aware of that
success in Kosovo. In the 1990s, the United Nations
was intensely engaged in Kosovo and condemned
the oppression by the Slobodan Milošević regime. In
1999, the United Nations created the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in order to end all the illegal measures and oppression
undertaken by Serbian Kosovars in order to create the
Kosovar Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
We declared our independence, which has been
recognized by most States Members of the United
Nations, and UNMIK has certainly helped transform
all the institutions of the Kosovo Government.
Although the Mission remains in Kosovo because
of a lack of consensus within the Council, we believe
that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/303) during
the fifteenth year of the UNMIK presence demonstrates
success and the victory of democracy in that European
country. Today, Kosovo has 90 per cent less violence,
and the capital, according to United Nations statistics,
is one of the most secure cities in Europe and the region.
Concerning political developments in Kosovo, let
me say that the new Government, which was created
by a broad coalition that includes the two main
political parties and all minority parties, has had a
very encouraging start in socioeconomic development.
Last year, we held elections to create that coalition and
proved that the independent institutions of Kosovo,
such as the Constitutional Court and the presidency, are
highly respected by all political factions, and that the
democratic processes are respected by all.
At the beginning, we adopted an economic
programme. In the first five months we gained two
large investors, including a French consortium that
signed a €400 million contract for the development of a
key centre in Brezovica. The centre is going to be built
in a region that is populated by Serbs and Albanians
and will create 4,000 new jobs, promote the integration
of Kosovo and help develop this poor part of Kosovo.

S/PV.7448

We also have an agreement with the World Bank,
the United States Agency for International Development
and the European Union (EU) to identify energy
investments. An American company has been selected
to invest about $1 billion, which also involves UNMIK
support. These contracts represent about 25 per cent
of all investments in Kosovo. We have increased
investments to $60 million, and we have obtained
other investors. We foresee an increase of 3 per cent
in economic development; since independence this has
been the highest economic development rate in Europe
for the past seven years.
We now have to focus on the creation of new jobs,
which is the first priority for Kosovars. That is how we
basically justify ourselves vis-à-vis the population. We
had a political crisis last year; in the past three months
there has been an influx of migrants from Kosovo trying
to achieve a better life in other European countries to
seek asylum.
We were deeply unhappy with our neighbour
Serbia, which in the past two months has opened its
borders with Hungary. There is a great deal of footage
in the media showing the Serbian police taking bribes
in order to assist this illegal migration. Following a
sensitization campaign, we were able to identify some
of the traffickers. A number of measures have been
taken by Germany, Austria and Hungary, and we were
therefore able to decrease the rate of migration by
95 per cent in the space of a month, earning us praise
from the European Commission.
Now we are waiting for the European Union to
liberalize the visa regime in Kosovo, which is the last
country in the Balkans to require Schengen visas.
Freedom of movement is one of the main factors
that is increasing frustration among Kosovars. The
Government of Kosovo during its first year faced a
political crisis, after the Serbian Minister was fired.
Now the Serbian parties have returned to the Assembly,
and we are working together with the Government to
develop Kosovo.
After achieving agreement in Brussels and after a
15-year boycott, today Serbs from the north participate
in all Kosovo institutions; this is an excellent result
from our joint work.
In the meantime, we held a high-level dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia and have reached an
agreement aimed at closing all illegal structures within
the Kosovo justice system and integrating judges,

15-151139/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

prosecutors and lawyers into the Kosovo justice system.
In every agreement and at every step of the dialogue, we
have managed to normalize dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia. It is the goal of both Governments and of
our partners from the EU and the United States that both
countries — Kosovo and Serbia — become members of
the European Union and not face any obstacles in that
respect.
We would like Serbia to stop its destructive
propaganda, which only obstructs dialogue. I have
met with the Serbian leadership on approximately
40 occasions, and I want to believe that the time of
racist propaganda has truly passed. The continuation
of this dialogue includes a meeting with Mr. Vučić and
Mr. Mustafa. We should openly talk to one another, as
good neighbours.
A few weeks ago Kosovo organized a conference
of six countries to discuss the region’s infrastructure.
One of the projects that has been approved and will
be financed by the European Union is a new highway
connecting Kosovo with Serbia, which should encourage
and promote regional cooperation.
Kosovo is dedicated to participating in youth
exchanges. Serbia and Kosovo should enable visits
by youth to one another’s countries, as Germany and
France did after the Second World War.
It is important to talk today about goodneighbourliness, as Kosovo has become a stronger
country dedicated to a European path. We have had
some unfortunate incidents in the region that could
undermine regional security. Following the deepening
of the political crisis in Skopje, there was an incident in
which police and armed men died. Some of the young
men arrested were from Kosovo. I wish here to be clear,
as we have been all along. The Government of Kosovo
strongly condemns the violence in Macedonia, which is
very destructive and disruptive, and every step should
be taken through dialogue and institutional means. We
will not support any attempt to destabilize the region.
Macedonia is a partner and ally of Kosovo on the path
to European integration and NATO, and we strongly
support the Ohrid agreement as the only solution for
the Macedonians.
We have heard accusations relating to greater
Albania, that Kosovo is working in that respect,
Albania is working in that respect, but these are
baseless accusations. We believe that in Macedonia we
need greater democracy and the full implementation of

10/25

26/05/2015

the Ohrid agreement, as a guarantee of stability and
the functioning of multi-ethnic Macedonia and its
Euro-Atlantic perspective.
Kosovo wants an independent international
investigation into what happened in Kumanovo. Greater
Albania is talked about in Belgrade more than here in
Pristina, unfortunately. We have won the war against the
Milosevic regime, and we also gained our independence
based on the Ahtisaari plan. We will also win the battle
for the integration into the European Union and NATO.
Those who are against NATO and the European Union
would like to create a fog and insecurity in the Balkans,
but we will not allow such against NATO and the EU,
whatever they may be, to undermine the success of the
Balkans after the independence of Kosovo.
We have signed an agreement on the demarcation
of borders with Macedonia, and in a few weeks Kosovo
will end its demarcation with Montenegro as well. We
are the only country that has confirmed its borders
with most of our neighbours without using any kind
of violence or resorting international courts of justice.
This proves that in Kosovo no one is talking about
changing borders. We are heading towards Brussels,
where borders have no meaning. We are working
towards a new Balkans and a new Europe.
Let me speak about some of the positive
developments in Kosovo. We have adopted a law
preventing our citizens from taking part in foreign
wars, and the number of Kosovars in Syria has
decreased by 50 per cent. We have arrested about 100
people who were participating in this war, and they may
be sentenced to up to 15 years in prison based on this
new law. The Government participates in the coalition
to combat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
we have suggested some specific steps to strengthen
that coalition. This week we convened 150 guests to
discuss methods for using social media to fight violent
extremism. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and UNMIK for supporting that project, which enjoyed
the participation of the entire country of Kosovo and
all religions.
Based on a British Council survey, 90 per cent
of Kosovars would like to participate in or become
members of NATO and the EU. Last week, we had
a march by members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender community. Kosovo is one of the
few countries in South-East Europe in which that
community enjoys constitutional protection.

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

It is important to report on another matter, which has
been taken up by the Security Council, which concerns
the victims of the families in Kosovo. We have continued
the process of creating special chambers within the
Kosovo judicial system, which is largely connected to
the accusations of Chief Prosecutor Williamson, based
on the accusations of Dick Marty. We believe that
most of those accusations are baseless. But, in order to
clarify the history of the war and individual cases, we
will create that independent, international institution.
The Kosovo constitutional court has ruled that the
Constitution allows for the creation of such a court in
a third country. In accord with the Constitution, the
Assembly of Kosovo will vote on 29 May to create the
special chambers court.
Some 13,000 people died in the last conflict;
approximately 1,600 are still missing. Most are
Albanians, but there are also Serbs and other minorities.
That is a tragic number, but it is 150 times smaller than
the number of victims in Syria or in Iraq. We are very
grateful to the international community for providing
the means to continue to investigate Dick Marty’s
accusations. Along with the verdicts by UNMIK courts
and the trials by The Hague Tribunal, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and domestic
courts, this represents the fifth time that members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army are being investigated.
Some in this Chamber, as well as the people of
Kosovo, ask me why we should waste €300 million to
investigate those alleged crimes. It is vital to clarify
the history of the war of Kosovo, which was supported
at the time by the progressive world. I will personally
never allow those special chambers created due to the
suspicions contained in Dick Marty’s report to be used
to rewrite our history. It is therefore a waste of time
to use that instrument to change the history that was
brought about by the former Government of Serbia. No
one in the Balkans will forget the terror created by the
regime of Slobodan Milosevic. No one in the Balkans
will forget the genocide of Srebrenica. No one will
forget the verdicts against the Serbian leadership by
The Hague Tribunal, which found clear evidence that
the Government of Serbia was the main cause of the
war in Kosovo in its drive to create a greater Serbia. I
encourage members to read that verdict, which details
the extent of the past century’s oppression in Kosovo.
The war in Kosovo was provoked and led by the
Government of Serbia, and the Serbian State is directly
responsible for the crimes committed in Kosovo.

S/PV.7448

I strongly believe in the reconciliation of peoples.
Last week, Antigua and Barbuda recognized Kosovo,
and Kosovo has become a member of Francophone
organizations and of the International Olymbic
Committee. We will soon be applying for membership
in other international organizations, which proves that
the independence of Kosovo is immutable and final.
The International Court of Justice has determined that
Kosovo’s declaration of independence did not breach
international norms, and its status has been deemed
final with the authorization of the dialogue between
Kosovo and Serbia. That dialogue has been a historic
success. After 100 years of hate and conflict, we are
now working on reconciliation and understanding and
for full normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia.
I would like now to make a few remarks about
our position as the process for normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia draws towards conclusion.
This is the moment to initiate dialogue at a higher level,
namely, the demarcation phase between Kosovo and
Serbia, which will be concluded by mutual recognition
of both countries. The bilateral demarcation agreement
between Kosovo and Serbia should also be recognized
by the Security Council. That will enable Kosovo
to become a Member of the United Nations and will
allow Serbia to accelerate its integration into the EU
and NATO. Of course, Kosovo will continue on its own
path for speedy membership in the EU and NATO.
Only peace between Albanians and Serbs can
guarantee sustainable peace in the region and in the
Balkans. Reconciliation and stability will not be
achieved by forgetting the past. We will teach Kosovars,
Serbs and Albanians not to forget the past. This year,
we mark the seventieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War, and we are still terrified by the
destruction caused by Adolf Hitler. Youth will never
forget the lessons of the Holocaust. We have built a
monument to the memory of the victims of the Holocaust
in the courtyard of the Kosovo Government in order
not to forget what happened in Auschwitz. Nor should
we in the Balkans forget the nationalism of the time of
Slobodan Milosevic: it can return. Last year, we worked
to document the crimes and the victims caused by that
regime. Kosovars will soon address the International
Court of Justice for the genocide committed by Serbia.
We will also ask for war reparations, not addressed to
the current Government but to history, in order not to
forget what has happened in Kosovo.

15-1511311/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

To conclude, I call on the Security Council to
recognize the progress that, with its help, has been
made in Kosovo. We ask the Council to end the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
because it has finished its executive functions in Kosovo
and has only a monitoring role. I invite members to
work to that end, because in today’s world — with its
many divisions, cultures, religions and politics, with
the current developments in Africa, in Ukraine, in the
Middle East — Kosovo is a joint success story.
We still face many challenges in Kosovo to create a
dignified State and to become a member of the EU and
NATO, but we are on the right path.
The President: I thank Mr. Thaçi for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like, at the outset, to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing. I would like to
warmly welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them for their
statements.
We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral for the period from 16 January to 15 April
2015 (S/2015/303), which highlights the priorities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and key developments since the previous report
(S/2015/74).
With respect to political developments, we
commend the establishment of a new Government and
the renewal of the high-level dialogue on 9 February
in Brussels between Belgrade and Pristina, represented
by the two Prime Ministers, under the aegis of the
European Union. Those discussions led to concrete
results, the most important of which was the agreement
on integrating minorities’ representatives into the
judicial system.
As to the security situation, despite the general calm
observed, there have been scattered demonstrations
of discontent, denouncing the social problems faced
by and acts of ethnically based violence committed
against religious minorities places of worship. That
has exacerbated ethnic and religious tensions between

12/25

26/05/2015

Muslims and Serbs. Such incidents will not help
national reconciliation. It is regrettable that they led to
the withdrawal from the Government of the Minister
for Communities and Returns, Mr. Aleksandar
Jablanović, who is himself Serb, and the suspension of
any participation by him in the consensus Government.
Chad nonetheless welcomes the decision taken
by Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić on 26 March to
establish telephone contact with Mr. Isa Mustapha, his
counterpart in Pristina. We commend that initiative,
which is the first of its kind, will help strengthen
cooperation between the two leaders and is a good step
towards appeasing tensions and reducing incidents
between the two communities.
We welcome the commitment of the Government
to combating violent extremism, radicalism and
terrorism through the vote by the Assembly of Kosovo
on 12 March on the law banning involvement in armed
conflict outside of Kosovo, in particular in Syria and
Iraq.
Regarding illegal immigration towards Europe,
we commend the praiseworthy efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to combat that trend, but urge them to do
more to dismantle the criminal networks that underpin
it.
Regarding disappeared persons, Chad welcomes
the publication on 4 February of the Kosovo Memory
Book. The Book — which lists the names of some
13,535 people, civilians and military personnel, who
were killed in the conflict between 1998 and 2000 — is
an important step, even if 1,655 victims have not been
identified to date. We therefore welcome the ongoing
support of UNMIK to shed more light on that issue.
We also commend the voluntary return, in January,
February and March of 36 people. Over 25,896 people
from minority groups have thus returned since 2000.
We believe that the normalization of that situation
necessarily involves providing assurances to and
guaranteeing security for ethnic minorities.
However, despite those signs of improvement, there
are ongoing issues that hamper good will between the
communities, in particular with respect to property
and the illegal occupation of homes and other areas
belonging to Serbs. We commend in that respect the
technical support by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) aimed at resolving
such disputes through the provision of property titles.
We congratulate and encourage the European Union

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and its
monitoring, mentoring and advising team for the
16 January resumption of its work for the first time
since April 2014, when it had to stop owing to security
concerns. Chad also commends the appointment of an
independent and experienced lawyer who is to carry
out an inquiry into allegations of negligence and coverup by EULEX personnel. We reiterate our trust in
that institution, which should continue to monitor the
situation and carry out its responsibilities in terms of
the rule of law.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support and encouragement to Pristina regarding the
significant progress made on national reconciliation
and the normalization of its relations with Belgrade. We
would also reiterate our support and congratulations to
UNMIK for promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region, in line
with resolution 1244 (1999), and to the Kosovo Force
and OSCE for their ongoing commitment and unfailing
efforts.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zarif for his comprehensive
update on Kosovo. I also thank His Excellency
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their statements.
The resumption of high-level meetings between
Belgrade and Pristina within the context of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue is a significant development.
We encourage both sides to consolidate the gains
made in the renewed dialogue by implementing the
outstanding provisions of the April 2015 agreement on
the normalization of relations.
On counter-terrorism, Nigeria commends the
Kosovo authorities for the promulgation of a law
prohibiting individuals in Kosovo from joining armed
conflicts abroad. We welcome the establishment of an
inter-agency task force to prevent violent extremism
and radicalization. We encourage the authorities to
ensure the early operationalization of the task force.
Nigeria welcomes the progress made in promoting
voluntary returns to Kosovo. In particular, we
acknowledge the important role of the European Union
in providing housing for returnees. That is a vital step
in helping them to reintegrate. We are concerned about
the large number of cases pertaining to properties
belonging to Kosovo Serbs that are being illegally

S/PV.7448

occupied by Kosovo Albanians. It is important that
the property rights of Kosovo Serbs are respected
and upheld by the courts. We believe that that would
help to facilitate their voluntary return and improve
inter-community relations in Kosovo.
We take this opportunity to pay tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif for
his astute leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. We assure him of
Nigeria’s full support in the execution of his mandate.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for his briefing. I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Dačić, the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for attending
today’s meeting. China also listened carefully to the
statement made by Mr. Thaçi.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) constitutes an important legal
basis for finding a solution to the question of Kosovo.
It is necessary to work on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and within the framework of the relevant Council
resolutions to find a proper settlement that is mutually
acceptable to the parties concerned through dialogue
and negotiation.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the parties concerned,
the security situation in Kosovo has generally remained
stable. The number of security incidents resulting
from inter-community friction has decreased from
previous levels. However, at the same time, Kosovo as
a society still faces elements of instability in terms of
development.
China commends Serbia for actively working to
find a political solution to the question of Kosovo. We
welcome the resumption of the high-level dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and are happy to
see that important consensus on questions such as
institution-building in the justice sector was achieved.
We believe that this will help the parties to further
enhance mutual trust and cooperation.
China supports the efforts by both parties to
continue to pursue pragmatic and constructive dialogue,
implement the existing agreements, effectively protect
the rights and interests of different ethnicities in Kosovo
and promote national reconciliation so that people can

15-1511313/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

enjoy the dividends of peace and development as soon
as possible. We hope that the parties will avoid any
words or actions that might escalate or complicate the
situation and actively search for a durable settlement to
the question of Kosovo, which would be in the interest
of security and stability in the Balkans and Europe as
a whole.
China commends the work being done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under Special Representative Zarif’s
leadership and supports UNMIK’s continuing efforts
to implement the Council’s mandate. We hope that
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
and the Kosovo Force will carry out the tasks assigned
under their respective mandates and strengthen
their coordination and cooperation in order to play a
constructive role in finding an appropriate settlement
of the question of Kosovo.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for his comprehensive briefing, and to warmly welcome
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi and thank them for their statements
this morning.
Jordan commends the Government of Kosovo’s
continued efforts since its formation to deal with the
numerous challenges facing the country. It has worked
to demonstrate that it cares about development and
has made important decisions in areas such as the
integration of judiciary structures and in passing a law
criminalizing the actions of Kosovars who participate
in foreign armed conflicts. That definitely represents a
step in the right direction for reform and development,
and we encourage the country’s authorities to pursue it.
The changes that Kosovans aspire to for a better life
for themselves and their children will require a greater
degree of committed, shared action on the part of all
the parties in Kosovo. The continuing emigration, legal
or illegal, out of Kosovo, will require the country’s
decision-makers to focus on the needs, particularly the
economic needs, of that sector of society, in order to
begin to deal with all the problems that hinder Kosovo’s
economy. It is also vital to foster a genuine sense of
citizenship in their country in every resident of Kosovo,
something that cannot be achieved until every citizen
possesses equal rights and responsibilities without

14/25

26/05/2015

discrimination of any kind. We urge the Government of
Kosovo to guarantee that issue for all and to strengthen
reconciliation among all of Kosovo’s communities.
The rule of law is the cornerstone of every modern
and democratic country, and the establishment of the
authority of the State and the rule of law throughout
Kosovo is an important factor in the country’s stability
and security. In that regard, Jordan welcomes and
supports the efforts the Kosovo authorities have
made in that area in conformity with international
law and international humanitarian law, and affirm
the importance of the work of the United Nations
Interior Mission in Kosovo in helping the authorities
to strengthen the rule of law. We are also pleased
with the action on creating a specialist court to try
cases investigated by the European Union Special
Investigative Task Force, which should help Kosovo to
turn the page on a part of its past.
We are concerned about the events in northern
Kosovo in which the central authorities’ power has been
challenged by local communities in various areas in that
region and about the continued ethnic tensions there.
We urge the Kosovo authorities to maintain contact and
conduct dialogue designed to arrive at an understanding
that will ensure that a healthy atmosphere prevails
within a united State. We encourage them to institute
a programme of social reforms so that all members of
society can live together in peace. We encourage the
European Union and the country’s regional partners to
help the Government in its efforts to achieve its goals
in northern Kosovo.
Stability and security in the Balkans in general
can be achieved only through good neighbourly,
healthy, established relationships between every
country in the region. In that regard, we welcome the
positive developments in Kosovo’s relations with the
Governments of the region, particularly in the resumption
of a high-level dialogue with Serbia. We reiterate the
importance of promoting the implementation of the
April 2013 First Agreement of Principles between the
two countries. We also encourage every country in the
region to strengthen its common efforts and action in
every area, particularly in the security, economic and
social fields.
The growing recognition over time of Kosovo as a
State is a true testament to the country’s position within
the international community, and Jordan therefore
encourages that community to facilitate and to refrain

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

from undermining Kosovo’s integration into all the
relevant international organizations and forums as long
as Kosovo continues to fulfil the requisite conditions.
In view of the stability of the situation in Kosovo, we
support extending the period covered by the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on the work of UNMIK.
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Head of UNMIK and his team for their efforts to
implement the Mission’s mandate.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Kosovo, for his briefing, and we welcome
the participation in today’s debate of Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo.
At the outset, and as a matter of principle, we would
like to reiterate that resolution 1244 (1999) continues
to be the applicable legal framework for reaching a
comprehensive settlement of the question of Kosovo
through dialogue and negotiations on the basis of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We are encouraged by the fact that the overall
security situation in Kosovo remained generally stable
and relatively calm during the reporting period. We
would like to emphasize the fundamental role that the
United Nations plays in Kosovo, through the United
Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), by
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in cooperation with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission.
We have been following the situation in Kosovo with
interest, and in that regard we welcome the resumption
of the dialogue led and facilitated by the European Union
on implementing the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that the
parties will continue to take the steps necessary for
them to move forward in implementing the outstanding
provisions of the Agreement, particularly the
establishment of a community of Serb municipalities,
which remains a main point of contention. We call on
the political leaders of Serbia and Kosovo to address
that issue as a priority.

S/PV.7448

The consolidation of the new Government and the
adoption of its ambitious programme for the period
2015 to 2018, which focuses on sustainable economic
development, employment and social welfare, the
rule of law, the fulfilment of all criteria linked to
Kosovo’s integration into the European Union, the
reforms in the education and health-care systems and
the agreement on the integration of judiciary structures
of northern Kosovo, are important political measures
we want to highlight. We also look forward to the next
steps in Serbia’s and Kosovo’s European integration
processes. The adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo of
a law prohibiting Kosovo citizens from joining armed
conflicts outside its territory, as a measure to counter
the recruitment of individuals from Kosovo to fight
in conflicts abroad, primarily in Syria and Iraq, are
important measures that we and the Security Council
warmly commend, in the framework of the fight to stop
foreign terrorist fighters.
Despite important political developments in
Kosovo, we remain concerned about the security
incidents that still occur, such as those in North
Mitrovica. We hope that such incidents can be
promptly and properly addressed, so as to keep them
from affecting intercommunity relations. The political
actors in Kosovo must refrain from using violence
as a means to achieve political ends. The announced
regional cooperation in addressing irregular migration
from Kosovo is a measure susceptible to contributing
to stability in Kosovo, while further long-term efforts
should be undertaken to improve the social and
economic conditions in Kosovo as a means of putting
an end to such detrimental population flows.
On internally displaced persons, we regret the high
number of internally displaced persons from Kosovo
and the reduced number of voluntary returns during the
reporting period registered by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We call for
a rapid resolution of the property rights issue and for
guarantees of security, identified as a main impeding
factor to voluntary returns and intercommunity
relations in Kosovo. The “self-defeating” statistics,
as the Serbian Minister characterized it, should be
overcome as a fundamental element for genuine
reconciliation in Kosovo.
We remain concerned about the question of missing
persons from the Kosovo conflict, and we encourage
the Working Group on Missing Persons to continue its

15-1511315/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

efforts in pursuing new sources of information on such
a painful issue.
We fully share the view expressed by some members
of the Council on previous occasions that these public
meetings on Kosovo should take place at more extended
intervals, such as every six months, since it is doubtful
whether they make a tangible contribution to progress in
relations between the contending parties. In fact, these
debates reveal a paradox: while the members of the
Council, in general, praise the positive developments
taking place in Kosovo and take stock with satisfaction
of the mediation efforts being deployed by the European
Union, the parties to the dispute, in their statements
to the Security Council, on the contrary, reveal sharp
differences and quite often uncompromising language
not in line with the negotiations they are conducting
in good faith, we believe, for a final settlement of the
Kosovo question.
In conclusion, we commend UNMIK’s active
role in facilitating dialogue between the communities
in Kosovo, among officials and with international
organizations, and its efforts aimed at preventing and
reducing tensions and promoting cooperation between
local authorities. We also greatly value the work being
carried by UNMIK in promoting security, stability, the
rule of law and respect for human rights in accordance
with the Mission’s mandate. As the authorities of Serbia
and Kosovo have requested a review of the UNMIK
mandate, we are ready to consider such a review in due
time.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the current
situation in Kosovo. We thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, for his presence here today and for his briefing.
Likewise, we welcome the briefing made by Mr. Hashim
Thaçi.
We welcome the resumption of dialogue at the
highest level between Pristina and Belgrade, which
opens a new space for achieving a more constructive
political interaction. We recognize that the European
Union has been instrumental in this dynamic, helping
to mediate the achievement of an agreement on the
integration of judiciary structures in Kosovo. We
encourage the European Union to continue to exercise

16/25

26/05/2015

its role as mediator. We urge the parties to develop a
constructive dialogue with the aim of contributing to
stability in the region.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has encouraged the authorities
of both sides to work together on issues of common
interest such as illegal migration. While the actions of
Kosovo to stop the smuggling of migrants have made
progress through specific policies, we encourage the
authorities in Pristina to deepen their efforts to fight
criminal groups.
The law on the prohibition of joining armed
conflicts abroad is an important step to address this
phenomenon. Chile appreciates the measures taken
in Kosovo and calls on political and religious leaders
to continue working to combat violent extremism and
terrorism.
Finding solutions to existing conflicts with local
Governments is an issue that contributes to increasing
tensions. It is therefore necessary to create conditions
for Kosovar and Serbian political actors to reach
agreement. We are also concerned about the unresolved
issues regarding property rights, especially those
affecting the non-majority Kosovo Serb population.
We are concerned about cases of illegal reoccupation
of territories which are creating an impediment to the
progress of voluntary returns and intercommunity
relations in Kosovo. Chile appreciates the efforts made
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in that regard.
We highlight the work of UNMIK, especially
with respect to the judiciary, and with specific actions
related to human rights, such as gender equality and
the recognition of people who disappeared during the
conflict in Kosovo. In particular, we note with interest
the study conducted on participation, the role and
position of women in central institutions and political
parties, within the framework of the Kosovo action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Measures intended to increase the representation
of women in decision-making responds to the
mainstreaming and rights-based approach embodied in
the text of the resolution.
It has been amply demonstrated that justice is
important for strengthening peace and for the national
reconciliation process. We highlight the work of
EULEX in transition matters and in consolidating the
rule of law.

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of
resolution 1244 (1999) as a guiding instrument to be
applied in the Kosovo region to promote peace and the
stability of its communities.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing.
We welcome Deputy Prime Ministers and Foreign
Ministers Thaçi and Dačić back to the Security Council.
We would also like to extend our thanks to the men and
women of the Kosovo Force and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, who continue to play
an indispensable role in Kosovo.
I would like to begin by congratulating Kosovo
on the European Commission’s recent approval of
a stabilization and association agreement proposal
with Kosovo. We are happy to see Kosovo taking that
important step on the path to European Union (EU)
membership. During the reporting period, we were also
heartened to hear of continued progress on the KosovoSerbia dialogue, in particular the agreement already
being implemented to integrate Kosovo’s judiciary,
as well as an agreement to integrate Serbian civilian
protection core personnel into Kosovo institutions. We
also note the progress made by northern municipalities
in approving budgets and rationalizing payrolls.
We look forward to further engagement through the
EU-facilitated dialogue process in the near future,
and urge both Kosovo and Serbia to continue making
progress on the telecoms, energy and insurance
issues, as well as on the formation of an association
of Serb-majority municipalities and a resolution of the
Mitrovica bridge issue.
The United States takes all allegations of war
crimes very seriously, so let me clearly say that Kosovo
must respond appropriately to allegations of serious
crimes committed between 1998 and 2000. Kosovo
must uphold its commitments undertaken in its 2014
exchange of letters with the EU High Representative
by promptly adopting the necessary legal measures
to set up a robust specialist court that can adjudicate
those cases, following the past summer’s findings by
the EU Special Investigative Task Force that there is
sufficient evidence to indict a handful of individuals
for serious crimes committed during that period. We
urge the Government of Kosovo to grasp the momentum
of the recent months and to unite and pass enabling
constitutional amendments and the necessary statutes
as soon as possible.

S/PV.7448

The United States is pleased to support the
EU-led investigative effort through seconding a new
Chief Prosecutor, David Schwendiman, who arrived in
Brussels to assume the role in the past week. We were
also pleased to observe Kosovo and Serbia’s continued
commitment to fighting terrorism. We welcome
Kosovo’s new foreign terrorist fighter legislation,
enacted in March, and its formation of a national
countering violent extremism working group, the goal
of which is to develop a nationwide plan on countering
violent extremism. We congratulate Serbia on hosting
a successful counter-terrorism conference in April and
particularly commend Serbia’s inclusive approach with
regard to Kosovo’s participation.
Both Kosovo and Serbia’s membership in the
anti-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant coalition and
their participation in the regional countering violent
extremism summit last week are appreciated. We ask
that Serbia and other non-recognizers acknowledge the
importance of Kosovo’s membership in INTERPOL
as a means of facilitating important law enforcement
cooperation on counter-terrorism and organized crime,
and not block Kosovo’s membership application.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) should support Kosovo’s
INTERPOL membership by turning its international
police cooperation competency over to the Government
of Kosovo.
The United States commends Kosovo for cooperating
with its neighbours on law enforcement issues. We were
pleased to see the national police directors of Kosovo
and Serbia meet for the first time during the reporting
period. Such exchanges are important, and we hope
that they will continue. We also note the Government
of Kosovo’s measured and constructive response to the
events in Macedonia.
In closing, I would like to stress that while the
United States believes the situation in Kosovo remains
an important issue, the burden on the Security Council
of these meetings must be reduced. Of the seven topics
covered by the Security Council under the debate
format, UNMIK has accounted for fully 25 per cent
of all meetings in just the past 12 months. Only the
situation in Afghanistan receives the same level of
attention in this format. We reiterate our preference
that the Council extend the reporting period for the
Secretary-General to every six months.

15-1511317/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing. We also welcome the participation of First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and of Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
While reiterating its strict adherence to international
law, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela again
expresses its view that the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999) remains the applicable international legal
basis for achieving a comprehensive settlement within
the framework of political negotiations on the question
of Kosovo, while respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Serbia. In that
context, we support the resumption of the dialogue and
high-level negotiations in Brussels between Serbia and
the local authorities of the province of Kosovo with
the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable agreement
between the parties. We encourage further such
talks in the light of the commitment of both parties
to implementing the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, as agreed
on 19 April 2013.
We welcome the indication in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/303) that security on the
administrative border of Kosovo has remained stable,
although some protests have been reported since the
report of February 2015 (S/2015/74), which we expect
to be channelled into peaceful engagement. We attach
special importance to the positive role that is being
played and must continue to be played by the United
Nations, through UNMIK, in promoting security,
stability and the respect for human rights, as well as
its cooperation with the International Security Force
in Kosovo and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) under the auspices of
the Organization. We trust that these missions, based
on their respective mandates, will continue to play a
constructive role in reaching an appropriate solution to
the question of Kosovo.
We welcome the progress made with respect to the
composition of the judiciary in western Kosovo, based
on the Brussels Agreement of 12 February 2014, which
established in Mitrovica a single Basic Court with a
Kosovar-Serb Chief Judge, with one seat in northern
Mitrovica and another in southern Mitrovica. We also

18/25

26/05/2015

support the call for the necessary steps to be taken to
establish a specialist court to investigate complaints of
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
during the armed conflict in Kosovo. This matter
cannot be delayed.
Furthermore, in keeping with our position of
categorical condemnation of terrorism in all its forms,
Venezuela welcomes Kosovo’s adoption in late March
of a law to prevent the recruitment of persons as foreign
terrorist fighters to participate in the armed conflicts in
Syria and Iraq.
We believe it highly important that full respect
be given to the human rights of displaced persons and
minorities and to promote their return to their places of
origin so that they can fully enjoy their human rights
free from discrimination. However, we are concerned
that we continue to hear of incidents against Serbian
Kosovar citizens in certain areas. It is for that reason
that we call for appropriate measures to address the
situation and to prevent persecution and hostilities based
on ethnic origin or religion. Furthermore, we reiterate
our call on the parties to step up their joint work to
clarify the situation of persons who disappeared during
the war. We are grateful for the forensic cooperation
of EULEX in this matter. We are concerned about the
legal actions against cultural and religious heritage
sites in Kosovo, and we encourage both parties to work
together to avoid any further recurrences of such acts
that will endanger peace and dialogue in the region.
Venezuela supports the peace and reconciliation
process. However, we believe that if the process is to
be successful, there can be no impunity for war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Kosovo. We must
insist on receiving without further delay responses
to the situation of those who disappeared during the
conflict. We must support the process of voluntary
reintegration of the thousands of Serbians who were
displaced from their homes in Kosovo. To that end,
we must guarantee their security, ethnic and religious
tolerance, and the land rights and economic opportunity
of Serbian Kosovars. All actions towards reconciliation
and political understanding among the parties must
be undertaken in strict accordance with the Brussels
Agreement of 2013.
Finally, we call once again on the parties to redouble
their efforts to find a peaceful, just and lasting political
solution that is in accordance with international law,
including full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this debate and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for introducing
the latest quarterly report (S/2015/303). The report
describes the progress made with respect to the
9 February resumption of the high-level dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, which was facilitated
by the European Union, but pending issues remain and
progress thereon is slow or even nonexistent. We must
not overlook them. Here I refer to the rule of law, the
voluntary return of displaced persons and the issue of
disappeared persons.
As the Special Representative pointed out, this
debate is taking place at a time when recent, very serious
incidents in the region, although isolated, recall the
need to make progress towards stability. In that context,
once again we see clearly the importance of the role
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). More specifically, we commend the role
of UNMIK in the promotion, by means of discreet but
indispensable actions, of the necessary progress in the
area of reconciliation among communities.
As I said in my statement to the Council on
6 February (see S/PV.7377), we are, unfortunately,
not in a position yet to speak of a total reconciliation
or any satisfactory integration among communities.
There has been much progress in this area, but much
remains to be done. We therefore call on all actors,
especially those that have institutional responsibilities,
to take responsible actions aimed at furthering progress
towards reconciliation, which remains elusive. It is
therefore particularly important that we comply with
pending agreements, which will help to establish a
joint association of municipalities in the north, in
keeping with the 19 April 2013, in the framework of
the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. This is a key issue with
respect to continued progress in the process that began
in Brussels, which cannot be further delayed.
I am grateful to Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and to Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their presence and their
respective briefings. Their regular participation in
these debates, which I believe should be held quarterly,
is a reflection of the positive political dynamic initiated
by the Brussels dialogue and of the serious commitment
made by Belgrade and Pristina. Spain commends this
openness and constructive attitude, and we encourage

S/PV.7448

both parties to continue to implement the agreement.
We welcome the February agreement between Belgrade
and Pristina relating to the reintegration of the various
judicial bodies on Kosovo territory. This must continue
to be pursued in the framework of justice and the rule
of law.
Here Spain would recall the commitment made by
the authorities in Pristina with respect to the exchange
of letters of April 2014 with respect to the allegations
contained in the Marty report of December 2010, which
are being investigated by the Special Investigative Task
Force. We call on Pristina to quickly take the remaining
steps to ensure that a specialist court is set up to look
into these allegations.
In closing, as I said here in February, Spain
constructively supports — as long as our principled
position is respected — any effort to facilitate this
direct dialogue promoted by the High Representative.
However, it is vital that this dialogue be translated into
concrete results that redound to the benefit of the entire
population. That would be a final justification and
rationale for this process.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. We
are also grateful to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Deputy Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo, for
their statements.
Malaysia joins other countries in welcoming
the positive developments in Kosovo following the
formation of a new Government in December 2014.
Malaysia is pleased in particular with the resumption
of the high-level dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union (EU). We
welcome the new level of cooperation between the
Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo, as evidenced
by their first meeting, on 9 February in Brussels, since
they took office last year. The meeting proved fruitful
as both sides reached an agreement on the integration
of the judiciary in northern Kosovo into the Kosovo
judicial system. This represents another milestone in
implementing the 2013 Brussels Agrement to normalize
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope to
see continuing dialogue and sustained momentum in
implementing the rest of the 15-point agreement. We

15-1511319/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

welcome the commitment shown by both sides to that
aim, as reflected in their statements today.
Malaysia takes note of the overall stable security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period. I join my
colleagues in reaffirming support for UNMIK, which
plays a key role in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo. We also commend
the role of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo in further strengthening the rule of law and
the judicial institutions in Kosovo. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Kosovo authorities to
establish a specialist court to try cases arising from the
findings of the EU Special Investigative Task Force.
We echo the call of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
in his report (S/2015/303) for the Kosovo authorities
to redouble their efforts towards that aim. We believe
that progress in establishing the specialist court to try
possible war crimes and crimes against humanity will
be crucial to bringing reconciliation and closure to the
communities of Kosovo. Malaysia also welcomes the
adoption of a law by the Assembly of Kosovo in March
to curtail the recruitment of terrorist fighters from
Kosovo to conflicts abroad.
We have heard from Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zarif today about the political
and socioeconomic challenges faced by Kosovars. We
concur that there is a need for the new Government to
embark on comprehensive political and socioeconomic
reforms to improve the living standards of the people.
Malaysia is concerned about the eruptions of
violence in Pristina during the reporting period, which
reflected the fragility of inter-ethnic relations. We urge
all parties to refrain from violence and inflammatory
rhetoric that could further escalate tensions between
ethnic groups. We strongly condemn any attempt to
spread hatred and instigate inter-religious violence,
including by descrating cultural and religious sites. As
a multi-racial and multi-religious country, Malaysia
believes in the creation of a common space for all and
in the values of moderation in countering extremism
and ensuring mutual respect, acceptance, compromise
and understanding among various ethnic and religious
groups. We urge all parties in Kosovo to intensify their
efforts towards reconciliation, inclusive democracy and
development, as well as respect for human rights and
the rule of law, and to create the institutions necessary
to nation-building. We remain committed to supporting
Kosovo towards that end.

20/25

26/05/2015

Ms. Davison (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing. I welcome the fact that we are again joined by
Deputy Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi, and I thank
them for their interventions.
It has been three months since we last met to discuss
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. In that time we have seen continued welcome
progress. The new government has launched its
programme of work and the European Union high-level
dialogue has resumed. Action is being taken on tackling
Foreign Fighters and on the Special Investigative Task
Force.
But challenges remain. It is disappointing that the
Kosovo Assembly presidency has postponed voting
on the specialist court. That delay risks calling into
question Kosovo’s commitment to the rule of law and to
dealing with war crimes. If the vote is delayed further,
that would affect Kosovo’s reputation, so it is vital
that the vote happens at the earliest opportunity. The
establishment of the court will be an important step
for Kosovo’s efforts to tackle impunity. Despite that
setback, the direction of travel remains positive. I want
to focus on three areas where progress has been most
important this quarter.
First, I join others in welcoming the consolidation
of the new Government of Kosovo. In its first 100 days,
the Government has set out an ambitious programme
to improve reconciliation, tackle economic reform
and strengthen the rule of law. It now needs to press
on with that programme in order to improve people’s
daily lives in Kosovo. The Government has set clear
direction despite the challenges. The protests in
January and the boycott by the Srpska list ministers
and parliamentarians that followed were early tests
for the new administration. We welcome the return of
Srpska list to the Government and parliament following
the end of the boycott last month, and we commend the
response of the Kosovo police to the protests. We are
pleased that the security situation has remained stable,
as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/303) notes,
although we were shocked by the recent violence in
Kumanovo. We welcome the positive role played by
the Kosovo Government in calming tensions after that
tragic incident.
Secondly, we welcome the important steps that
the Government has taken to address economic
development in Kosovo. In a country where far too

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

many young people are struggling to find employment,
such steps are desperately needed. That means
developing the economy, attracting inward investment
and creating jobs, to give people a new sense of hope.
For that to happen, the Government needs sustained and
energetic focus on the rule of law, tackling corruption,
promoting judicial reform and creating the conditions
for investment and enterprise to flourish.
The consequences of not addressing economic
development can be seen in the worrying increase in
illegal migration. That issue not only deprives Kosovo
of talented workers, but leaves migrants open to abuse,
trafficking and exploitation. We welcome the urgent
steps that the Kosovo Government has taken to combat
criminal networks and to increase public awareness of
the issue. And we commend the coordinated efforts of
the region, including European Union (EU) member
States, to help arrest that exodus.
My third and final point concerns the EU highlevel dialogue with Serbia. Last month marked the
second anniversary of the historic Brussels Agreement
signed by Deputy Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi.
Although the pace of progress has been measured, we
should not underestimate how far Serbia and Kosovo
have travelled towards the normalization of relations.
In the past two years, agreement has been reached on a
wide number of issues, including border management,
regional cooperation, the judiciary, civil protection and
policing. And at the local level, we are seeing good
cooperation, including on housing in Mitrovica and
policing in Klinë.
We congratulate both countries on the commitment
they have shown to the dialogue. The United
Kingdom is a strong supporter of both Serbia’s and
Kosovo’s EU perspectives. We look forward to further
implementation of the outstanding elements of the
Brussels agreement, including the establishment of an
association of Serb-majority municipalities.
Let me close with a familiar point. Kosovo’s progress
is now undeniable. Relations with the region, and with
Serbia, are at their strongest. Over half of the United
Nations membership now recognises Kosovo as an
independent, sovereign State, as do many international
institutions. It is because of that progress that we say
again that it is long past time to reduce the frequency of
these meetings. The realities on the ground, as reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report, do not merit this
level of Council attention, particularly when there are
so many more pressing calls on our time. As we move

S/PV.7448

into the third year of EU-facilitated dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo, we must acknowledge that it is the
EU, rather than this Council, that will bring momentum
for further progress. Our efforts must therefore focus
on supporting dialogue in Brussels rather than in this
forum in New York.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif for
presenting the report (S/2015/303) of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and for
his assessment of progress in the province. We welcome
the participation of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and we share his opinion. We have
listened to Mr. Hashim Thaçi’s statement. We note that
it contained a number of grandiose theories that have
no bearing on assistance for Serbians and Kosovars in
the province.
The Kosovo problem is still very pertinent and
continues to have a destabilizing impact on the whole
region, as demonstrated by recent events in Macedonia,
in particular the attack by uniformed bandits of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) on Macedonian border
guards on 21 April, and by the incident in Kumanovo
on 9 May, set off by the arrival in that town of a large
group of radical fighters from Kosovo who planned to
carry out a series terrorist attacks in the territory of
Macedonia.
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) is called to take action
to restore security and order in the territory under its
mandate. Under resolution 1244 (1999), the KFOR
mandate includes demilitarizing the KLA and other
military groups of Kosovar Albanians, ensuring public
security and order, and carrying out commitments
regarding border control. We expect that, in addition
to its mandate, the EU mission will also make an active
contribution to solving these obvious problems in terms
of the rule of law. We were astonished to learn that
Skopje’s information about the plans of the terrorists
was apparently conveyed early this year to international
partners who play a security in key role in ensuring
Kosovo. That warning was ignored.
The Macedonian incident shows inter-ethnic
conflicts persist in the Balkans and highlights the high
conflict potential of the region. The situation is also
impacted by the absence of the rule of law in Kosovo
as a result of the lack of the settlement to the Kosovo
problem as a whole. This once again demonstrates the

15-1511321/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

pernicious nature of staying silent and covering up the
real situation in the province. Furthermore, the slogans
regarding greater Albania are of concern, as are the
insinuations regarding the unification of Albania and
Kosovo.
The situation with regard to the Serbian minority in
Kosovo is still of serious concern, including the ongoing
inter-ethnic incidents and the cases of desecration of
Serbian Orthodox sites. We consider the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, with the mediation
of Brussels, to be a useful instrument in assisting the
stabilization of the situation. The protection of the
interests of the Kosovo Serbs should be enhanced by the
establishment of a community of Serb municipalities
of Kosovo. An agreement was reached on this some
two years ago. The lack of progress in implementing
that agreement is a poor sign. We are convinced that
decreasing tensions between the ethnic communities
would help give the community real powers, enabling it
to insist on the rights of the Serbian inhabitants of the
province.
There have been delays in establishing the specialist
court to investigate crimes carried out by the KLA,
including the trade in human organs. It is odd that the
establishment of such a body should be dependent on
the adoption of legislative decisions in Pristina when
Kosovo is clearly not ready to evaluate such a delicate
matter objectively. This a negative legacy of the recent
past.
There have been reports of Western diplomats in
Pristina trying to persuade Kosovans to adopt a text,
written on their behalf, that would apparently produce
better results than if this matter were brought to the
Security Council. We do not understand how such
friendly recommendations can be married with the
mantra of the rule of law. We insist on the need to achieve
real progress in this area as soon as possible. We note
the statement made in that regard today by Mr. Thaçi.
We confirm our position that the perpetrators of these
crimes must be brought to justice, irrespective of their
status.
We should continue to decisively curtial the
participation of Kosovans in conflicts in the Middle
East, including in the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and other radical organizations. We believe that
this issue should remain a priority of UNMIK.
The United Nations Mission is the main international
presence in Kosovo. The European Union mediation

22/25

26/05/2015

in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and
the transfer of the UNMIK rule of law functions to
EULEX do not mean that the United Nations role in the
province is diminished. We welcome the cooperation
established between Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif and Pristina. Given the broad
spectrum of problems, we would urge UNMIK to
fully implement its mandate by taking the necessary
initiatives. To do so, it should be provided with all the
necessary resources and staff. We are categorically
against attempts to devalue the role of UNMIK and
would urge the Kosovo-Albanian side to fully cooperate
with the United Nations presence.
In conclusion, we would like to confirm that Russia’s
stance on the Kosovo matter remains unchanged.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force as a
international legal instrument that is binding for all. It
is still the responsibility of the Security Council.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I too would like
to thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing
and welcome Deputy Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi
to this debate.
New Zealand strongly encourages dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristine, and the European Union’s
support for this process. We commend the leaders of
Serbia and Kosovo for their willingness to engage and
hope that this will continue in a constructive atmosphere
aimed at delivering concrete results. Leadership and
political determination will continue to be necessary to
deliver on all agreements reached thus far to normalize
relations.
Long-term reconciliation requires due attention to
the past to prevent it from blocking progress in the future.
We acknowledge the steps taken by Kosovo towards the
establishment of a specialized court to try cases arising
from the European Union Special Investigative Task
Force. We urge the Assembly of Kosovo to take the
remaining steps required to complete this process. We
also urge constructive ongoing attention to resolving
the particular political and socioeconomic issues
affecting the people of northern Kosovo. In a similar
vein, we encourage continued attention on the matter
of missing persons and greater efforts in addressing
property issues and other matters that affect the return
of displaced persons.
The problem of nationals travelling abroad to join
foreign conflicts is of increasing international concern,
with Kosovo being no exception. The adoption of a law

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

by the Assembly of Kosovo aimed at prohibiting the
recruitment of individuals into foreign conflicts is an
important step in combating this problem. However, the
issue will continue to require more than legislation. As
shown by the way Kosovo has stemmed the outward
flow of irregular migrants, influencing the movement
of people requires a comprehensive strategy. Ongoing
cooperation with partners in the region, the engagement
of community leaders and economic reforms to improve
conditions for all residents of Kosovo will be important
in countering the issue of foreign fighters.
New Zealand is a strong believer in ensuring that
the Council hears the views of peoples who are affected
by its decisions. Equally, we must organize the work of
the Council so that its time and energy are optimized to
advance the cause of international peace and security.
Given the breadth of the Council’s agenda, achieving
the correct balance is not easy.
With respect to the Council’s consideration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, we are not convinced that it is calibrated
appropriately. We think that the Council should be
more flexible in how it organizes itself to monitor the
situation in Kosovo, with more scope to ensure that the
Council can adjust its activity to reflect developments
on the ground while adequately addressing the other
issues on our agenda.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for presenting the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/303) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo,
Mr. Dačić and Mr. Thaçi, for their statements.
The Council met fewer than four months ago to
discuss the situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.7377). The
country, which was then coming out of a long-standing
institutional crisis, was the scene of violent protests and
it was feared that extremists and nationalist rhetoric
would take over the national conversation. In that
regard, we welcome the calm that has since prevailed
in the Kosovo political landscape. We welcome in
particular the constructive spirit adopted by the
Pristina authorities, who have shown their willingness
to advance towards the construction of a peaceful and
democratic public space.
That favourable environment has enabled the
country to finally resume the high-level dialogue with

S/PV.7448

Serbia, as called for by the Security Council for several
months now. We welcome the prospects opened by the
9 February meeting held in Brussels and commend the
efforts to that end by the European Union and its High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, who visited Belgrade and
Pristina in late March. We give her our full support in
this process.
The meeting in late March was an essential step
towards the effective implementation of the Agreement
of 19 April 2013, a prelude to the normalization of
relations between the two countries that we earnestly
desire. The agreement on justice signed on 9 February
is another step towards the dismantling of the parallel
Serbian structures in northern Ibar, which is necessary
for the future of Kosovo as well as that of Serbia. We
call on the parties to continue their exchanges while
continuing to look to the future. It is no longer only
a matter of working for the formal normalization of
relations, but of rebuilding, in the long run, genuine
neighbourly relations that are mutually beneficial. In
that regard, the development of trade relations and the
legal security of investments will play a key role.
The recent progress should not lead Kosovo or
Serbia to abandon their efforts. The task ahead of
Pristina remains important indeed. We recall in that
regard the importance of establishing an association/
community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. We believe
that such action is necessary if the Serbian population
is to fully embrace their Kosovar citizenship and cease
to consider themselves, wrongly, as foreigners. There
is no question of establishing an enclave for Serbs, but
instead of asserting forcefully that Kosovo, as a whole,
is also their country. The unitary status of Kosovo will
in no way be undermined by the creation of such a
structure.
The future will also require the consolidation of
the rule of law and therefore a fight against impunity.
We note with satisfaction the steps taken by Pristina
to establish specialized chambers to judge past crimes
revealed by the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force. We call for the rapid adoption by the Kosovo
Assembly of the constitutional amendments and the
law for the establishment of specialized chambers,
previously scheduled for 21 May and now postponed to
29 May. I would also take this opportunity to reiterate
our unwavering support for the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, which works every day for the
rule of law and security in Kosovo.

15-1511323/25

S/PV.7448

Kosovo

I cannot conclude without addressing the European
perspective that we want for the entire region of the
Balkans. In recent years, Serbia has made significant
efforts to move closer to the European Union, through
both internal reforms and improving relations with
its neighbours. We congratulate them once again on
these efforts. We encourage them to pursue the full
implementation of the agreements concluded with
Pristina and reiterate our desire to see it integrated into
the European Union in the near future. We hope that the
first stage of negotiations can now be opened quickly.
We know and support Kosovo’s desire to follow
the same path. It will be long and difficult, but is
nevertheless necessary for the future of the country. We
know that the Kosovo leaders are fully aware of what
is at stake. We reiterate our confidence in them and our
full support to their efforts.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.
I thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their statements. I
also thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his
briefing and his dedicated efforts on the ground.
We are witnessing positive developments and
changes taking place on the ground in Kosovo and the
region. We are encouraged by the determination of the
Government of Kosovo to continue with crucial reforms,
ensuring lasting stability in Kosovo. We welcome the
resumption of the European Union-facilitated highlevel dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. These
vital talks have already brought results, including an
agreement on justice and on civil protection integration.
We encourage the Kosovo Government to stay
focused on the outstanding issues. The implementation
of the agreements already reached, the rebuilding of
vital economic links and intercommunal reconciliation
are key. We encourage both parties to further engage
in constructive dialogue, concentrating on the priority
areas set at the most recent high-level meeting, held
in Brussels on 21 April. They include, among other
things, energy, telecommunication, the free movement
of persons and the establishment of an association of
Serbian municipalities.

24/25

26/05/2015

The European Union (EU) remains committed
to supporting Kosovo as it moves along the path of
reform and pursues its European integration goals. The
stabilization and association agreement with the EU,
which we hope will be signed this summer, will be a
milestone in relations between the EU and Kosovo,
anchoring Kosovo within the EU’s Western Balkans
policy and supporting necessary economic and social
reforms in the country.
Establishing respect for the rule of law is
fundamental to achieving a durable peace, and
accountability for past crimes is integral to the rule of
law. We stress the importance of establishing a specialist
court to address the allegations raised in the December
2010 Marty report. We welcome the progress made in
preparing the relevant constitutional amendments and
the legislation for establishing specialist chambers to
try cases stemming from the findings of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force. We note the
positive ruling of the Kosovo Constitutional Court
and the deployment of the new Chief Prosecutor of the
Task Force, David Schwendiman. We look forward to
Kosovo’s honouring its commitment and the approval
by the Assembly later this week of the relevant
constitutional amendments that will pave the way for a
specialist court.
We welcome the Kosovo authorities’ commitment
to pursuing necessary reforms. The new Government
programme for the period from 2015 to 2018 is a
very promising start. It aims to catalyse economic
development, employment and welfare, improve the
rule of law, implement structural reforms and make
progress on the EU integration agenda, as noted in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/303). We welcome
the adequate focus by the Kosovo Government on
creating social and economic opportunities for the
people of Kosovo that in the long run will encourage
them to stay in the country and contribute to its
prosperity.
While the security situation has remained calm, we
have taken note of the continuing role that the Kosovo
Force plays in ensuring security. We welcome its
continued coordination with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX), which also plays an important
role in consolidating the rule of law. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank EULEX for expediting
the investigation into the murder of EULEX customs
officer Audrius Šenavičius in 2013. The approval of the
law on prohibiting the joining of armed conflicts outside

15-15113

26/05/2015

Kosovo

the territory of Kosovo — along with Kosovo’s support
for the South-East European Cooperation Process
resolution on combating terrorism and strengthening
anti-terrorist cooperation within the region and with
European and international partners — demonstrates
Kosovo’s determination to address the issue of
radicalization and violent extremism.
Kosovo’s efforts to be a responsible regional
partner and to develop good neighbourly relations are
particularly welcome. We would encourage further
promoting ethnic and religious tolerance and peaceful
coexistence as a direct contribution to the security,
stability and prosperity of the Western Balkans region.

S/PV.7448

Finally, like many delegations around this table,
we believe that reducing the discussion of the UNMIK
report to twice yearly rather than quarterly meetings
would be a reasonable step forward in acknowledging
the progress being made in normalizing relations
between Belgrade and Pristina and with stability in
Kosovo. We also have in mind the very full agenda that
the Council has and the many crises we have to tackle.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

15-1511325/25
