A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/122
4 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 83
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/51/590)]
51/122.

Declaration on International Cooperation
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space
for the Benefit and in the Interest of All
States, Taking into Particular Account the
Needs of Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space on the work of its thirty-ninth session1 and the text of the
Declaration on International Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space for the Benefit and in the Interest of All States, Taking into
Particular Account the Needs of Developing Countries, as approved by the
Committee and annexed to its report,2
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling notably the provisions of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,3

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 20 (A/51/20).
2

Ibid., annex IV.

3

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

97-76411

/...

A/RES/51/122
Page 2

Recalling also its relevant resolutions relating to activities in outer
space,
Bearing in mind the recommendations of the Second United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,4 and of other
international conferences relevant in this field,
Recognizing the growing scope and significance of international
cooperation among States and between States and international organizations in
the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Considering experiences gained in international cooperative ventures,
Convinced of the necessity and the significance of further strengthening
international cooperation in order to reach broad and efficient collaboration
in this field for the mutual benefit and in the interest of all parties
involved,
Desirous of facilitating the application of the principle that the
exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all
countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development,
and shall be the province of all mankind,
Adopts the Declaration on International Cooperation in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space for the Benefit and in the Interest of All States,
Taking into Particular Account the Needs of Developing Countries, set forth in
the annex to the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996
ANNEX
Declaration on International Cooperation in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space for the Benefit and in the Interest
of All States, Taking into Particular Account the Needs of
Developing Countries
1.
International cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes (hereinafter "international cooperation") shall be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations and the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies.3 It shall be carried out for the benefit and in the
interest of all States, irrespective of their degree of economic, social or
scientific and technological development, and shall be the province of all
mankind. Particular account should be taken of the needs of developing
countries.

4

See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, 9-21 August 1982 and corrigenda
(A/CONF.101/10 and Corr.1 and 2).
/...

A/RES/51/122
Page 3

2.
States are free to determine all aspects of their participation in
international cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space on an
equitable and mutually acceptable basis. Contractual terms in such
cooperative ventures should be fair and reasonable and they should be in full
compliance with the legitimate rights and interests of the parties concerned,
as, for example, with intellectual property rights.
3.
All States, particularly those with relevant space capabilities and with
programmes for the exploration and use of outer space, should contribute to
promoting and fostering international cooperation on an equitable and mutually
acceptable basis. In this context, particular attention should be given to
the benefit and the interests of developing countries and countries with
incipient space programmes stemming from such international cooperation
conducted with countries with more advanced space capabilities.
4.
International cooperation should be conducted in the modes that are
considered most effective and appropriate by the countries concerned,
including, inter alia, governmental and non-governmental; commercial and
non-commercial; global, multilateral, regional or bilateral; and international
cooperation among countries in all levels of development.
5.
International cooperation, while taking into particular account the
needs of developing countries, should aim, inter alia, at the following goals,
considering their need for technical assistance and rational and efficient
allocation of financial and technical resources:
(a)
Promoting the development of space science and technology and of
its applications;
(b)
Fostering the development of relevant and appropriate space
capabilities in interested States;
(c)
Facilitating the exchange of expertise and technology among States
on a mutually acceptable basis.
6.
National and international agencies, research institutions,
organizations for development aid, and developed and developing countries
alike should consider the appropriate use of space applications and the
potential of international cooperation for reaching their development goals.
7.
The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should be strengthened
in its role, among others, as a forum for the exchange of information on
national and international activities in the field of international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space.
8.
All States should be encouraged to contribute to the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications and to other initiatives in the field of
international cooperation in accordance with their space capabilities and
their participation in the exploration and use of outer space.
