A/RES/57/33

United Nations

Distr.: General
22 November 2002

General Assembly
Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 25

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.19 and Add.1)]

57/33.

Plenary meetings of the General Assembly on 9 and
10 December 2002 devoted to the consideration of the
item entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea” and to the
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
opening for signature of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1 was
opened for signature on 10 December 1982,
Recognizing the personalities who served as officers of the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea or who otherwise contributed untiringly
towards the conclusion of the Convention and its adoption on 30 April 1982,
Recalling its resolution 56/12 of 28 November 2001, in which it decided to
devote two days of plenary meetings at its fifty-seventh session, on 9 and
10 December 2002, to the consideration of the item entitled “Oceans and the law of
the sea” and the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the opening for
signature of the Convention, and encouraged Member States and observers to be
represented at the highest possible level,
Decides to adopt the organizational arrangements for the plenary meetings on
9 and 10 December 2002 as outlined in the annex to the present resolution.

52nd plenary meeting
19 November 2002

_______________
1

See The Law of the Sea: Official Texts of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 and of the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 with Index and Excerpts from the Final Act of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10).

02 53989

A/RES/57/33

Annex
Organizational arrangements for the plenary meetings of the General Assembly
on 9 and 10 December 2002 devoted to the consideration of the item entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea” and to the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea
1.
Three plenary meetings of the General Assembly shall be held on 9 and
10 December 2002, as follows:
(a) One plenary meeting, on 9 December 2002, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., shall
be devoted to the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the opening for
signature of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea;
(b) Two plenary meetings, on 10 December 2002, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and
from 3 to 6 p.m., shall be devoted to the consideration of the item entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”.
2.

The list of speakers in the commemoration shall be as follows:

(a) Dr. Ugo Mifsud Bonnici, former President of Malta, to pay special tribute
to the late Ambassador Arvid Pardo of Malta;
(b) Ambassador Tommy Koh, President of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea;
(c)

Chairpersons of the five regional groups;

(d) Ambassador Don MacKay, President of the twelfth Meeting of States
Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea;
(e) Mr. Martin Belinga-Eboutou,
International Seabed Authority;

President

of

the Assembly

of

the

(f) Mr. Satya N. Nandan, Secretary-General of the International Seabed
Authority;
(g)

Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the International Court of Justice;

(h) Judge Dolliver Nelson, President of the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea;
(i) Mr. Peter F. Croker, Chairman of the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf.
3.

Statements in the commemoration shall be limited to ten minutes.

4.
Two informal panels shall be held in parallel on 9 December 2002, from
3 to 6 p.m., and shall be organized as follows:
(a) Both informal panels shall include the participation of non-governmental
organizations and academia;
(b) The overall theme for both informal panels shall be “The Dynamism of
the Convention: challenges for the present and solutions for the future”;
(c) The sub-themes for Informal Panel 1 shall be “The International Seabed
Authority: an institution to manage the common heritage of mankind”, “Limits in
the seas: the need to establish secure maritime boundaries” and “Settlement of
disputes: a linchpin of the Convention”; the sub-themes for Informal Panel 2 shall
2

A/RES/57/33

be “Implementation of the Convention: the challenge to ensure the effectiveness of
its rules (role of non-State actors/regional approach)”, “The emerging concepts for
the development and strengthening of the legal regime for the oceans (ecosystembased approach, marine protected areas and oceans stewardship)” and “The tools for
change: the amendment procedure”;
(d) Informal Panel 1 shall be chaired by Ambassador Cristián Maquieira
(Chile) and shall have the following panellists: Mr. Satya N. Nandan, SecretaryGeneral of the International Seabed Authority, Mr. Rolf Fife (Norway) and Judge
Hugo Caminos (Argentina), International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea; Informal
Panel 2 shall be chaired by Ambassador Hasjim Djalal (Indonesia) and shall have
the following panellists: Judge José Luis Jesus (Cape Verde), International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea, Mr. Michael Bliss (Australia) and Professor Bernard Oxman
(United States of America).

3
