TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 22 JULY 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1487) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . , . . . . . . . ,

1

Tribute to the United States astronauts . . , . . . .*. . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

. ... ....... .....,... .....,............

2

Letter dated 15 July 1969 +from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/933 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

SlPV.1487

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New 2.ork on Tuesday, 22 July 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland; France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/14871
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331).
Tribute to the United States astronauts

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):‘Before the
Security Council takes up the item before it, I trust that
members will permit me, on their behalf and my own, to
extend warm congratulations to the United States delegation and to the Government and people of the United
States on the unprecedented feat in the history of mankind
which United States scientists have just achieved, in niaking
it possible for human beings to land and walk on the moon.
We wish to express our admiration and pride to these
human beings, to these astronauts whose courage the whole
world must hail.
2. In setting foot on the moon, they have opened up new
vistas for us and it is to be hoped that all mankind may
benefit. The emotion which gripped us all at that moment
strengthens our conviction that all men on earth, whatever
their nationality, feel closely united.
3. Why, then, should we tear each other apart on this
earth on which we live when, in future, we shall no longer
be able to use the expression: “You’re asking for the
moon” appositely when speaking to someone who seemsto
be demanding the impossible?

may’be the first ray of a dawn of prosperity and freedom
for all who live here on earth.
6. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): Mr.President, I wish to express my deep thanks to you for your
statement, as well as to the Secretary-.General for his
statement yesterday. We are grateful for these generous
expressions of praise on the landing on the moon by
Apollo 11.
7. This has indeed been a historic occasion, perhaps in fact
the most memorable that any of us will have an opportunity to witness during our lifetimes. As Americans we are
naturally proud of the courage and the skills of our
astronauts as well as the genius of those thousands ‘of
unnamed scientists and technicians who made this flight
possible. At the same time, and I want to make this
particularly clear in this forum, we are most conscious that
this latest and greatest step in space is not an accomplishment of and by the United States alone, We are well aware
that we carry with us into space a heritage of history, for
the wisdom which has made this venture possible represents
an accumulation of knowledge which has been contributed
by every culture, in every age and from every quarter of the
globe. We know too that, as we enter this new dimension of
human existence, the hopes of all mankind for a better and
more peaceful world go with us.
8. We are also well aware’of the role that this Organization
plays as man pushes back this last frontier. We recognize,
for aexample, that the law governing our activities on the
moon has been laid down in a treaty which wasnegotiated
by the Outer Space Committee of this Organization, a law
which provides that the moon shall be the province of all
mankind. These are reasons, I might say, why the astronauts have carried with them a flag of the United Nations,
as well as the flags of all States that are Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies.
9. Obviously, there is nothing that we can say here today
that can add lustre to the drama we have seen played out
before our eyes this past weekend. Perhaps nothing we say
here could be a more fitting reflection of the spirit in which
this mission was accomplished than the plaque the astronauts have placed on the moon for posterity;which reads:
“We came in peace, for all mankind.”

4. Truly, the historic event which we lived through last
Sunday and Monday, by breaking the bonds which have
imprisoned us for thousands of years, has conferred upon
man csw and urgent responsibilities towards his fellowman, to whom he is linked in solidarity and for whom he
should seek happiness and peace. The men of science have
done their duty; we now expect the economists and
financiers to do theirs.

10. I believe that, as we wait in the next anxious hours for
Apollo 11 ‘s return, President Nixon has conveyed a message
to the astronauts that spoke faithfully for all of us when he
told them :

5. In any case, at this solemn moment, it is our heartfelt
hope that the exploit of the gallant American astronauts

“For one priceless moment in the whole history of
man, all the people on this ear% are truly one, one in

16. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, please
permit me to add some humble words to your eloquent
statement in congratulating the United States delegation,
and through it the resourceful American people, on the
historic occasion of their sons’ setting foot on the moon.
We pay a tribute to the gallant heroes, Neil Armstrong,
Edwin Aldrin and Michael Collins, who, aided by the
efforts and creative spirit of thousands of workers, technicians and scientists, turned into reality age-old dreams, We
wish the three astronauts a successful and h?ppy return to
good mother earth. Their achievement is a magnificent
example of the way in which the means and the men of war
can, instead of being used for destruction, serve peaceful
exploration. May we hope that a similar success will
characterize our efforts here on earth, too, and that the
technology created for destruction and man’s handling of it
will instead serve peace, progress and co-operation.

their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers
that you will return safely to earth.”
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331)
11. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken at our previous meeting, I
invite the representative of Portugal to take a place at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the president, Mr. B. de Miranda
(Portugal) took a place at the Council table.

17. I now turn to the item an ‘the agenda of our meeting,
At the request of the Government of Zambia, the Security
Council is called upon to discuss a very serious act of
aggression committed by Portugal against a young, independent African country, Zambia. Portugal launched a sizable
attack by its air force and infantry units, killing and
wounding innocent civilians and destroying their homes.
This premeditated and co-ordinated ruthless action covered
extensive areas of Zambia. The representative of Portugal
explained the situation in a peculiar way: at a certain stage
“the Zambian Government decided to open its territory to
hostile activities against Angola and Mozambique”/1486th
meeting, para. 681.

12. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I wish to
draw the attention of the members of the Council to the
fact that the repre$entative of the United Republic of
Tanzania, in a letter dated 18 July 1969 (S/9341/, has
asked to be allowed to participate in the debate on the
question before t,he Council. In accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the practice of the
Council, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Tanzania to participate in the
debate, without the right to vote.
.At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. A. Foum
(United Republic of Tanzania) took a place at pi;<?Council
table.

18. In fact, all Zambia did was to abide by the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, having given shelter to
the refugees of Angola and Mozambique, victims of the
Portuguese colonizers. Portugal not only refuses to abideby
the resolution of the Security Council and General Assembly, but uses the policy of intimidation and terror against a
country which, fulfilling its international obligations on the
basis of the United Nations Charter, supports the freedomloving people of Angola and Mozambique, whose struggle
has been recognized *as legitimate by the United Nations. In
an &ffort to annihilate the refugees of Angola and Mozambique, to stamp out the fire of national independenceand
to suppress all possible assistance to them, the Portuguese
armed forces brutally attacked Zambian villages, which
resulted in many casualties,

13. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
also just received a letter dated 22 July 1969 [S/9348]
from the representative of Somalia, asking to be allowed to
participate in the Council’s debate on the question before
it. With the consent of members and in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the practice of the
Council, I propose to invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in the debate, without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, A. A. Farah
(Somalia) took a place at the Council table.
14. The PRESIDENT (translated j?om French): The
Council will now consider the item before it, First,
however, I should like to draw the attention of members to
the letter dated 18 July 19691 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
thirty-two African States on behalf of the Organization of
African Unity. To these thirty-two States should be added
the Ivory Coast, whose representative has just addressed to
me a letter dated 22 July 19691 asking that the Ivory Coast
be included as a co-signer of the letter of 18 July 1969
supporting the request that the Security Council be
convened.

19. It seems that in the eyes of the Government Of
Portugal the implementation of United Nations decisions
constitutes a casus belli. But that is a direct attack on the
very foundation of our Organization. On the other hand,
they call the activities of Angolans and Mozambicans
hostile to Angola and Mozambique. But that, firstly, is
complete nonsense and, secondly, a gross and misleading
distortion of the facts, We have to state here that these
people are fighting Portuguese colonialism. They are against
the forces of obscurantism and their aim is independence
and progress, all in unison with the most noble ideas of
mankind, with the provisions of the Charter and with
numerous United Nations resolutions, including, in the first
place, General Assembly resolution 1514 (Xv) of 14
December 1960.

15. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Hungary. I now give him the floor.
1 SW Official
Records of the Security
Council, Twenty-fourth
Year, Supplement
for July, August and September
1969, documents
S/9340 and Add.l-3.

2

20. But what has happened in this situation? The reprev
sentative of Portugal attempted hypocritically to shift the
responsibility upon Zambia when he claimed several times
that the territory and air space of Portugal had been
violated by the armed forces of Zambia. This is, I submit,
absolutely ridiculous. HOW could Zambian soldiers and
pilots launch an attack against the territory of Portugal on
the Iberian Peninsula, in Europe? He further stated: “a
situation has arisen in which the Portuguese frontier areas
in Angola and Mozambique are constantly being violated by
armed elements proceeding from Zambia”. [1486th meeting, para. 69.1 No such allegation will excuse the Government of Lisbon or justify its shameful aggression. The fight
is being waged by the indigenous population against
Portuguese colonialist invaders in Angola, Mozambique, and
now in Zambia. These are the facts.
21. The Portuguese colonialists are conducting a three-fold
war: a brutal colonial war against the African peoples, a
political and immoral war against the United Nations and a
desperate struggle against the changing times, trying to
perpetuate nineteenth-century colonialism. They do not
shrink from violating elementary principles of international
law by attacking an independent country and infringing its
territorial integrity. No justification can be accepted for the
brutal attack of Portugal against Zambia, and no further
violation of the Charter can be tolerated. We should put an
end to this practice of the law of the jungle, and Portugal
should abide by the norms of valid contemporary international law, recognizing the right of all peoples to
self-determination.
22. We have been discussing for quite a long time in the
United Nations, as a special item, the situation prevailing in
African colonies under Portuguese administration. Since the
adoption, of the Declaration on decolonization, the General
Assembly and the Security Council have several times been
compelled to face the deteriorating situation in the Territories under Portugal’s administration resulting from its
refusal to comply with the resolutions of those bodies. In
spite of several resolutions of the world Organization, and
in defiance of world public opinion, the Government of
Portugal has been intensifying its suppressive activities and
military operations against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea, as well as its
aggressive acts against the independent African States, some
bordering the Territories under its administration, some
situated farther away, like the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Republic of Senegal, the Republic of Guinea
and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville), as indicated in
the letter2 just submitted by thirty-three African States to
the President of the Security Council.
23. It is common knowledge that Portugal is a small
country, economically and financially, and militarily weak.
And yet, how can this small country be successful in
pursuing a colonial war against the peoples of Africa and in
defying the resolutions of the United Nations? Were it not
for the economic military support of its NATO partners,
the Portuguese Government would not be capable of
resisting the national liberation movements.
24. The facts and experience of the recent debates in the
Security Council on Namibia and Southern Rhodesia
2 Ibid,

reaffirm again that in the southern part of Africa a military
and political triangle has been set up, called by the Africans
“the ‘unholy alliance”, that is, the Republic of South
Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Portugal. Those who take
part in that bloc carry out co-ordinated punitive operations
against the peoples of the Portuguese colonies, of Namibia
and of Zimbabwe and threaten with war and armed
intervention. the peoples of other young, independent
countries of Africa. Those are the reasons why Portugal has
dared and managed to go so far.
25. For the grave situation created by the aggression
against the peace-loving people of Zambia, the Government
of Portugal must bear full responsibility and is liable to pay
reparations for the damages. But all those countries which,
against the clearly expressed position of the United
Nations, have provided financial and military assistance to
Portugal, helping its policy in contravention of international law and the United Nations Charter, have to share
the grave responsibility for the serious events.
26. The position of the Government of the Hungarian
People’s Republic is clear and firm. In brief it is: first, the
right of all peoples to self-determination, independence and
territorial integrity should be respected; secondly, Portugal
should be condemned for committing aggression against
Zambia and for suppressing by force the liberation movement of the peoples of Angola and Mozambique; thirdly,
Hungary supports Zambia’s just and defensive fight in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter and its’ claim for
appropriate reparations’for the damages resulting from the
Portuguese aggression.
27. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Somalia, on
whom I now call.
28. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to thank you, and through you, the members of the
Security Council for allowing it this opportunity to express
its views on some of the issues that are involved in the
complaint of the Republic of Zambia against Portugal.
29. It is not the intention of my delegation to enlarge on
the details of the complaint lodged in the Council by the
Republic of Zambia, for this has been well presented by its
representative. But before passing on to a consideration of
some wider implications of the complaint, I feel it
important to emphasize that the Portuguese authorities
have committed no fewer than 66 separate acts of
aggression against the Republic of Zambia over the past
three years. The exemplary restraint displayed by the
Government of ‘Zambia in the face of such provocation
deserves no’; only our commendation but also our acknowledgement that it is dedicated to the cause of peace. The
Republic of Zambia has not only refrained from exercising
its right under Article 51 of the Charter to take defensive
action to repel the aggressor, but has afforded Portugal
every conceivable opportunity to make amends for its
lawless conduct through the medium of bilateral negotiations.
30. What, then, are some of the significant issues seen in
the conduct of the Portuguese authorities against this

African State? My delegation sees in this complaint
brought by Zambia against Portugal not only evidence of
acts of aggressionby one State against another, but also
evidence of a wider pattern of aggressiveacts ~hkh the
Portuguese colonial authorities have committed against
African States bordering on Angola, Mozambique and
so-called Portuguese Guinea.
3 1. It will be recalled that, immediately after attaining
independence, Senegal was obliged in 1961 to lodge a
complaint with the Security Council against violations of its
territory and air space by Portuguese armed forces. In
1963, Senegal was again compelled to protest in the
Council about the bombing of its territory by four
Portuguese aircraft. I In 1964, the Portuguese aggression
shifted to the territory of another African State, Guinea. In
October of that year, the Government of Guinea informed
the Council that, in view of the deliberate provocations and
repeated violations of Guinean air space by Portuguese
aircraft, the Government of Guinea had given orders to its
troops stationed on the border to put an end by the most
effective means to any further intrusions by Portuguese
aircraft. Evidently this is the kind of language Portugal
understands, for since then there has been no further
complaint from Guinea.
32, Senegal was again forced to protest to the Security
Council, towards the end of 1964 and in February 1965,
charging further violations of its air space and territory by
the Portuguese armed forces. These complaints were followed by a complaint from the Government of the Congo
(Brazzaville) in the same period, charging repeated incursions into its territory by Portuguese soldiers.
33. In 1966, there were complaints about Portuguese
aggressions from Zambia, the Republic of the Congo
(Brazzaville), the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The protests related to
violations of their air spaceand territory by the bombing of
frontier villages by Portuguese aircraft, the mining of
roadways by Portuguese troops and armed incursions and
as&Its against their territory by Portuguese troops.

the local African population under their control, as some
other former colonial Powers in the region have done.
Portugal holds firm to the legal fiction that the so.calledl
overseasprovinces in Africa constitute inalienable parts bf
the Portuguese nation. According to the Portuguese, tht!
African inhabitants of these Territories have no right to 81
separate identity, for according to the Portuguese they hsve
been ofl%ially assimilated. Yet in Angola, for example, 2;
of 1960 Iess than 1 per cent of 4 million Africans had beerr
recognized by the Portuguese as assimilados.
But then 1 do
not wish the Security Council to be caught up with thj::
particular question of assimilation since this concept is &cn
to any self-respecting people and is particularly alien ~0
African aspirations.
36. Conscript labour, political repression and social discrimination were factors which resulted in th’e Angolaur
revolt of 1961, that has enveloped the country and spread
to Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea. Memhns
of the Council are aware that these widespreadrevolts have
entailed great human suffering. Apart from the mani;
thousands of dead and wounded, the repressiveacts of rhe
Portuguese have created enormous refugee probtems.
According to a report by the United Nations Ili&
Commissioner for Refugees, there were on 30 June I%!$
448,954 refugees from the Territories of Angola, Mozxnbique and Guinea sheltered in the neighbouring African
States of Zambia, Senegal, the United Republic of Tanmi;s
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, With half a
million refugees yearning to return to their homeland 2nd
with the African population within the Territories intensi.
fying their armed struggle against the colonial overlordship
of Portugal, it is not surprising that Portugal finds its
colonial crown uneasy’ to wear. Nor is it surprising, &at
Portugal should look for others upon whom to pin rh::
causeof its worries.
37. Another of the wider aspects of the problem oi
Portuguese aggression against independent African Sutn.
and an equally disturbing one, is the fact that S&I
aggression is related to Portugal’s alliance with the tad
racist regimes of southern Africa: South Africa anll
Southern Rhodesia. This alliance is of course based &,Q;a
community of interests which includes the belief thnr a
stranglehold on the so-called Portuguese provinces in Afr&
can be maintained with the military
and economic atiil,.
ante of these racist regimes, particularly South Africa. Ia ii
no secret that when the South African Defence Minialrr
gave a dinner in honour of General Horatio Rebelo. 1?t2
Portuguese Minister of Defence on 10 February 1969. t;e
was able to say that South Africa and Portugal were
co-operating in combating the destructive forces of uhlt
they termed international communism. General Rebelo L.&
in return that the balance of power in southern Afti;
depended on the stability and strength of South Afriia.
that Portugal had contributed to that balanceand was@ad
to have South Africa as a friendly neighbour. The follosiag
day the Portuguese Minister of Defence addedin lohanucs.
burg: “I am sure that Portugal with Angola and Momm
bique can join with South Africa to build a great ftiia
against foreign aggressors”.

34. What, then, is behind these aggressiveacts which the
Portuguese authorities repeatedly commit despite censure
by the United Nations? The reason for them is that the
Organization of African Unity has pledged itself to give all
possible support to the liberation movement in the African
Territories under Portuguese rule in their struggle for
self-determination and independence, Furthermore, Portugal would like the worid to believe that the unrest and
turmoil that is rampant in three African territories over
which it claims sovereignty is attributable not to the social,
political and economic demands of the populations, but
solely to the importation of ideas and assistancefrom
neighbouring independent States.
35. The numerous acts of aggression of the Portuguese
authorities are symptoms of a disease, While those symptams must be. dealt with by the Security Council, the cause
of the disease must also be recogaized. The chief reason for
the complaints against Portugal which repeatedly come
before the Council is the refusal of the Portuguese
authorities to transfer political power and sovereignty
to

38. The Defence Minister, according to The CcFc Ti,rrfl of
12 February 1969, also stated that South Africa mj
4

Portugal would share in the military-police defence of the
two hydroelectric
power schemes on which they had
collaborated-the
Kunena scheme on the northern boundaries of Namibia and the Cabora Bassa Dam on the
Zambesi-namely,
military and police co-operation and
collaboration in defence of those two dams on territories
belonging to’African people.

to you, and throughyou to the Council,for giving us this
oPPortunity to participatein the debateon the agendaof
the Security Councilat this time. The presentdebate on
Zambia’s complaint againstPortugueseaggressionis of
extremeimportanceto the peopleandGovernmentof the
United Republicof Tanzania.Zambiais Tanzania’sneighbour. Wesharea commonborderand aretied together by
strong bonds of friendshipwhich have their basisin a
similarhistoricalpast.Zambiaand Tanzania,just like the
rest of Africa, are engagedin the strugglefor economic
developmentand the eradicationof colonialismand imperialism from the southernpart of Africa. In addition to
that, Zambia,unlike Tanzania,is a land-lockedcountry-a
fact which hasbeenandis still beingexploited,or is sought
to be exploited,by the enemies
of Zambiaandof Africa in
order to sabotageZambia’sandAfrica’s goalsand aimsin
southernAfrica. The United Republicof Tanzania,therefore, is committed,asa matter of primary nationalpolicy,
to be of assistance
to Zambiain brotherhoodand solidarity
in any way that it can,so that the geographical
positionof
that nation is not exploited by the forces of evil,
colonialismand imperialism.We ;n Tanzaniaknow that
whateverhappensto anotherAfrican country is bound to
affect us, and whenthat country is Zambia,the effect on
us, and indeedon Africa asa whole,canhave far-reaching
consequences,

39. The true significance of the racist alliance in southern
Africa, is best described by the following extract from the
Manifesto on Southern Africa issued in Lusaka on I6 April
I969 by the Heads of State and Government of East and
Central Africa:
“The present Manifesto must, therefore, lay bare the
fact that the inhuman commitment of Portugal in Africa
and her ruthless subjugation of the people of Mozambique, Angolia and so-called Portuguese Guinea are not
only irrelevant to the ideological conflict of powerpolitics, but’. . , to”the . . . philosophies and the doctrine
practised by her Allies in the conduct of their own affairs
at home. The peoples of Mozambique, Angola and
Portuguese Guinea are not interested in communism or
capitaIism; they are interested in their freedom. They are
demanding an acceptance of the principles of independence on the basis of majority rule.“3
40. The Portuguese authorities, my delegation submits,
would do well to reconsider their attitude towards the
people of Africa and assess whether co-operation with them
would not give better returns than an alliance with the evil
racist forces of southern Africa. As the Lusaka Manifesto
points out, ‘&An independent Mozambique, Angola or
Portuguese Bissau may choose to be as friendly with
Portugual as Brazil is. That would be the free choice of a
free people .”

45. It is becauseof thesereasons
that my delegationhas
found it necessary
to requestpermission
of the Councilto
participatein the presentdebate.
46. It is commonknowledge,it is knowledgesharedby
every memberof this Council,that Portugal,the causeof
Zambia’spresentcomplaint,for more than four centuries
has dependedon its colonies for its survival. It has
exploitadandplunderedthoseAfrican territories,underthe
pretext of the cynicalandflimsy claimthat the coloniesare
beinggovernedfor their own good 01that they arepart of
Portugal and the IberianPeninsula,Of course,this dreamlike ideahasbeenrejectedby all free-thinkingmen.

41. It seems to my delegation that a consideration of these
wider aspects of the matter before the Council should
ensure the strongest condemnation of Portugal for its acts
of aggression. Furthermore, the Council should take cognizance of the fact that the situation in Africa caused by the
presence of Portuguese colonialism requires a comprehensive examination by the Council. Note should be taken of
the fact that as far back as 1962 the General Assembly, in
its resolution 1819 (XVII) on the situation in Angola,
expressed its conviction that the colonial war being carried
on by Portugal and its refusal to implement the provisions
of General Assembly resolution I.514 (XV) constituted a
source of international conflict and tension as well as a
serious threat to world peace and security.

47. The people of the colo;iiesof Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea(Bissau)havelong sincerefusedto be cheated
by thesehollow Portuguese
claims,asrightly they should,
in the defenceof their motherlands.They have therefore
taken up armsto fight for ,their freedomand have been
scoring substantialvictories. The oppressedpeople of
Angola,Mozambiqueand Guinea(Bissau)havebeenparticularly encouragedby the outstandingachievements
of the
rest of free Africa-and Zambia standsproudly in that
line-since thosenationsattainedtheir independence.
They
have steeledthemselvesin their struggleand have been
encouragedby the commitmentundertakenby the countries of Africa within the Organizationof African Unity to
support them. They have been encouragedtoo by the
recognition of the United Nations that their struggleis
legitimateand the call of the United Nationsto all peoples
that standfor the freedomof man to renderthem moral
andmaterialassistance.

42. I submit that the situation created by the recent
aggression of Portugal against the Territory of the Republic
of Zambia also merits the most serious consideration of this
Council and the strongest condemnation.
43. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, on whom I now call.

48. The liberation strugglewhich is taking place in the
whole of southernAfrica, coupled with the remarkable
economic,socialand political reconstructionnow goingon
in all independentAfrica, hascompletelyfoiled Portuguese
colonial policy in that part of the world. Portugal’s

44. Mr. FOUM (United Republic of Tanzania): May I,
Mr. President, express the sincere thanks of my delegation
j For the text of the Manifesto, see 0fFciuZ Records Of the
Twenty-fourth,
Session, Annexes, agenda
‘item
106,documentA/7754.

General Assembly,

5

pointed out that up to that time at which he was speaking
there had been some 60 such acts of aggression. From his
statement, my delegation has been able to see, as I am sure
members of the Council also have, that these acts of
Portuguese aggression are occurring at a greater frequency
than in the past. These acts of aggression are similar to
those which Portugal has committed in other independent
African countries, including Tanzania. They include such
primitive and outrageous methods as rape and robbery with
violence; ‘they also involve the unprovoked violation of
Zambia’s air space, the bombing of Zambian villages and
the burning of houses, the destruction of crops and grain
storage facilities, the kidnapping and torturing of villagers
before they are finally murdered in cold blood, the mining
of roads and the blowing up of bridges vital to the
economic life of Zambia; the list could go on.

aggression in Zambia, if its meaning is to be properly
understood, should therefore be looked at in the context of
the developments in the whole of Africa.
49. This, of course, is not the first time that the Security
Council has heard a complaint by a United Nations Member
against Portugal. In fact, in all previous cases, the complaints were made by independent African States. That is a
point which should be of immediate and important
significance.
50. The Council has at various times been called upon to
consider with the requisite urgency provocative actions and
violations committed by the Portuguese Government, as I
said, against several African Member States of this Organization. It should be wise to recall that as far back as 1963,
when similar violations were committed against Senegal, or
1965, against the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council deplored such violations and called upon the
Government of Portugal to take the necessary action to
prevent such violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the African States.

55. Portugal knows that Zambia and the United Republic
of Tanzania border the colonies of Angola and Mozambique
and that therefore whatever happens in Zambia or Tanzania
is bound to influence events in those colonies. Portugal
therefore regards a united, peaceful and prosperous Zambia
as a threat to the forces of exploitation in those Territories.
The Portuguese colonialists are thus doing all they can to
create political and economic confusion inside Zambia. In
their opinion, as colonialists normally think, a weak Zambia
would be much easier to control, and this, in their twisted
thinking, would sound the death knell for the liberation
struggle in southern Africa.

51. We in the United Republic of Tanzania have not
escaped Portuguese acts of aggression. On various occasions
the Portuguese colonialists have intruded into Tanzania,
bombing villages and killing and wounding innocent civilians. Equally serious provocative and aggressive actions have
been undertaken against the Republic of Guinea and against
the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville).

56. But the commitment of Zambia, the commitment of
all Africa, should dispel any such illusions. Africa has
suffered and endured all kinds of atrocious acts committed
by the forces of imperialism aimed at subjugating and
exploiting the peoples of Africa and the rich resources of
the continent. Thousands upon thousands of the daughters
and sons of Africa have heroically laid down their lives for
freedomand prosperity, as enjoyed in other parts of the
world, and for the progressand peaceof mankind. It is
thereforeonly natural that the primary concernof the free
peoples of Africa today-and I repeat: Zambia stands
proudly in thoseranks-shouldbe the total liberation of the
continent from the pernicioussystemof the exploitation of
manby man.

52. It would have seemed that the warnings given to the
Portuguese Government by the highest organ of the United
Nations would suffice, as many believed they would, to
bring about the desired result-that
is, the immediate and
complete cessation of such gross violations and infringements of the sovereignty of independent African States.
The passage of time, however, and the development of
events have shown, as do indeed the, facts in the present
case, that the fascist forces of Portugal are bent on
continuing with such aggressive acts, threatening peace and
security.
53. Portugal’s primary aim is, without any doubt, to cover
up its failure to maintain an unchallenged grip on the
African Territories which are under its occupation. Portugal
has failed to defeat the glorious liberation movements in
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). Indeed, the
peoples’ national liberation movement is moving from
strength to strength; it is doing so because it depends on the
force of the masses of the people, and it is receiving the
support of the freedom-loving peoples of the world,
primarily because the United Nations has recognized the
legitimacy of the struggle of those peoples and has called
upon them to render moral and material support to those
struggling to regain their freedom and to liberate themselves. This is a commitment which the African people, the
members of the Organization of African Unity, have
undertaken. Portugal, to cover up its failure, now wants to
create political confusion in independent African countries.

57. The PortugueseGovernment, supportedby its alliesin
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, isrepresentativecf
that pernicioussystemin Africa. The PortugueseGovern
ment, to date, has expresseditself by word and deedan
avowedenemy of African liberation and, in prosecutinga
vicious, genocidal war against the peoplesof ,Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau),has shownitself tc ha
againstpeace and progress;Portugal is maintaining this
irresponsiblepolicy becauseof the substantialsupport it
receivesfrom its allies within the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.Portugal is the standard-bearer
of imperialism
in southern Africa: The records of the United Nations
clearly supportthis proposition.
58. In its resolution 1542(XV) of 1.5December1960,the
GeneralAssembly recognizedthat in the Territories under
Portuguesedomination the denial of the peoples’right to
freedomconstituted “a threat to the wellbeing of human.
ity and to international peace”. Again, in its resolution

54. Last Friday, the representative of Zambia gave this
Council (1486th meeting] a detailed account of Portuguese
acts of aggression against Zambia since 1966, and he
6

of all military and other forces at present employed for that
purpose. By the same resolution, in paragraph 6, the
Security Council requested all States to refrain forthwith
from offering the Portuguese Government any assistance
that wouId enableit to continue its repressionof the people
of the Territories under its administration and to take all
the necessarymeasuresto prevent the sale and supply of
arms and military equipment to the PortugueseGovernment for this purpose, including the saleand shipmentof
equipment and materialsfor the manufacture and maintenanceof armsand ammunitionto be usedin the Territories
undei Portugueseadministration.

1807 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, the General Assembly
noted with deep concern: “that the policy and acts of the
Portuguese Government with regard to the Territories
under its administration have created a situation which
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security”.
59. Furthermore, this very organ, the Security Council, by
various resolutions, determined-and particularly in the
words of its resolution 180 (1963) of 31 July 1963-“that
the situation in the Territories under Portuguese administration is seriously disturbing peace and security in Africa”.
60. It is universally recognized that the forces of colonialism, having been abolished from the rest of Africa, have
established the last bastion in the southern part of Africa.
We, the African people, have no illusions about the forces
involved or what they represent. These forces are the forces
of imperialism which manifest themselves directly in the
form of the evil system of apartheid of the regime in
Ijretoria and the’ illegal racist minority rkgime in Southern
Rhodesia, as well as the Portuguese colonialists and, most
prominently, the internatioqal monopolies that support and
hence encourage those forces of imperialism.

64. I ask: have the provisions of that resolution, among
others, been implemented? The answeris obviously and
emphatically no, The CounciI would not have been sitting
now if the Portuguese Government had accepted and
carried out the Council decisionsdemandingthat it cease
and desist from acts of repressionand concedeimmediate
independenceto the peoplesof Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau).The Council would not have beensitting if
the PortugueseGovernment had accepted and carried out
other decisions of the Council demandingthat it desist
from acts of violation and infringement of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of independentStatesborderingthe
enclavesunder its colonial domination.

61. To date, Portugal has not come out of the slumber and’
reconciled itself to the fact that Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau) are not integral parts of any European
State. Therefore Portugal has stubbornly and viciously
unleashed a war against the people. In the prosecution of its
criminal war against those people, the Portuguese Government has shown itself an apt student by adopting the
aggressive concept of “hot pursuit” followed by its imperialist trainers. In fact, the representative of Portugal in this
very chamber, obviously taking a cue from other forces
that have made similar contentions before, has indicated
clearly that it considers this illegitimate concept as a natural
practice.

65. Portugal has,refused to abide by earlier decisionsof
the General Assembly and the Security Council. The
Portuguese Government continues to commit acts of
aggressionagainst Zambia and other independent African
States. This is a very dangeroustrend which, unlesschecked
in time; may escalateto proportions fraught with the most
grave consequences.It would appearthat Portugal, encouraged by the substantialsupport it receivesfrom its NATO
allies, is unmindful of the consequencesthat may result
from its irresponsible and criminal policies and actions
againstthe peoplesof Africa asa whole and, asexemplified
in the present case,againstthe people and Government of
Zambia.

62. Artide 25 of the Charter unambiguously maintains
that: ?he Members of the United Nations agree to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the present Charter”. I suggest that the
Portuguese Government, by statements in the various
organs of the United Nations, including the Security
Council, and by its actions against the African people as
exemplified by Portuguese aggression against the Republic
cf Zambia, has defiantly expressed itself as unmindful of
this very basic concept. This is also a very pertinent and
important aspect directly relevant to the substance of the
present debate. We feel fully justified in asking: will there
be no end to the gross flouting of United Nations
resolutions, the Security Council resolutions included?
This ffouting of the resolutions is done by Portugal and
those allies among the Western countries that support it
within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

66. The attitude of the representativeof Portugal in this
Council has revealed that Portugal has still not drawn any
lessonfrom the historical development of society. It still
maintains an attitude characteristic of the forces of
imperialism, of rejecting legitimate and factual charges
againstit en bloc. Thesetactics have been usedin virtually
all debatesrelative to the aggressiveactions of the PortugueseGovernment. The representative of Portugal in this
chamber has sought to draw the Council’s attention away
from the serious charges which Zambia has preferred
againstPortugal.
67. From what hasbeen said, it should be easyto seethe
pattern being followed by the forces of reaction, by the
forces of imperialism: they seekto turn back the clock of
history; they seek to perpetuate the inhuman systemof
colonialism, to suppressthe legitimate struggle of the
people for liberation and to intimidate independentStates,
by brute force, into submitting to the dictates of imperialism.

63. By its resolution 218 (1965), the Security Council,
after reaffirming its own resolution 183’ (1963) and General
Assembly res@ution 15 14 (XV), urgently demanded of
Portugal, inter alia: (a) the immediate recognition of the
right of the peoples of the Territories under its administration
to self-determination and independence; (b) the immediate cessation of all acts of repression and the withdrawal

68. The United Republic of Tanzania is, and other
independent States of Africa are, fully andunquestionably
7

P’
*

death and destruction, deserve condemnation by the
Council in the strongest terms. Indeed, we should not lose
sight of the fact that the substantial support given to
Portugal, especially by the prominent members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and by the white racists
in southern Africa, makes these forces assume great
responsibility for the actions of Portugal against Zambia as
well asagainst the people of Angola, of Mozambique and of
Guinea (Bissau). By supplying arms and other material to
Portugal, knowing full well Portugal’s intentions and
actions in Africa, and by refusing to take strong measures
to stop their ally, Portugal, from committing acts of
aggression,those forces must bear the guilt of the crimes
that Portugal is committing against Zambia and Africa.

committed to the cause of liberation of the occupied
colonies and for the removal of the threat to international
peace and security. Tanzania, like the whole of liberated
Africa, loves peace. That is why we are opposed to war and
to colonialism. Colonialism, the system of exploitation of
man by man, is a crime against humanity. The historical
development of society has effectively shown us that
human freedom is indivisible and that freedom of man
cannot be divorced or separated from peace. Thus, it is
clear that Africa cannot remain quiet, cannot coexist with
colonialism. We cannot coexist with the enemy of humanity, the enemy of freedom, the enemy of peace.
69. Zambia is a part of Africa that is committed to these
noble principles for the liberation of Africa and for the
attainment of international peace and security. That is why
Portugal, the standard-bearer of imperialism in southern
Africa, is committing these acts of aggression against
Zambia.

72. Finally, Tanzania, if I need to reiterate this, fully
endorses the just complaint of the Republic of Zambia
against the Portuguese imperialist aggressors.It is our hope
and conviction that the Security Council will, without
reservation, endorse and recommend the demands made by
Zambia.

70. Portugal represents an obvious threat not only to
to which it clings illegally, but to all
African countrieh. The aggressive actions of Portugal reveal
this. It has violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Zambia not once, not twice, not a dozen times, but more
than sixty times. The Security Council has determined
before, as I said earlier, that the actions of the Portuguese
Government in Africa seriously disturb peace and security.
The presentation of the charges made by Zambia clearly
indicates that the continuing violations being committed by
Portugal are very seriously threatening peace and security.
those Territories

73. In conclusion, I cannot fail, while saluting the just and
clear stand of the people and the Government of Zambia,
to salute the heroic soldiers of liberation of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), and to express the
conviction of the African people as a whole that they shall
move from victory to victory, striking blow after blow,
until they make the Portuguese colonialists leave the shores
of their motherland.
74. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): I have no
other speakers on my list. If no other representative wishes
to take the floor at this stage of the debate, I shall adjourn
the meeting. Following consultations with the members of
the Council, it has been agreed that next meeting will take
place on Wednesday, 23 July, at 3 p.m.

71. The Security Council, which under the Charter has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should therefore once and for all direct
a serious warning to the Portuguese Government to stop all
its acts of vandalism and aggression against Zambia and the
African people. The activities of Portugal, infringing the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia and causing

The m.eetingroseat 5.05 p.m.

8

HOW

T Q OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Molions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
booksfore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Ler
publications
des
diporitaires
du monde
Naflonr
Unies,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicociones
en lodes
pdrter
Ventos,

Nuevo

Litho in United Nations, New York

de
York

obloined
or write

Nations
Unier
sonI
entier.
Informer-vour
der venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES

del

be

from
bookslores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
ouprir
de votri
ou GenCve.

DE LAS NACIONES

lar Nacioner
Unidor
ertbn
mundo.
Consulte
o sv libreio

throughout
New York

ICI librairier
et les agencer
libroirie
ou odresrez-vour
21:

UNIDAS

en venta
en libreriar
a dirijose
o: Nociones

y cosos dislribuidoror
Unidos,
Seccidn

de

o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent in other currencies)

SZlzo-November

1972-2,050

/
