S/2013/579

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 September 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 27 September 2013 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
agreed to send a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Ethiopia from 3 to 9 October 2013. The mission will be led by Counsellor
Alexis Lamek of France and Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki of Morocco
(Democratic Republic of the Congo); Ambassador Samantha Power of the United
States of America (Rwanda); Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Uganda); and Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev
of Azerbaijan and Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana of Rwanda (Ethiopia). The
members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission, which
are annexed hereto.
The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval (Argentina)
Ambassador Gary Francis Quinlan (Australia)
Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan) co-head of mission
Counsellor Zhao Yong (China)
Counsellor Alexis Lamek (France) co-head of mission
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala)
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas (Luxembourg)
Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki (Morocco) co-head of mission
Minister Asim Iftikar Ahmad (Pakistan)
Ambassador Kyung-hoon Sul (Republic of Korea)
Minister Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana (Rwanda) co-head of mission
Ambassador Kodjo Menan (Togo)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom) co-head of mission
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States) co-head of mission
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Gary Francis Quinlan
President of the Security Council

13-48878 (E) 300913

*1348878*

S/2013/579

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Africa
I.

Great Lakes regional elements
1.
To recall the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States in the region and to emphasize the
need to respect fully the principle of non-interference, good-neighbourliness and
regional cooperation.
2.
To call upon all countries of the region to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring countries, to not interfere in the internal affairs
of neighbouring countries, to not harbour persons accused of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law or persons listed by United
Nations sanctions regimes and to promote accountability, and to call upon all
countries of the region to neither tolerate nor provide assistance or support of any
kind to armed groups.
3.
To express the strong support of the Security Council for the improvement of
relations among the countries of the region and to encourage them to continue
reinforcing cooperation in all fields, especially on political, economic and security
issues, in order to guarantee the long-term stabilization of the Great Lakes region.
4.
To reiterate its support for the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region, which is essential for the achievement of lasting peace and
security in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
and to call upon all signatories to implement promptly, fully and in good faith their
respective commitments.
5.
To reiterate that all parties should contribute to stabilizing the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to encourage all countries of the region to
work together, and to recall the importance of the full implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2098 (2013), as a means of
stabilizing the situation.
6.
To reiterate support for the strengthening of the regional dynamic, including
through the development, where appropriate, of economic projects of common
interest and the implementation of appropriate steps to facilitate legal trade and put
an end to the illegal trafficking of natural resources, as means of consolidating
peace and security.
7.
To emphasize the continuing concerns of the Council about the protection of
civilians, to address the situation of internally displaced persons and to advocate for
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, to address the issue of
sexual violence and to strengthen child protection, and to encourage the parties and
Governments concerned to ensure that those responsible for serious violations of
human rights and humanitarian law are brought to justice.
8.
To affirm that sexual violence, when used or commissioned as a method or
tactic of war or as a part of a widespread or systematic attack against civilian
populations, can significantly exacerbate and prolong situations of armed conflict
and may impede the restoration of international peace and security, to emphasize in
this regard that effective steps to prevent and respond to such acts contribute

2/5

13-48878

S/2013/579

significantly to the maintenance of international peace and security, and to stress the
participation of women as essential to any prevention and protection response.
Additional elements for the Democratic Republic of the Congo (co-led by Morocco
and France)
9.
To acknowledge the primary responsibility of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to consolidate peace and stability, to promote
recovery and development in the country, to protect civilians and to express the
continued support of the Council in this regard.
10. To reiterate its deep concern regarding the fragile security and humanitarian
crisis in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo due to the
ongoing destabilizing activities of the 23 March Movement (M23), the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and other Congolese and foreign
armed groups, and to demand that they immediately cease all forms of violence and
destabilizing activities and that their members immediately and permanently
disband and lay down their arms.
11. To call upon all Congolese authorities to implement fully and in good faith
their commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
especially to intensify their efforts to reform the security sector, to consolidate State
authority, to make progress on decentralization and to further the agenda of
reconciliation, tolerance and democratization.
12. To express its support for the establishment of a national oversight mechanism
by the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as requested in the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and in resolution 2098 (2013), and to
call upon the Congolese authorities to ensure transparency and effectiveness in this
mechanism.
13. To reaffirm the support of the Security Council for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and to receive a briefing on the implementation of resolution 2098
(2013), in particular on the reconfiguration of MONUSCO and the deployment of
the intervention brigade, and on the delivery of a road map outlining the transfer of
tasks to the fullest extent possible to the United Nations country team, and to
receive a briefing on the threat posed to regional stability by armed groups,
including M23, FDLR and the Allied Democratic Forces — National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda.
14. To get updates on the joint military operations between the Armed Forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO against M23 and
other armed groups, to request further updates on how MONUSCO intends to
implement its mandate of neutralizing all armed groups according to resolution 2098
(2013) and on how MONUSCO intends to conduct future disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement efforts, to reaffirm that
all military operations should be carried out in accordance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to take appropriate measures to
protect civilians, and to draw insights from the experience of MONUSCO that can
inform Council members on current and future peacekeeping operations.
15. To reiterate the continuing concerns of the Council about the protection of
civilians, to discuss the implementation of Security Council resolution 2098 (2013),

13-48878

3/5

S/2013/579

to address the situation of internally displaced persons and to promote and protect
human rights and international humanitarian law, and to address sexual violence and
child protection issues, including through the implementation of the action plan on
children in armed conflict signed by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in 2012.
16. To ensure the full participation of women in conflict resolution and peace
processes, and to reiterate its recognition of the interrelated nature of the effective
protection of civilians, the reduction and removal of the threat of armed groups and
comprehensive security sector reform, in particular with regard to the screening and
vetting of troops integrated in the Congolese armed forces.
17. To recall the utmost importance of the fight against impunity, notably in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by bringing to justice those
who have committed crimes and atrocities.
Additional elements for Rwanda (led by the United States of America)
18. To discuss Rwandan concerns in the region, including FDLR, and how they
can be addressed while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States in the Great Lakes region.
19. To reiterate support for the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region, and to call upon all signatories to fulfil their commitments in
good faith.
20. To examine the plight of refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
forced to flee by armed groups.
21. To reiterate that all parties should contribute to stabilizing the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to encourage Rwandan and Congolese
authorities to work together, in collaboration with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region and MONUSCO, to ensure the full
neutralization, disarmament, demobilization, and cessation of sources of support to
armed groups in the region, in the framework of a multidimensional approach
aligned with the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and to recall the
importance of the full implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions as a
means of stabilizing the situation.
22. To explore the strengthening of the regional dynamic, including through the
creation of peace dividends and the development, where appropriate, of economic
projects of common interest.
23. To discuss with the Government of Rwanda the modalities for how the
Government, the United Nations and other international organizations can work
together to urgently address the situation of the former M23 combatants interned in
eastern Rwanda since March 2013, including individuals designated by the Security
Council, and to ensure that they are permanently demobilized and dealt with in
accordance with relevant international law, with special attention given to children
and women among them.

4/5

13-48878

S/2013/579

Additional elements for Uganda (led by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
24. To reiterate the support of the Security Council for the improvement of
relations among the countries of the region, to encourage them to strengthen
cooperation in all fields, and to discuss regional efforts in that regard.
25. To discuss Ugandan concerns in the region, including the Allied Democratic
Forces, and how they can be addressed while respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States in the Great Lakes region.
26. To emphasize the support of the Security Council for action against armed
groups in the region, including the Lord’s Resistance Army.
II.

African Union (co-led by Azerbaijan and Rwanda)
27. To strengthen partnership and enhance cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations through an exchange of views on issues of interest to both
the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in accordance with resolution 2033 (2012).
28. To exchange views and explore ways of reinforcing and supporting the conflict
prevention tools of the African Union.
29. To exchange views on situations of interest to both the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, namely:

13-48878

(a)

The situation in the Great Lakes region;

(b)

The situation in the Sudan and South Sudan;

(c)

The situation in Somalia;

(d)

The situation in the Central African Republic;

(e)

The situation in the Sahel region.

5/5
