General Assembly- Fortieth Session

68

b. International seismic monitoring network:
i.

Determination of capabilities for monitoring compliance;
ii. Steps for establishment and improvement;
iii. Institutional, administrative and financial arrangements for establishment, testing and operation;
iv. Relationship to an effective verification
system;
c. Other means, including an international
atmospheric radioactivity monitoring network;
d. On-site inspection;
(iv) Specific verification problems and their solutions,
including:
a. Monitoring large land masses;
b. Methods of possible evasion;
c. Chemical explosions;
(c) Compliance:
(i) Procedures and mechanisms for consultation and
co-operation;
(ii) Co-ordinating body, e.g. committee of experts;
(iii) Consultative committee;
(iv) Series of actions triggered by suspicion or violation, including complaints procedures;
5. Further urges the Conference on Disarmament:
(a) To take immediate steps for the establishment,
with the widest possible participation, of an international
seismic monitoring network to determine the capabilities
of such a network for monitoring and verifying compliance
with a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty, taking into
account the work performed by the Ad Hoe Group of Scientific Experts to Consider International Co-operative
Measures to Detect and Identify Seismic Events;
(b) To initiate detailed investigation of other measures
to monitor and verify compliance with such a treaty,
including an international network to monitor atmospheric radioactivity;
6. Urges all members of the Conference on Disarmament, in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to co-operate within the Conference in fulfilling these tasks as called
for, inter alia, in the Final Declaration of the Third
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; 8
7. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to
report on progress to the General Assembly at its fortyfirst session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Urgent need for a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/82. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December
1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/71 of 10
December 1976, 32/82 of 12 December 1977, 33/64 of 14
December 1978, 34/77 of l l December 1979, 35/147 of
12 December 1980, 36/87 of9 December 1981, 37/75 of9
December 1982, 38/64 of 15 December 1983 and 39/54 of
11 A/40/442 and Add. I

12 December 1984 on the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also the recommendations for the establishment of such a zone in the Middle East consistent with
paragraphs 60 to 63, and in particular paragraph 63 (d), of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 10
Emphasizing the basic provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions, which call upon all parties directly concerned to consider taking the practical and urgent steps
required for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East and, pending and during the establishment of such a
zone, to declare solemnly that they will refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, acquiring or in any other way
possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices
and from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons on
their territory by any third party, to agree to place all their
nuclear facilities under International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards and to declare their support for the
establishment of the zone and deposit such declarations
with the Security Council for consideration, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all States to acquire
and develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing further the need for appropriate measures
on the question of the prohibition of military attacks on
nuclear facilities,
Bearing in mind the consensus reached by the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session that the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East would greatly enhance international peace and security,
Desirous to build on that consensus so that substantial
progress can be made towards establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Emphasizing the essential role of the United Nations in
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
region of the Middle East,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 11
I. Urges all parties directly concerned to consider seriously taking the practical and urgent steps required for the
implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and, as a means of promoting this objective,
invites the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; 6
2. Calls upon all countries of the region that have not
done so, pending the establishment of the zone, to agree to
place all their nuclear activities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Invites those countries, pending the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East, to declare their support for establishing such a zone,
consistent with the relevant paragraph of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, and to deposit those declarations with the Security
Council;
4. Further invites those countries, pending the establishment of the zone, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or permit the stationing on their territories, or territories under their control, of
nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices;
5. Invites the nuclear-weapon States and all other
States to render their assistance in the establishment of the

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

zone and at the same time to refrain from any action that
runs counter to both the letter and spirit of the present resolution;
6. Extends its thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report containing the views of parties concerned regarding
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
region of the Middle East; 11
7. Takes note of the above-mentioned report;
8. Requests those parties that have not yet communicated their views to the Secretary-General to do so;
9. Welcomes any further comments from those parties
that have already communicated their views to the Secretary-General;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East".
I I 3th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/83. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in South Asia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December
I 974, 3476 B (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/73 of 10
December 1976, 32/83 of 12 December 1977, 33/65 of 14
December 1978, 34/78 of 11 December 1979, 35/148 of
12 December 1980, 36/88 of9 December 1981, 37/76 of9
December 1982, 38/65 of 15 December 1983 and 39/55 of
12 December 1984 concerning the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia,
Reiterating its conviction that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the world
is one of the measures which can contribute most effectively to the objectives of non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and general and complete disarmament,
Believing that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in South Asia, as in other regions, will strengthen
the security of the States of the region against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the declaration issued at the highest level by
Governments of South Asian States reaffirming their
undertaking not to acquire or manufacture nuclear weapons and to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively to
the economic and social advancement of their peoples,
Recalling that in the above-mentioned resolutions it
called upon the States of the South Asian region, and such
other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as might be
interested, to make all possible efforts to establish a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia and to refrain, in
the mean time, from any action contrary to this objective,
Further recalling that, in its resolution 3265 B (XXIX),
it requested the Secretary-General to convene a meeting
for the purpose of the consultations mentioned therein and
to render such assistance as might be required to promote
the efforts for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South Asia,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraphs 60 to 63 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
!2 A/40/473.
!3 A/CONF.95/15 and Corr.2, annex I. For the printed text of the Convention and its Protocols see The United Natwns Disarmament Yearbook, vol. S:
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E8 I.IX.4), appendix Vil.

69

General Assembly 10 regarding the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones, including in the region of
South Asia,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 12
1. Reaffirms its endorsement, in principle, of the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
2. Urges once again the States of South Asia, and such
other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as may be
interested, to continue to make all possible efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia and to
refrain, in the mean time, from any action contrary to this
objective;
3. Calls upon those nuclear-weapon States that have
not done so to respond positively to this proposal and to
extend the necessary co-operation in the efforts to establish
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be required to promote the efforts for the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia
and to report on the subject to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
1 I 3th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/84. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/152 of 19 December 1977,
35/153 of 12 December 1980, 36/93 of9 December 1981,
37/79 of 9 December 1982, 38/66 of 15 December 1983
and 39/56 of 12 December 1984,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption, on lO October
1980, of the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, together with the Protocol on NonDetectable Fragments (Protocol I), the Protocol on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby
Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II) and the Protocol on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary
Weapons (Protocol III), 13
Reaffirming its conviction that general agreement on the
prohibition or restriction of use of specific conventional
weapons would significantly reduce the suffering of civilian
populations and of combatants,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General, 14
l. Notes with satisfaction that an increasing number of
States have either signed, ratified, accepted or acceded to
the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects, which was opened for signature in New York on l 0
April 1981;
2. Further notes with satisfaction that, consequent
upon the fulfilment of the conditions set out in article 5 of
the Convention, the Convention and the three Protocols
annexed thereto entered into force on 2 December 1983;
14 A/40/550.
