S/PV.9139

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9139th meeting

Wednesday, 28 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60388 (E)
*2260388*

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 28 July, Israeli settlers, accompanied by Israeli
security forces, moved into an empty Palestinianowned house in the H-2 Area of Hebron. That is the
second takeover of a Palestinian home in the H-2 Area
this year.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: Today’s briefing is devoted to
the twenty-third report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The reporting
period is from 17 June to 20 September.
Paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Israel to,
“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and ... fully respect all of
its legal obligations in this regard”.
Settlement activity nevertheless continued during the
reporting period. Between 19 and 21 July, Israeli settlers
erected tents across the occupied West Bank in a widely
publicized campaign by a settlement organization to
establish new outposts. Israeli authorities subsequently
removed the encampments because they were illegal
under Israeli law.
On 25 July, Israeli authorities advanced plans for
the construction of 1,215 housing units at the Lower
Aqueduct site, adjacent to Kibbutz Ramat Rachel and
the Palestinian neighbourhood of Umm Tuba. Some
units are intended for construction across the Green
Line in occupied East Jerusalem.
On 27 July, Israel’s Supreme Court reversed its
ruling ordering the evacuation of settlers from the
illegal outpost of Mitzpe Kramim, near Ramallah. The
Court accepted the Government’s argument that the
Palestinian land had been allocated to the settlers in
good faith and that the principle of so-called market
regulation should be applied.
2/17

28/09/2022

On 5 September, Israeli authorities advanced plans
for 700 units in the planned East Jerusalem settlement
of Givat Hashaked, adjacent to the Palestinian
neighbourhoods of Beit Safafa and Sharafat.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures continued across the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Israeli
authorities, citing the lack of Israeli-issued building
permits — which are almost impossible for Palestinians
to obtain — demolished, seized or forced people to
demolish 316 structures. Those actions displaced 237
people, including 116 children; 41 of those structures
were donor-funded.
On 21 July, Israel’s Supreme Court partially
accepted the appeal of a Palestinian family under threat
of eviction in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Silwan, freezing the eviction order until proceedings
are completed in a lower court.
On 25 July and 8 August, Israeli security forces
demolished four homes belonging to family members
of Palestinians accused of or indicted for killing Israelis
in April and May, displacing 31 people, including
13 children.
Israeli pressure on two Palestinian communities to
leave their homes in Area C continued to mount. On
12 July, 16 of the 35 households comprising the herding
community of Ras Al-Tin left the Area after facing
settler-related violence, demolitions and confiscations.
In Masafer Yatta, movement restrictions continued,
including for humanitarian access, and the arrests of
Palestinian residents also continued. On 8 September,
Israel’s Supreme Court upheld the military commander’s
decision to reject the planning permission requested by
the Masafer Yatta community. The Court ordered a stay
on demolition orders until 29 September.
On 12 July, Israeli authorities announced that they
would advance six plans for Palestinian construction in
Area C.
Paragraph 6 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls for,
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

“immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as
all acts of provocation and destruction”.
Unfortunately, daily violence continued.
Overall in the West Bank, 29 Palestinians, including
six children, were killed and 1,813 Palestinians,
including 27 women and 194 children, were injured
by Israeli security forces during security operations,
demonstrations, clashes, stone-throwing incidents,
attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis, and other
incidents. Of those injuries, 1,206 were caused by
tear gas inhalation and 202 by live ammunition. In
addition, Israeli settlers or other civilians perpetrated
some 128 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in one
death and 51 injuries and/or instances of damage to
Palestinian property.
In Gaza, during the August escalation between
Israel and Palestinian armed groups, 49 Palestinians
were killed, of whom at least 26 were civilians,
including four women and 17 children. According to the
Gaza Ministry of Health, 360 Palestinians were injured,
including 151 children and 58 women. Israeli officials
reported that two Israelis were moderately injured and
at least 62 lightly injured, including nine children. Ten
houses in Gaza were completely destroyed, and 48
were severely damaged and rendered uninhabitable.
According to the Gaza authorities, more than 600
housing units were damaged, displacing 84 families.
One Israeli civilian and one member of the Israeli
security forces were killed, while 50 Israelis and
eight Israeli security forces personnel were injured by
Palestinians in clashes, rock-throwing and Molotov
cocktail-throwing attacks, and other incidents. The
majority of those were stone-throwing attacks on
Israelis, including settlers, which resulted in injuries
and damage to Israeli-owned property.
Israeli security forces carried out 906 searchand-arrest operations in the West Bank, resulting in
the arrest of 1,528 Palestinians. On 19 June, Israeli
security forces shot and killed an unarmed 53-yearold Palestinian while he was attempting to enter Israel,
reportedly for work, through a breach in the separation
barrier near Qalqilya. On 24 June, a 16-year-old
Palestinian was killed by Israeli security forces while
throwing stones in Silwad village near Ramallah.
In the village of Jaba’a, near Jenin, on 2 July, Israeli
security forces shot and killed a 17-year-old Palestinian
22-60388

S/PV.9139

after he reportedly threw Molotov cocktails, and in a
separate incident, on 6 July, killed another Palestinian
as he was running away during a search operation. On
5 July, an Israeli man was seriously injured after being
stabbed in Bnei Brak in central Israel. Israeli security
forces arrested a Palestinian man under suspicion of
carrying out the attack. On 19 July, an Israeli was stabbed
and injured by a Palestinian on a bus in Jerusalem.
The assailant was subsequently shot and injured by an
Israeli civilian. On 26 July, Israeli security forces shot
an unarmed 59-year-old Palestinian man with a mental
disability at Huwwara checkpoint, south of Nablus. The
man subsequently died of his injuries.
On 9 August, four Palestinians, including a senior
militant commander and a 16-year-old, were killed by
Israeli security forces in Nablus, while 76 people were
injured with live ammunition during a search operation
and subsequent clashes. The same day, a 16-year-old
was killed by Israeli security forces in Hebron while
throwing stones. On 14 August, a Palestinian opened
fire at a group of Jewish worshippers in Jerusalem’s
Old City. Eight civilians, including a pregnant woman,
were injured, two seriously. The assailant was arrested.
On 15 August, Israeli security forces shot and killed a
Palestinian during a search operation and subsequent
clashes in Kufr Aqab, north of Jerusalem. Israeli security
forces said that the man was attempting to stab officers,
but an eyewitness denied that allegation. On 17 August
near Joseph’s Tomb, in Nablus, Israeli security forces
shot and killed a Palestinian and injured three others
with live ammunition in clashes after Palestinians threw
stones and reportedly fired on buses transporting Jewish
worshippers to the site, in accordance with established
procedures. On 30 August, Palestinians opened fire at
a car with five Jewish worshippers inside, injuring two,
as it entered Area A without prior coordination, which
is illegal under Israeli law. On 19 August, an unarmed
58-year-old Palestinian man — an apparent bystander
in an armed exchange — was shot and killed in Tubas
during an Israeli security forces search operation.
On 6 September, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a Palestinian man live-broadcasting a punitive
demolition and related clashes in Jenin. Sixteen
other Palestinians were injured with live ammunition
during the clashes. One of them subsequently died. On
8 September, a 16-year-old Palestinian attacked and
likely injured a member of Israeli security forces with a
hammer before being shot and killed by Israeli security
forces. On 13 September, an Israeli security forces
3/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

officer and two armed Palestinian men were killed in an
exchange of fire near Jalama crossing in Jenin. One of
the Palestinians killed was an intelligence officer in the
Palestinian security forces. On 15 September, Israeli
security forces shot and killed a 17-year-old Palestinian
attempting to launch a Molotov cocktail during clashes
in Kafr Dan, near Jenin.
The President (spoke in French): Mr. Wennesland,
would it be possible for you to give us your remaining
account of these incidents in written form and to move
on to the substance of your briefing?
Mr. Wennesland: I can definitely do that, but it is
outside the normal procedures for an oral presentation.
On the basis of your request, Mr. President, I will revert
to the Secretary-General’s observations, but I would
like that to be noted in the record.
In conclusion, I would like to share the SecretaryGeneral’s observations concerning the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) during the
reporting period.
“I remain deeply troubled by continued Israeli
settlement expansions in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and attempts by some
Israelis to further expand the settlement footprint
through the establishment of outposts, which are
also illegal under Israeli law. I am also concerned
about the possibility that the Supreme Court’s
Mitzpe Kramim decision could set a precedent for
the legalization of additional outposts under Israeli
law. I reiterate that Israeli settlements have no
legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation of
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. I call on the Government of Israel to
cease all settlement activity immediately.
“Demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned property remain a serious concern. I
am particularly concerned about the ongoing
situation in Masafer Yatta, where more than
1,000 Palestinians, including 569 children, are at
imminent risk of eviction. I urge Israeli authorities
to immediately cease the demolition of Palestinianowned property and the forcible displacement
and eviction of Palestinians, in line with Israel’s
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, and to approve plans that would
enable Palestinians to build legally and address
their development needs.
4/17

28/09/2022

“I am deeply concerned about the tragic
civilian deaths and injuries, including of children,
caused by the latest escalation in Gaza. Israel
must abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the proportional
use of force, and take all feasible precautionary
measures to spare civilians and civilian objects
during military operations. Furthermore, I
condemn the indiscriminate launching of rockets
by Palestinian armed groups from highly populated
neighbourhoods in Gaza into civilian population
centres in Israel, which also resulted in casualties
and violates international humanitarian law, putting
the lives of civilians at risk.
“I am gravely concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in the occupied West Bank,
including the increase in attacks and armed
exchanges between Israelis and Palestinians. The
high number of Palestinians killed and injured by
Israeli security forces in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, remains deeply troubling,
particularly in the light of reports that some did not
appear to pose a threat. The possible excessive use
of force by the Israeli security forces continues to
raise serious concerns, particularly their use of
live ammunition. Security forces must use lethal
force only when it is strictly unavoidable in order
to protect life and must promptly and thoroughly
investigate all instances of death or injury resulting
from its use and hold those responsible to account.
“I am particularly appalled that children
continue to be killed and injured in large numbers.
Children must never be the target of violence or put
in harm’s way.
“I remain deeply concerned about the high
levels of settler-related violence against Palestinians
in the occupied West Bank, which often occurs in
the presence of Israeli security forces. I urge Israel
to abide by its obligations under international law
to protect the Palestinian population from all acts
or threats of violence, to ensure that all attacks are
investigated promptly and transparently and to hold
perpetrators to account.
“I condemn all acts of terrorism against
civilians, including the 14 August attacks targeting
Jewish worshippers near Jerusalem’s Old City.
The glorification of such acts is unacceptable and
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

further undermines the possibility of a peaceful
future for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
“I am deeply troubled by the Israeli security
forces’ search and closure of the offices of seven
Palestinian
non-governmental
organizations.
I remain concerned about the shrinking space
for civil society in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
“I reiterate my call for the parties to respect
and uphold the status quo, taking into account the
special and historic role of Jordan as custodian of
the Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
“The absence of intra-Palestinian unity
continues to undermine Palestinian national
aspirations and prevent a common Palestinian
approach towards resolving the conflict and
addressing the needs of the population. I call on all
Palestinian factions to redouble efforts to reunite
Gaza and the occupied West Bank under a single,
democratic, national Government. “Gaza is, and
must remain, an integral part of a future Palestinian
State, as part of a two-State solution. It is also crucial
that Palestinians hold elections — not only as a key
step towards Palestinian unity, but also as a means
to renew the legitimacy of national institutions.
“I welcome United States and regional support
pledged to East Jerusalem hospitals, which are
vital Palestinian institutions. Israel’s commitment
to improving movement and access for Palestinians
at the Allenby Bridge and the transition to 4G
technology to support economic growth are also
important and welcomed. I call on the Member
States to support the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) with sustainable funding sources
to protect the delivery of vital services to millions
of Palestine refugees. That is crucial to upholding
their rights and supporting the stabilizing role of
the Agency in the region.
“In Gaza, the humanitarian and economic
situation remains dire, although some important
improvements have taken place in access and
movement, particularly the increase in the number
of permits for Palestinians from Gaza to work in
Israel. The limited availability of key materials and
equipment, coupled with cumbersome protocols
and restrictions, continues to impede private sector
development, job creation and economic growth. I
22-60388

S/PV.9139

encourage the parties to solidify the ceasefire and
enable further economic development. Ultimately,
the debilitating Israeli closures should be lifted, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009).
“The current negative trajectory puts at great
risk the socioeconomic and institution-building
that has prepared the Palestinian Authority for
statehood. There must be a bridge between those
immediate challenges and the longer-term objective
of achieving the vision of two States — Israel and
an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State — living side by side in
peace and security, within secure and recognized
borders, on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States.
“I welcome the four strategic elements put
forward in the report of the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied
Territories to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, on
22 September, for a comprehensive package of
incremental, durable and meaningful steps that the
parties and their partners should take to address
the current situation, strengthen the Palestinian
Authority and advance the goal of sustainable
peace: first, address the continuing drivers of
conflict and instability; secondly, strengthen
Palestinian institutions and address the challenge
of Palestinian governance; thirdly, improve access,
movement and trade, thereby creating space for the
Palestinian economy to grow; and fourthly, better
align the framework of economic and administrative
relationships with the economic transformations of
the past decades.”
Before concluding, I wish to note a few important
developments during the opening of the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly, just after the
closure of the reporting period.
First, I commend Prime Minister Yair Lapid’s
reaffirmation of support for the two-State solution in his
statement delivered on 22 September (see A/77/PV.8). I
also wish to acknowledge the continued commitment
of President Mahmoud Abbas to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict, as well as his urgent appeal for the
re-establishment of a political horizon, in his statement
delivered on 23 September (see A/77/PV.10).
A number of important meetings were held on the
margins of the Assembly’s general debate, including a
meeting on the Arab Peace Initiative co-hosted by the
5/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/09/2022

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the European Union; a
ministerial meeting of the Munich format; a Jordanian
and Swedish co-hosted event in support of UNRWA;
and a meeting of the Norwegian-chaired Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, which focused on preserving the viability
of the two-State solution and moving the State-building
process forward.

We also welcome the fact that, from the same rostrum,
President Abbas recognized that statement as a
positive step and reiterated the same commitment from
Palestine (see A/77/PV.10). We are convinced that a
two-State solution based on the 1967 borders is the best
way to ensure the rights and safety of both Palestinians
and Israelis.

Returning to my conclusion, we continue to see
little progress in the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) since its adoption in December 2016. The
absence of a meaningful peace process to end the Israeli
occupation and resolve the conflict fuels a dangerous
deterioration across the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in the West Bank, driving the perception
that the conflict is unresolvable.

Since we previously met (see S/PV.9107), there
has been little progress in the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016). As the Special Coordinator
noted, settlement-building, demolitions and evictions
have continued apace. Let me underline that the illegal
settlement activity not only erodes trust but also
fuels and deepens tensions and undermines the twoState solution.

Israelis and Palestinians must determine how
they envision the future. Negotiations can no longer
be put off indefinitely. The current course is leading
us towards a perpetual state of violence and conflict.
Meaningful initiatives are needed to turn the current
trajectory around, and they are needed quickly. Ending
the occupation and realizing the two-State solution
must drive those collective efforts. I remain actively
engaged in advancing those objectives with Israeli
and Palestinian leaders and with key international and
regional partners.

We are particularly concerned about plans to
legalize dozens of farm outposts in the West Bank.
Settlements and outposts remain violations of
international humanitarian law. They destroy the fabric
of communities and break apart territorial continuity
for a Palestinian State. We condemn any and all settler
violence against and harassment of Palestinians.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I too would like to thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Last week, Norway chaired the annual ministerial
meeting of the donor group for Palestine — the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee — here in New York. The Committee
urged Israelis, Palestinians and international partners
to take steps to restore a political horizon for peace as a
matter of urgency. The need to improve cooperation and
the situation on the ground and the need to strengthen
Palestinian institutions were emphasized. While some
recent progress has been made on trade issues, work
permits and Palestinian reform plans, it is clear that the
situation is challenging, and more concrete progress
is needed.
Norway welcomes Prime Minister Lapid’s support
for the two-State solution expressed in his statement
to the General Assembly last week (see A/77/PV.8).
6/17

Norway would also like to reiterate its deep
concern about the situation in Masafer Yatta. Movement
restrictions impede children’s access to education.
Teachers are denied access to their classrooms, and
children must walk long distances to reach school
safely. That is unacceptable. We encourage the Israeli
authorities to remove restrictions and revoke all eviction
and demolition orders, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
We are also troubled by the deteriorating security
situation in the West Bank and the clear risk that it
could spiral out of control. Earlier today in Jenin,
several people were killed and many more were
injured. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 80 Palestinians
have been killed by Israeli security forces in the West
Bank to date this year. While we recognize Israel’s
legitimate security concerns, we call for restraint
and proportionality. Force must be used only when
necessary and in a manner that minimizes harm against
civilians, including children, and preserves life.
I would also like to draw attention to the five prisoners
executed in Gaza, on 4 September. The use of the death
penalty is cruel and fails to provide deterrence. Let me
underline that this practice is simply unacceptable and
must be stopped immediately.
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

There is also a need to end the internal Palestinian
divisions and strengthen the Palestinian Authority,
including by ensuring democratic renewal and
stronger institutions.
Finally, let me reaffirm Norway’s strong
commitment to a two-State solution. We will continue
to work for that goal.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
During the general debate of the General Assembly
last week, Heads of State and Government frequently
brought up the Palestinian issue, showing that the plight
of the Palestinian people has not been forgotten. A
speedy, comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question continues to be a shared aspiration
of the international community. The Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and is duty bound
on the question of Palestine. It must take more robust
action to support the Palestinian people in restoring and
exercising their inalienable rights and achieving lasting
peace in the Middle East.
First, we must advance a two-State solution, and it
is the international consensus that a long-term solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli issue must be based on the
concept of two States living side by side. That is the
bottom line in terms of fairness and justice and must be
firmly adhered to. We noted that in his address to the
General Assembly at its general debate, Prime Minister
Lapid stated that
“[a]n agreement with the Palestinians, based on two
States for two peoples, is the right thing for Israel’s
security, for Israel’s economy and for the future of
our children”, and that “a large majority of Israelis
support the vision of this two-State solution” (see
A/77/PV.8).
We also noted that President Abbas recognized that
statement as positive and emphasized that
“[t]he real test of the seriousness and credibility
of this position is for the Israeli Government to sit
at the negotiating table immediately, to implement
the two-State solution on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative and to stop all unilateral measures that
undermine the two-State solution” (see A/77/
PV.10).
22-60388

S/PV.9139

China hopes that the parties concerned can translate
their political will into constructive policies and actions
and make concrete efforts to realize a two-State solution
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and other international consensus and norms.
Secondly, common security must be promoted.
In the past two years the war in Gaza has claimed
hundreds of Palestinian lives, violence in the West
Bank has been steadily increasing and the peace and
tranquillity at the religious holy sites in Jerusalem
have been repeatedly broken. Israel and Palestine are
neighbours that cannot relocate, and their security
is independent and indivisible. If the security of one
side is based on the insecurity of the other, the cycle
of violence will continue and security will never be
achieved. The international community should attach
equal importance to the security concerns of both sides
and encourage them to find their greatest common
denominator, through dialogue and cooperation,
in order to achieve common security. At the same
time, the occupying Power should earnestly fulfil its
obligation under international law to ensure the safety
of the people in the occupied territories.
Thirdly, the rule of law at the international
level must be upheld. Settlement activities violate
international law and the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016). They encroach on Palestinian land, expropriate
Palestinian resources and squeeze the living space of
the Palestinian people. I have noted that the Special
Coordinator mentioned that there has been little
progress in implementing the resolution. We urge Israel
to immediately cease all settlement activities. We
support resolving the issue of the occupied territories
in the West Bank in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and delimiting the final Palestinian-Israeli
borders through peaceful negotiations.
Fourthly, fairness and justice must be upheld. What
is lacking in resolving the Palestinian issue is not a
grand plan but a willingness to uphold justice. Whether
the Security Council is fit for purpose depends not
on grand pronouncements but on actual deeds. In his
address at the general debate of the General Assembly,
President Abbas once again asked the Council to
take measures to implement its resolutions on the
question of Palestine. The Council should perform its
duties objectively and impartially, in accordance with
international consensus, and promote a resumption
of Palestinian-Israeli talks without delay, instead of
7/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

waiting for the so-called conditions for dialogue to
mature. On issues concerning the future and the fate
of the Palestinian people, no one has a right to a veto.
China supports the just cause of the Palestinian
people in restoring their legitimate national rights and
establishing an independent Palestinian State with full
sovereignty, on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We are ready to work with
all parties to encourage the Council to play its role in
breaking the current stalemate and transforming the
consensus on a two-State solution into action and its
vision into reality, so as to realize peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel, harmony between the
Arab and Jewish peoples and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Mr. Wennesland
for his sobering report. Ireland shares his concerns
about the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) on
settlements and other issues.
First of all, we are alarmed by the spike in violence
today in Jenin following incursions by the Israeli
security forces, with further loss of life and injuries
to Palestinians. Along with the clashes in Nablus last
week, those events clearly demonstrate that the fragile
situation on the ground in the West Bank is continuing to
deteriorate. Ireland is appalled at the level of casualties
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
So far this year, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Israeli
forces have killed more than 80 Palestinians and injured
more than 7,400 in the West Bank. We are particularly
concerned about the level of civilian casualties, since
the protection of civilians is of paramount importance
and is required under international law. Israel has a right
to defend itself. However, in doing so, it must respect its
obligations under international law. Long-term security
for both Palestinians and Israelis cannot be achieved
through the use of excessive force or by acts of violence
by anyone. Such actions by the Israeli military in the
occupied Palestinian territory undermine the capacity
and effectiveness of the Palestinian Authority, which
needs to be empowered and supported.
We continue to see Israel’s relentless expansion of
new settlements and outposts, in flagrant violation of
resolution 2334 (2016) and international law. Ireland
again joins other members of the Security Council
and the wider international community in calling on
Israel to cease all settlement activities. This year has
8/17

28/09/2022

witnessed a continued increase compared with previous
years in plans for settlement construction in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Current Israeli plans
for settlement establishment and expansion in the
Nablus and Ramallah governorates, and on the outskirts
of Jerusalem and Bethlehem, pose the greatest threat to
the territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
We are particularly concerned about plans in Area
E-1 and the Givat Hamatos, Atarot, Lower Aqueduct,
Givat Hashaked and Har Gilo West areas, which would
effectively encircle East Jerusalem, disconnecting it
from the major urban areas in the rest of the West Bank.
Ireland is gravely concerned about the alarming
increase in settler violence, with OCHA reporting a
34 per cent increase this year compared with last year
in the monthly average of incidents causing injury or
property damage and an 83 per cent increase compared
with 2020. We call on Israel not to proceed with
demolitions in the village of Khallet Athaba in Masafer
Yatta. Forced evictions resulting from demolitions give
rise to violations of human rights. The forcible transfer
of the civilian population of an occupied territory is
also prohibited under international humanitarian law.
I recently had the opportunity to meet with Lina Abu
Akleh, the niece of the renowned Palestinian-American
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh. Ireland supports Lina’s
call for accountability and an independent investigation
into the death of her aunt. Shireen deserves nothing less.
Last week’s meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians recalled the colossal
economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian
people. The ongoing restrictions on movement and
access are compounding those challenges. Economic
and social assistance is urgently required.
I am pleased that Ireland was able to increase its
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) by
€2 million, bringing its total support to €8 million this
year. We urge all Member States, including those of the
region, to step up their support for UNRWA.
Ireland is deeply concerned by the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza, exacerbated by the ongoing Israeli
blockade, in contravention of resolution 1860 (2009).
While incremental increases in the quota of work
permits granted to Gazans by Israel is welcome, the
total number of permits is less than 1 per cent of the
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

population and has decreased significantly over the
past years
The human rights situation in Gaza is also of
great concern. We condemn in the strongest terms the
execution by Hamas of five prisoners on 4 September.
We call on Hamas to immediately end the practice of
executions and to return captured Israelis, including
human remains, to their loved ones.
Actions on the ground, particularly Israeli
settlement expansion, in violation of resolution 2334
(2016), continue to undermine a political horizon.
The Security Council must step up to discharge its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
to maintain international peace and security and to
reaffirm the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. We must move beyond talking about
the need for a two-State solution and take real steps
towards a just, inclusive and lasting peace. Progress is
possible, but it requires political will.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Tor Wennesland for his briefing on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The escalation in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
zone in August once again showed that the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories will remain
volatile until the parties reach mutually acceptable
compromises on all final-status issues, based on the
universally recognized international legal framework
for a Middle East settlement.
From 5 to 7 August, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
conducted another military operation in the Gaza Strip.
As a result of the bombing of the enclave, according
to United Nations reports, hundreds of houses and
facilities were destroyed or seriously damaged, killing
at least 26 civilians, including 17 children.

S/PV.9139

protests continue, with more than 130 people killed in
such clashes since the beginning of the year. We are
concerned about reports of possible provocations at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound in the approaching autumn,
which marks three key Jewish holidays, as well as a new
Israeli election campaign cycle. The legal space is also
rapidly shrinking. Press freedom has been restricted,
even to the point of killing reporters, and the activities
of human rights organizations are severely limited.
In the context of the Special Coordinator’s briefing
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
we reaffirm the principled position reflected in that
document, according to which the establishment of
Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, is a violation of
international law and a major obstacle to achieving a
settlement based on the two-State solution.
Of particular concern is Israel’s creation of
irreversible facts on the ground — the increase in illegal
settlement construction, while continuing the practice
of the forcible eviction of Palestinians, the destruction
of homes and the confiscation of property. In August
alone, more than 100 people lost their homes, including
50 children.
At the same time, Israel’s arbitrary illegal actions go
beyond the the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, affecting
neighbouring Arab countries through numerous
incidents of the violation of their sovereignty. I refer
primarily to attacks launched against the territory
of Syria and Lebanon. We oppose such methods of
protecting national security, which provoke threats to
other States and risk exacerbating the situation in the
region as a whole.

We note the alarming regularity of such eruptions
of violence in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. We
attribute those renewed tensions primarily to the
stagnation of the peace process, while the Israelis
continue their unilateral actions to create facts on
the ground and a carte blanche to use force against
the Palestinians.

We believe that the international community
should play a constructive role, both in resolving the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and in alleviating the severe
humanitarian and socioeconomic problems in the
occupied territories, especially in the Gaza Strip. We
attach great importance to the ongoing effective work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which provides
support to Palestinians, both in the occupied territories
and in neighbouring Arab countries.

Mass arbitrary detentions of Palestinians occur on
a daily basis, with more than 700 being held in Israeli
prisons without charge. Provocative violations of the
status of Jerusalem’s holy sites by Israeli ultra-Orthodox
groups and the violent suppression of Palestinian

We believe that it is not possible to achieve the longterm stabilization of the situation without restoring the
political horizon and reviving the peace process on a
universally recognized international legal basis with
a key element — the two-State solution, which we

22-60388

9/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

consistently support. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to direct negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis on all parameters of a final settlement.
We carefully listened to the addresses of the
Palestinian and Israeli leaders during the general
debate of the General Assembly at the start of the
seventy-seventh session (see A/77/PV.10 and A/77/
PV.8, respectively). We noted the reaffirmation of the
readiness of both sides to seek a settlement based on
the two-State solution. We support that approach on
the understanding that a solution to the Palestinian
question is possible only if all the parameters of the
well-known international legal framework are met. We
are ready to provide the necessary assistance to achieve
those goals, including in joint formats in cooperation
with regional actors.
In that regard, we believe that the actions of
Washington are counterproductive. It has effectively
blocked the activities of the Quartet of international
mediators and seeks to replace meeting the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinians to establish an
independent State by forcing them to an economic peace.
Mrs. Koumba Pambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
informative briefing.
The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains an ongoing challenge for the Security Council
and the international community as a whole. The
recent general debate of the General Assembly again
provided an opportunity for various delegations to
express their concerns about the lack of progress on the
Palestinian issue.
Instead of progress, we continue to see violence,
with its toll of destruction and loss of life, as well as a
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, particularly
in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Gabon reaffirms its commitment to the two-State
solution, living side by side on the basis of the 1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital.
We therefore call on the parties to resume
negotiations in good faith, with a view to restoring trust
and for the good of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples,
who legitimately aspire to live in peace. To that end,
we believe the role of the countries of the region and of
the Quartet to be crucial in assisting the resumption of
peace talks.
10/17

28/09/2022

We are encouraged by the address of the Israeli
Prime Minister, Mr. Yair Lapid, at the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly, in which he spoke in
favour of an agreement with the Palestinians based on
two States for two peoples, conditional on respect for
the security of Israel (see A/77/PV.8). We also welcome
the efforts of the Quartet and other partners, such as
France, Germany, Egypt, Jordan and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, aimed at achieving the broadly
supported two-State solution.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the Special Coordinator’s tireless efforts aimed at
achieving peace in the Middle East. Diplomatic efforts
must continue to be made to revive the peace process.
This is the only way to stop the violence.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
monthly briefing on the situation of the Middle East
peace process.
Ghana takes note of the positive and deliberate
attempts by Israel to improve ties with countries of
the region, following upon the Abraham Accords. We
also welcome the encouraging statement made by the
Prime Minister of Israel during the general debate of
the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session
(see A/77/PV.8), which was positively reciprocated
by President Abbas. We believe that it takes bold
leadership to invest in peace. We therefore encourage
all efforts made in favour of good-neighbourliness and
the sustenance of the two-State solution in the interest
of peace in the Middle East, a region with strategic
geopolitical and economic importance but engulfed in
protracted conflict.
As we have stated in the past, we condemn all
incidents of terrorism against Israel. We do not believe
that violence can help resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, and we urge all militant groups to channel
their energies towards a robust political process that
can deliver the much-needed peace.
Mindful of the security concerns of Israel, we
continue to be equally concerned about the insecurity
and dire humanitarian situation in parts of Palestine as
well as the incidence of human right abuses, violations
and detentions without charge or trial perpetrated
against Palestinians, especially in the West Bank,
Gaza and East Jerusalem. We believe that the growing
insecurity in the West Bank and Gaza does not augur
well for a peaceful resolution of the conflict. Rather,
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

it jeopardizes prospects for realizing the generally
accepted two-State solution. We therefore urge the
parties to de-escalate tensions and generate the required
political momentum for direct negotiations.
I reiterate Ghana’s request that all parties comply
fully with international humanitarian law, the United
Nations Charter and the many relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We urge
Israel, to respect the inalienable rights of Palestinians
and abide by its legal obligations and responsibilities
under the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
In concluding, we reiterate our strong conviction
that the path for lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East can run only through the two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders. However, realizing the goals of
the Middle East peace process requires that the Council
and the wider international community be constructive
by sustaining the engagement of the parties whose
good-faith efforts are required to resolve this decadeslong conflict.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Last week, at the General
Assembly, the Prime Minister of Israel highlighted
in very clear terms the strong and unambiguous
commitment of his Government in favour of the twoState solution (see A/77/PV.8). For the first time in more
than a decade, an Israeli Prime Minister recommitted
to a formula that the international community finds to
be the most promising one to end the ongoing conflict
in the Middle East, a statement welcomed by President
Abbas as well.
A two-State outcome that protects Israel’s security
and provides sovereignty and dignity for Palestinians
with a Palestinian State that is democratic and viable
is the only way forward in securing peace with Israel
as a democratic State while fulfilling Palestinians’
legitimate aspirations. While we spend most of the
time in this Chamber expressing worry about the trends
of violence and tensions, which we always regret and
condemn, this is the kind of message we expect from
leaders, as it will to inspire, I hope, both Israelis and
Palestinians to engage in efforts to resolve the neverending tragic conflict.
This land has always known violence in all forms
and intensity. Violence has caused only victims, mostly
civilians, from both sides. It has brought pain and
suffering while reminding everyone that an endless
22-60388

S/PV.9139

cycle of violence always ends up being a zero-sum game.
This is why we highlight the crucial importance of
upholding the ceasefire between Israel and Palestinian
militants as critical to safeguarding the gains made
through tireless efforts, because such important gains
are fragile and easily reversible. Violence can never be
conducive to fulfilling dreams; it is just a treacherous
road of false promises that are never realized.
Every effort must now therefore be made to bring
the parties closer together to meet, talk and seek
solutions. This is how the Oslo Accords happened. This
is how future accords may and should happen. The
country is losing time — time that has been and will
always be regretted.
We look forward to the resumption, at the next best
opportunity, of dormant peace talks within the legal
framework created by the United Nations in order to
find a lasting and just solution to the conflict with a
democratic, as I mentioned before, and secure Israel and
a viable and democratic Palestinian State living at peace
with each other, with Jerusalem as a shared capital. Any
positive step or measure, even small steps, helps in the
process. The growing number of work permits issued
to Palestinians from the Gaza Strip to work in Israel
contributes to improving the well-being of thousands
of families living in poverty. They also help build trust
among communities, becoming promoters of better
understanding on a much greater scale.
We will never tire in reiterating our categorical
rejection and condemnation of every terrorist attack
against Israel or anywhere else. We abhor terrorism in
all its forms and oppose and denounce it vigorously and
unreservedly. We support Israel’s right to defend itself,
acting proportionately and based on law.
The value of life is the same for Palestinians and
Israelis. As my own country was recently victim of an
unprovoked massive and large-scale cyberattack that
aimed to destroy critical Government infrastructure,
sponsored and carried out by groups affiliated with
Iran, we better understand the security concerns of
other countries, Israel in particular, which is faced with
an ongoing threat from a State that calls openly and
continuously for its destruction and sponsors proxies
in its backyard with the sole aim of harming, killing
and destroying.
We have said it many times and deem it important
to reiterate: building peace in post-conflict situations
requires not only efforts but also genuine goodwill and
11/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

especially trust — a lot of trust. This is why, if truly
committed, parties should refrain from actions that go
against efforts to promote the peace process. In this
respect, we will continue to highlight our position that
settlements and their expansion go against international
law and constitute an obstacle to the two-State solution,
the cornerstone of the peace process. They are wrong
and must be stopped.
We also urge all sides to refrain from inflammatory
rhetoric that escalates tensions and endangers the peace
process. We see no other way to move ahead than
through peace talks. The negotiation table is the only
place where a viable and just solution lies and can and
should be found.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I also thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for presenting the
Secretary-General’s periodic report.
My delegation takes note of the discussions and
outcomes of the high-level meetings that took place
on the sidelines of the general debate at the General
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session, including the
21 September Munich format meeting, the 22 September
meeting of the Ministerial Committee of the Non-Aligned
Movement on Palestine, the 22 September meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, and the 23 September
Ministerial meeting hosted by Jordan and Sweden on
sustainability of funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. All of that attests to the continued engagement,
commitment and focus on the Israel-Palestine issue,
and rightfully and urgently so. They also reflect efforts
to fill the gap of an elusive genuine Israel-Palestine
political peace process underpinned by direct dialogue
and a pacific settlement as provided for in the United
Nations Charter. Unfortunately, the lack of meaningful
progress in the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) contributes to widening this gap
The objectives of resolution 2334 (2016) are
comprehensive. They speak to the urgency of stabilizing
the situation and reversing the negative trends on the
ground, which are undermining the prospects of a twoState solution along the 1967 lines, and the creation of
conditions for successful final-status negotiations.
As my delegation stated during the most recent
quarterly Council meeting on this agenda item (see
S/PV.9077), the uniqueness of resolution 2334 (2016)
lies in the fact that it is propositional, not prescriptive.
Indeed, beyond rhetoric, its implementation requires
12/17

28/09/2022

the political will of both the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to operationalize the commitments if it is to
succeed. That is the only way to create immediate — not
future — political traction on the ground.
More important, while recognizing the importance
of direct negotiations and irrespective of the existence
or resumption of those negotiations, Kenya, in line with
paragraph 11 of resolution 2334 (2016), continues to
call for the presentation of clear objectives, timelines
and feasible solutions to resolving pending issues in
a way that the Council will be better positioned to
“examine practical ways and means to secure the full
implementation of its relevant resolutions” on this
protracted conflict.
In the meantime, Kenya welcomes progress made
through practical cooperation between the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities in Gaza, in recognition of the
positive impact of strengthened economic conditions
and the right of Palestinians to humanitarian relief
and economic empowerment and integration. Prime
Minister Lapid’s recognition of two States for two
peoples during his 22 September General Assembly
address (see A/77/PV.8) is also an important
confidence-building measure.
This morning we listened to the report on the
evolving situation on the ground, including the
deteriorating security situation, the escalation of
violence in the Holy Esplanade and around the Old
City and the loss of life in the West Bank, including
the clashes in Nablus, in the past couple of weeks. We
urge leaders on all sides to help calm the situation to
prevent further escalation and affirm the need for the
status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem to be upheld
and respected.
Settlements, demolitions and evictions continue to
increase in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, in violation of international law.
Today we also heard about disturbing statistics
from violent incidents and fatalities involving
children and youth, as well as acts of violence against
civilians that have tragically claimed both Israeli and
Palestinian lives.
This is a normalization that should not be acceptable.
It is a normalization that continues to distance us from
the important vision embodied by resolution 2334
(2016), of
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9139

“a region where two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side in peace within secure
and recognized borders” (resolution 2334 (2016),
ninth preambular paragraph).

We look forward to seeing intensified efforts to
create a suitable political environment that paves the
way for the resumption of serious political negotiations
between the two parties on final-status issues.

In line with resolution 2334 (2016), Kenya
continues to condemn and call for accountability
and strengthened efforts to combat terrorist attacks
perpetrated by Hamas, Palestinian Jihad and other
militant groups in Israel.

We also emphasize the need for the parties to act
urgently, prioritize dialogue and engage in good faith
in order to prevent the situation from spiralling out of
control. Today’s meeting provides an opportunity for
the Council to send a critical message about the need
for self-restraint and the importance of refraining from
unilateral measures that may inflame the precarious
situation, especially in the Holy City of Jerusalem.

Kenya also reiterates the need for all the parties
concerned, including communal, political and religious
leaders, to practically and consistently support the
daily dividends of constructive grass-roots efforts to
mitigate against cycles of conflict, in the interest of the
promotion of peace and security.
In conclusion, Kenya once again urges both parties
to exert collective efforts and demonstrate political
commitment to the desirable and obtainable objectives
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his briefing and for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), which paints a bleak picture of
the current situation on the ground.
The Middle East region urgently needs a
fundamental positive transformation that will spare
its people from the hardships of conflicts and crises.
That would make it contribute effectively to supporting
development and addressing global shared challenges,
thereby in turn contributing to the maintenance of
regional and international peace and security.
Achieving total regional stability is not possible
without reaching a just and comprehensive solution
to the Palestinian question, in accordance with the
legitimate international terms of reference, so that an
independent Palestinian State is established based on
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace, security
and mutual recognition. In that spirit, the United
Arab Emirates will continue to support all peaceful
initiatives aimed at realizing those aspirations. We also
welcome the reference made by the Prime Minister of
Israel, during his statement at the high-level week of
the General Assembly, regarding his support for the
vision of the two-State solution (see A/77/PV.8).
22-60388

Recent reports refer to Israel’s announcement of a
plan to build 560 new settlement units in the southern
part of East Jerusalem, specifically on lands considered
by UNESCO to be an archaeological area. We
reiterate here our firm position that settlement activity
undermines the two-State solution and constitutes
a flagrant violation of both international law and the
relevant resolutions of the Council. We also stress the
need to stop attacks carried out by settlers against
Palestinian communities. That includes attacks on
agricultural crops, which many families depend on as
a primary source of income. We take particular note
of the approach of the olive harvest season — a period
that witnessed an unprecedented upsurge in attacks
last year.
As students return to school this month, we stress
the right of Palestinian children to access education
without obstacles or intimidation. In conflict settings,
educational institutions are particularly important
for empowering generations to effectively contribute
to building and advancing their communities. The
maintenance of educational facilities is equally
important on occupied Palestinian territory. According
to reports by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, as of August there were 56
pending demolition orders for schools in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem that provide educational services to
more than 6,000 children.
We also stress the need to continue responding to
the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people, and
we welcome last week’s meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, chaired by Norway, in that regard.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its firm commitment to support the brotherly Palestinian
people. We will continue to provide education and
13/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

health assistance, and we hope that future Palestinian
generations will enjoy long-awaited security and peace.
Mrs. Espeschit Maia (Brazil): As we just heard
from the detailed briefing presented by the Special
Coordinator, tensions keep escalating on the ground,
especially in the West Bank. The agreed ceasefire is at
continuous risk, and the situation can easily deteriorate
if calm is not restored.
Last week, the General Assembly formally opened
for the seventy-seventh time. The question we are
addressing here today has been on the agenda of the
United Nations since 1947, year of the second session
of the General Assembly, when the two-State solution
was first put to paper. We therefore wonder — what
efforts are we making today, as representatives on the
Security Council, to re-establish the path to a muchawaited solution to this long-lasting conflict?
Seventy-six years have passed, and Brazil remains
convinced that a two-State solution, within the
framework of international law and the resolutions of
the Council, is still the only way to meet the aspirations
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and to ensure
security for all. We welcome the words expressed last
week by the Israeli leadership to the General Assembly
(see A/77/PV.8), and we hope that will encourage a
resumption of negotiations on the establishment of
two States for two peoples. In that regard, we agree
with the Special Coordinator that unless fundamental
issues are addressed, the cycle of acute crises followed
by short-term fixes will persist. Concerted efforts
are needed to restore a political horizon and resume
meaningful negotiations.
Brazil urges the parties, first of all, to maintain
their ceasefire and exercise maximum restraint.
Unilateral actions, including extremist rhetoric, only
add fuel to the fire. Confidence between the parties
must be restored for negotiations to flourish. All the
parties must comply with international humanitarian
law. Investigations should be conducted to clarify
all the alleged violations and hold those responsible
accountable. The safety and security of religious sites,
an essential component of freedom of religion or belief,
should also be preserved — and that means preserving
the status quo of holy sites.
The Special Coordinator recently presented a report
on measures that could contribute to strengthening the
Palestinian economy and addressing the challenge of
Palestinian governance. We should not underestimate
14/17

28/09/2022

the roles that poverty, food insecurity and hopelessness
play in preparing the ground for extremist forces to
flourish. Some promising measures have been taken
over the past year, particularly an easing of restrictions
on the movement of people and goods into and out of
the Gaza Strip. Economic growth may also contribute
to intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is another step
needed to promote stabilization and a resumption of
genuine dialogue. We encourage continued cooperation
between the Palestinian Authority and Israeli officials.
Collaboration on all matters, including the security
sector, can happen only in the presence of strengthened
Palestinian institutions and a viable Palestinian
economy, which would in turn help reinvigorate the
efforts to realize a two-State solution.
The Secretary-General stated during his opening
speech to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh
session (see A/77/PV.4) last week that the funding
gap for the global humanitarian appeal is the largest
ever recorded. That does not come as a surprise. We
know that global price increases for key commodities
have strained the resources of humanitarian agencies.
However, Palestinian refugees must not be forgotten
amid the many ongoing humanitarian crises. For as
long as it has existed, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) has played an important role in providing
relief and assistance to millions in many countries.
In that regard, Brazil echoes the calls for renewed
efforts to restore UNRWA’s capabilities, since its
chronic underfunding continues to risk leaving
people unassisted.
In conclusion, Brazil would like to once more affirm
its support for the work of the Special Coordinator.
We thank Mr. Wennesland for being open and frank
with the Security Council and for his engagement with
all the parties. We also commend the efforts of the
countries, especially those in the region, that have been
working ceaselessly to bring some calm and de-escalate
the situation on the ground.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his helpful but sobering briefing.
Let me start by welcoming both Prime Minister
Lapid and President Abbas’s support for a twoState solution during their speeches to the General
Assembly last week (see A/77/PV.8 and A/77/PV.10,
respectively). The United Kingdom firmly believes
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that a two-State solution, based on the 1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as a shared capital, and a just solution for
refugees, is the best way to deliver long-term peace.
However, the challenges facing a two-State solution
remain significant. We share deep concerns about the
deteriorating security situation in the West Bank. We
urge all the parties to reduce tensions and refrain from
taking destabilizing unilateral actions.
We urge Israel not to proceed with demolitions
at Masafer Yatta, which would cause unnecessary
suffering and are against international law in all but
the most exceptional circumstances. We unequivocally
condemn the execution of five Gazans by Hamas this
month. The United Kingdom opposes the death penalty
in all circumstances. In the West Bank in 2022 alone,
more Palestinians were killed by Israeli forces than
the total recorded since the United Nations began
documenting fatalities in 2005. The United Kingdom
remains fully supportive of Israel’s right to self-defence,
but where there are accusations of excessive use of
force, we advocate swift, transparent investigations.
We are also appalled by the terrorist attacks on Israeli
citizens, which cannot be justified.
We appreciate Norway’s leadership in convening
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee this month. We
welcome the progress on economic measures, including
the electronic payment of Palestinian workers in Israel,
and the work on ensuring the continued success of
the e-VAT portal. However, bolder and faster action
is needed to deliver real economic change in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The United Kingdom
is committed to supporting another meeting of the Joint
Economic Committee as soon as possible.

S/PV.9139

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his very extensive briefing.
I would like to begin today by wishing our Jewish
friends and colleagues chag sameach — a very happy
new year. The briefing we just heard once again
demonstrates the very limited progress that has been
made in the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Unfortunately, the reality is one of reversals and
setbacks, three of which I will focus on today.
The first is settlement expansion, which
undermines the viability of a two-State solution. The
construction and expansion of settlements and all that
entails, such as the transfer of settlers, the confiscation
and demolition of properties and the displacement of
the Palestinian population, as is happening in Masafer
Yatta and Sheikh Jarrah, among other places, constitute
violations of international law and a number of United
Nations resolutions. Mexico therefore calls once again
for all activities related to settlement expansion to cease.
The second is the constantly increasing violence.
We are very concerned about the increasing frequency
of violent incidents and deplore the attack that occurred
a few days ago in Holon in which an Israeli woman died.
As the Special Coordinator noted, the fragile situation
in East Jerusalem is also alarming. The provocations
that have taken place in the courtyards of the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque are unacceptable, given the
fact that as we have seen on other occasions, they can
have disastrous consequences. We call for restraint
and for avoiding any measure that undermines the
historical, demographic, religious or cultural character
of the city.

We also thank Jordan and Sweden for hosting a
ministerial meeting in support of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The United Kingdom is a longstanding financial and political supporter of UNWRA
and welcomes its continued support to Palestinian
refugees across the region. We encourage further
dialogue among partners to ensure that UNWRA can
deliver on its mandate.

We also note that the security situation in the West
Bank continues to deteriorate. According to statistics
from the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, this year has been the deadliest
since 2005. Frequent raids and operations by the Israel
Defense Forces have resulted in the deaths of more than
80 Palestinian civilians, and nearly 7,500 injured to
date in 2022. Israel’s law-enforcement agencies must
observe the principles of necessity, proportionality
and distinction.

In conclusion, peace will be achieved only through
meaningful dialogue between the parties that tackles
the drivers of instability and violence in the immediate
term. We encourage further and deeper engagement
towards that goal.

Thirdly, with regard to the political process, we
acknowledge confidence-building measures such
as permits for Palestinian workers and easing the
movement of people and goods in Gaza. However,
such efforts should also come with an inclusive and

22-60388

15/17

S/PV.9139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

far-reaching political process in which Israel and
Palestine engage constructively, with the shared goal
of addressing the structural causes of the conflict. In
that regard, we welcome meetings such as that of the
Munich Group, discussions on the Arab Peace Initiative
and the ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, which was held during the
high-level week of the General Assembly, the purpose
of all of which is to encourage measures to rebuild trust
and promote a two-State solution.
The support of the international community and
particularly the commitment of both President Abbas
and Prime Minister Lapid to a two-State solution
deserve special recognition. That is the way forward.
It is time to resume the political process under the
auspices of the international community, and hopefully
under more active leadership by the Security Council.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
India is concerned about the unfortunate loss
of civilian lives and reiterates its call for a complete
cessation of violence and attacks on civilians, especially
women and children. Likewise, we are concerned about
the recent acts of terror and incidents of violence in Israel
and the West Bank. We are also aware of the tensions
around Jerusalem’s holy sites owing to provocative
action and rhetoric. The historical and legal status
quo at Jerusalem’s holy places must be respected and
upheld. Actions that the Special Coordinator identified
in his briefing are also continuing. They need to stop.
Palestinians continue to face severe economic
and humanitarian hardships. The unhindered delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian civilian
population must be prioritized. For its part, India
continues to support the Palestinian people through
its bilateral development partnership, which covers
wide-ranging sectors such as health, education, women’s
empowerment, entrepreneurship and information
technology. Palestinian students and officials of the
Palestine Authority are provided with scholarships
every year for education and training in premier
educational institutions. The scholarships are also open
to Palestinian refugees through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), and we are supporting grassroots Palestinian institutions in their development
16/17

28/09/2022

initiatives. Our support also extends to UNRWA for
its humanitarian services. In recognition of the current
financial situation of UNRWA, we have advanced the
disbursement of our 2022 contribution of $5 million to
the Agency.
In conclusion, I want to say that the developments
in Palestine only confirm the urgent need for political
dialogue between Israel and Palestine through a
resumption of direct negotiations aimed at establishing
a sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel. We believe there is no
alternative to a negotiated two-State solution, and in
that context, we welcome the statement by Israel’s
Prime Minister at the General Assembly last week (see
A/77/PV.8) supporting such a solution. India stands
ready to support all diplomatic efforts to strengthen
the international community’s collective commitment
to resuming the negotiations and facilitating the peace
process for achieving a two-State solution.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his informative briefing.
From day one, the Biden Administration has been
unequivocal in its support for a two-State solution. That
has not changed. As President Biden made clear to the
General Assembly last week,
[A] negotiated two-State solution remains [...] the
best way to ensure Israel’s security and prosperity
for the future and give the Palestinians the State to
which they are entitled” (see A/77/PV.6).
We are not alone in pushing for such a peace. In fact, the
Hall of the General Assembly was filled with calls for
a two-State solution during the high-level week. Prime
Minister Lapid made a courageous and impassioned
speech (see A/77/PV.8) that articulated his vision of two
States for two peoples. The significance of his appeal
for peace between Israelis and Palestinians should
not be underestimated. I also want to acknowledge
President Abbas’s statement (see A/77/PV.10) and his
stated commitment to non-violence and affirmation of
his support for a two-State solution. Now it is time to
turn those words into action and to make real, sustained
progress. It is incumbent on both the parties to work in
good faith to arrive at two States for two peoples. There
are no shortcuts to statehood.
22-60388

28/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that regard, we strongly oppose unilateral actions
that exacerbate tensions and move us further away from
a two-State solution, which in turn moves us further
away from peace. That includes terrorist attacks and
incitement to violence against Israelis. It includes the
plans to develop Har Gilo West, which would further
fragment the West Bank, and the possible demolitions
in Masafer Yatta. It also includes the violence inflicted
on Palestinians in their neighbourhoods by Israeli
settlers, who in some cases are escorted by Israeli
security forces. I will also note that the United States
is concerned about increasing tensions and violence in
the West Bank among Palestinians, including the recent
clashes in Jenin and Nablus. We are troubled by the
overall trend of growing violence.
Instability in the West Bank is in the interests
neither of Israel nor the Palestinian people. We call on
both sides to work for peace without delay. The United
States is doing its part to help. In July, while he was
in the region, President Biden announced a number
of measures to improve conditions for the Palestinian
people in the West Bank and Gaza, including additional
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We
are now working to expand fourth-generation digital
connectivity to Gaza and the West Bank and improve
accessibility to the Allenby Bridge. We encourage the
Government of Israel to move those projects forward
quickly. But we cannot do it alone. We strongly urge
countries that espouse support for the Palestinian people
to translate that conviction into concrete improvements
on the ground. We call on the Palestinian Authority
to ensure respect for human rights and refrain from
making payments to those who harm Israelis. A strong
and legitimate Palestinian Authority is in the interest of
the entire region.
Before I conclude, I would like to take note of the
historic visit to Israel earlier this month made by the
Foreign Minister of the United Arab Emirates. The
United States will continue working with Israel and its
neighbours to expand relationships across the region,
and we will strive to ensure that those new relationships
also benefit the Palestinians.
Even if the current circumstances do not lend
themselves to negotiation, we must not retreat into

22-60388

S/PV.9139

cynicism. The international community can and must
take steps to achieve conditions conducive to negotiating
the two-State solution. That will be a real challenge,
but it is a challenge that we must take on together. The
United States will not hesitate to work with its partners
to build a brighter and more peaceful future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Mr. Wennesland for his briefing and
reiterate that he has France’s full support.
Ending unilateral measures remains the priority.
Colonization, which is at variance with international
law, undermines any possibility for the resumption
of the peace process and beyond that for a two-State
solution. France therefore requests Israel to end the
current process of expanding or establishing new
settlements. The demolitions and evictions must stop.
We also recall the importance of respecting the status
quo of holy sites.
Inaction is no longer a solution. A political horizon
must be re-established. France is determined to work
to that end and will support all initiatives aimed at
bringing the parties to the negotiating table. Direct
negotiations must be resumed as a matter of urgency.
Only a solution involving two States living side by side
in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the capital of
both, will bring just and lasting peace to Israelis and
Palestinians and the entire region. We welcome the
open-mindedness demonstrated by the Israeli Prime
Minister at the recent general debate of the General
Assembly (see A/77/PV.8). Indeed, we hope that his
words will be translated into action.
France calls on the Security Council to take
steps towards resuming peace negotiations as soon
as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

17/17
