United Nations

A/RES/60/160

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.2 (Part II))]

60/160. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights
of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, as well as its subsequent
resolutions on the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
Noting that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities contributes to political and
social stability and peace and enriches the cultural diversity and heritage of society, as
reaffirmed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Concerned by the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts concerning
minorities and their often tragic consequences, and concerned also that persons
belonging to minorities are particularly vulnerable to displacement,
Recognizing that the effective promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to minorities is a fundamental part of the promotion and protection of
human rights, and acknowledging that measures in this area can also contribute
significantly to conflict prevention,
Emphasizing the role that national institutions can play in early warning for
problems regarding minority situations,
Emphasizing also the importance of human rights education as an effective tool
to promote an inclusive society and understanding of and tolerance towards and
among persons belonging to minorities,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an important role to play regarding
the protection of minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of and giving effect to
the Declaration,

_______________
1

05-49720

See resolution 60/1.

A/RES/60/160

Noting that the Working Group on Minorities of the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights held its tenth and eleventh sessions from
1 to 5 March 2004 and from 30 May to 3 June 2005, respectively,
Noting with appreciation the appointment of the independent expert on minority
issues by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on 29 July 2005,
as requested by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2005/79 of
21 April 2005, 2
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.
Recognizes that respect for human rights and the promotion of
understanding and tolerance by Governments as well as between and among
minorities are central to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to minorities;
Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to
3.
minorities may exercise fully and effectively all human rights and fundamental
freedoms without any discrimination and in full equality before the law, as
proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, 4 and draws attention to the relevant
provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, 5 including the
provisions on forms of multiple discrimination;
4.
Encourages States, in their follow-up to the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to include
aspects relating to minorities in their national plans of action and, in this context, to
take forms of multiple discrimination fully into account;
Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the
5.
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
as set out in the Declaration, including through the encouragement of conditions for
the promotion of their identity, the provision of adequate education and the
facilitation of their participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social,
religious and cultural life of society and in the economic progress and development of
their country, without discrimination, and to apply a gender perspective while doing
so;
Calls upon States to give special attention to the promotion and protection
6.
of the human rights of children belonging to minorities, taking into account that girls
and boys may face different types of risks;
Urges States to take, as appropriate, all necessary constitutional,
7.
legislative, administrative and other measures to promote and give effect to the
Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate bilaterally and multilaterally, in
accordance with the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
Calls upon States to take all appropriate measures to protect the cultural
8.
and religious sites of national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
_______________
2

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3
A/60/333.
4
Resolution 47/135, annex.
5
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

2

A/RES/60/160

9.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request of
Governments concerned, qualified expertise on minority issues, including the
prevention and resolution of disputes, to assist in existing or potential situations
involving minorities;
10. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
promote, within her mandate, the implementation of the Declaration, to continue to
engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and to disseminate widely
the United Nations Guide for Minorities;
11. Requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts to improve the
coordination and cooperation among United Nations programmes and agencies on
activities related to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to
minorities and to take the work of relevant regional organizations active in the field
of human rights into account in her endeavours;
12. Welcomes the inter-agency consultation of the High Commissioner with
United Nations programmes and agencies on minority issues, and calls upon those
programmes and agencies to contribute actively to this process;
13. Encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
continue to contribute to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
14. Calls upon the Working Group on Minorities of the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to implement fully its mandate, focusing
its work on interactive dialogue with relevant non-governmental organizations and on
conceptual support of, and dialogue with, the independent expert on minority issues,
by recommending, on the basis of its findings, further measures for the promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities;
15. Invites the High Commissioner to seek voluntary contributions to facilitate
the effective participation of representatives of non-governmental organizations and
persons belonging to minorities, in particular those from developing countries, in
minority-related activities organized by the United Nations, particularly its human
rights bodies, and in doing so to give particular attention to ensuring the participation
of young people and women;
16. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its sixty-second
session under the item entitled “Human rights questions”.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

3
