United Nations

S/PV.9313

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9313th meeting
Thursday, 27 April 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11966 (E)
*2311966*

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Ms. Lisa Doughten, Director, Humanitarian
Financing and Resource Mobilization Division, Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: We are at a potentially important
juncture in efforts to move forward a political process
on Syria. In the tragic aftermath of the earthquakes,
we have seen renewed diplomatic attention on Syria.
Diplomacy is continuing involving the Astana players
and the Syrian Government. And there have been new
openings of engagement between Arab countries and
the Syrian Government. That renewed attention to
Syria is very important if it can act as a circuit breaker
and unlock long-stalled efforts to move the political
process forward.
I thank the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan in particular for their
continued engagement with me. I look forward to
continuing to stay in close touch with regional players
and with the full range of stakeholders to maximize
coordination and common messaging. In that regard,
I appreciated the engagement I had recently in Athens
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece and
with representatives of European Union members.
I continue to stress that a political solution is the
only way out of the suffering of the Syrian people,
towards stability, security and peace. Such a solution
requires realism from all sides and agreements and
actions on key issues in resolution 2254 (2015). I
2/19

27/04/2023

continue to seek to facilitate a Syrian-led, Syrianowned political process. Equally, I have always said
that the United Nations cannot do it alone. We need the
support of all key actors, and we will continue to work
with all. No existing groups of players — not the Syrian
parties, not the Astana players, not the Western players,
not the Arab players — can alone bring about a political
solution. If we are to make progress on any issue, even
incrementally in a step-for step manner, we must see
a wider group of players work together. Ultimately,
all will have to make contributions in a coordinated,
multilateral effort.
Members might ask why that is — because no
existing group of actors can fundamentally shift the
military stalemate or restore Syria’s sovereignty,
independence or territorial integrity. No one group of
players can address structural issues, fix the economy
and reconstruct Syria. No one group of actors can
resolve the threat of terrorism, stabilize Syria, stem the
sources of regional instability and safeguard legitimate
security concerns, including on Syria’s borders. No one
group of actors can realize our collective responsibility
to protect Syrian civilians, address the issue of the
detained, abducted, disappeared or missing and ensure
conditions for safe, dignified and voluntary refugee
returns. And no single group of actors can realize our
collective responsibility to help the Syrian people chart
their own future, the only way that Syria will ever be
truly stable and prosperous again. In short, unlocking
each of Syria’s myriad problems requires several keys,
each held by a different stakeholder who cannot be
overlooked and who can block if excluded.
The recent diplomatic moves mean we are now in a
period of renewed probing and testing, in a new context,
with an enhanced regional engagement and with many
ideas that have long been on the table. I am continuing
to use my good offices and to develop the collective
thinking on those ideas. I am ready to help facilitate
the way forward, step-for-step and step-by-step, in a
reciprocal and verifiable manner, consistent with my
mandate in resolution 2254 (2015). I will continue my
direct engagement with the Government of Syria and with
the Syrian Negotiations Commission, and I appeal anew
for genuine engagement and readiness to move forward
on substance. I am ready to work very closely with
others who are seeking to play a facilitative role as well.
When I briefed the Security Council the previous
time (see S/PV.9291), I mentioned the kinds of areas
where moves could be made on both sides. It is clear
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

that actions by the Syrian Government, matched then
with actions from the outside, on some of these issues
could arrest negative trends and build positive ones.
That would have new potency, with a stronger regional
role. Substantive moves could build some trust and
confidence, including among civilians inside Syria
and those who have fled. On the other hand, if this
opportunity is not seized, we will not see real change
on the ground, leading to new frustration and despair.
Let me also reiterate my readiness to facilitate
Syrian-Syrian dialogue, including to reconvene the
Constitutional Committee. It is surely past time for us
to move beyond the non-Syrian issues that have been
stalling the process. The Committee should resume
its work in Geneva in a spirit of compromise, with
substance and at pace.
Meanwhile, I continue to convene a broader
spectrum of Syrians in Geneva and the region,
including through the Women’s Advisory Board and
the Civil Society Support Room. Those meetings show
that Syrians still have much that they can agree upon,
across many divides. We saw that earlier this month in a
meeting that Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi convened in
Geneva, bringing together a group of Syrians from all
quarters of the country, and its diaspora too, to discuss
post-earthquake political challenges.
Let me register my concern that the brief calm
after the earthquakes has been further eroded.
Violent incidents have been increasing in the northwest, with ever-more regular shelling and rocket fire
across front lines involving pro-Government forces,
armed opposition forces as well as the listed terrorist
group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which has announced
further cross-line raids on Government positions. The
relative calm in the north-east has been punctuated by
Turkish and armed opposition groups targeting Syrian
Democratic Forces positions, in what they say was a
response to the latter’s shelling and rocket attacks,
including on Turkish soldiers. Israeli strikes are
becoming ever-more frequent. The south-west remains
turbulent. And, in some areas, sporadic attacks by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant appear to be on the
uptick, especially in the central desert, with increasing
Syrian Government, Russian and United States-led
coalition strikes against them.
I urge all to work to rein in violence and bring
about sustained calm, an appeal I will continue to make
to all key stakeholders, including in the ceasefire task

S/PV.9313

force in Geneva. Ultimately, we need a nationwide
ceasefire and a coordinated approach to countering
listed terrorist groups, in line with international law.
Finally, I remind the Council that, after the
earthquakes and more than 12 years of war and conflict,
Syria remains a humanitarian crisis of epic proportions.
We will hear more on that, of course, from my colleague
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Syrians still need immense resources from
all members to meet emergency humanitarian needs,
including with regard to early recovery and livelihoods.
Humanitarian access remains essential via all
modalities, whether cross-line or cross-border.
To summarize my key message, we are at a
potentially important juncture, with renewed attention
on Syria — particularly from the region — that could
assist our efforts in advancing a political solution to
this conflict in line with resolution 2254 (2015). But for
that renewed attention to help unlock progress, many
actors will need to take concrete steps, not just one
set of actors. I will continue to engage directly with
the Syrian parties and to remind them — in particular,
at this juncture, the Government of Syria — that they
should seize the opportunity with a readiness to move
forward on substantive issues. I will also continue to
work closely with all and to emphasize the importance of
close coordination with all key actors. Even modest and
specific steps will require give-and-take from a broad
range of different players, and genuine verification too.
And I hope that, if we build some trust and
confidence with substantive moves, that can then serve
in time as a basis for a more comprehensive effort to
resolve this conflict via a political settlement. There
is no shortcut to stability without addressing the
fundamental drivers of the conflict. We must constantly
remind ourselves that, even if we start small and move
in stages, Syria still needs a comprehensive solution,
as called for in resolution 2254 (2015), that restores
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Doughten.
Ms. Doughten: The current scale of humanitarian
need in Syria is unprecedented, even in the long and
brutal history of the Syria crisis. I has been almost

23-119663/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

three months since the devastating earthquakes that
struck Türkiye and Syria. The United Nations and its
humanitarian partners continue to support recovery
efforts. Over 3 million people in Syria have received hot
meals and ready-to-eat rations. Some 1.1 million people
have received health assistance. And over 470,000 cubic
metres of rubble have been cleared. Progress has been
made, but much more needs to be done.
The earthquakes on 6 February were nothing
short of catastrophic. They not only brought more
death and destruction to parts of northern Syria worn
down by more than a decade of war, but they also
underscored a dire reality facing millions throughout
the country, namely, that 12 years of armed conflict,
growing macroeconomic pressures, dwindling public
services and decaying critical infrastructure have
left the population of Syria acutely vulnerable to
shocks and stresses, let alone those as devastating as
the recent earthquakes. Even before the earthquake,
15.3 million people — more than half of the total
population — required humanitarian assistance and
protection support. That number, I fear, only stands
to grow.
The protection needs provoked by the earthquakes
are enormous. They sent thousands of people seeking
refuge, with many taking temporary shelter in schools,
mosques and neighbours’ homes. Many turned to open
spaces for fear of aftershocks. Women, men and children
are living in crowded, stressful settings, compounding
the mental strain on those coping with years of trauma.
Children are being forced to work to support families.
The number of children dropping out of school is on
the rise.
The United Nations and its partners are doing what
we can to provide support services to those displaced.
As people leave emergency and collective shelters
for more long-term settings, support for adequate
accommodation will be increasingly essential.
This crisis of forced displacement, of course,
extends much more widely. Across Syria, over
6.9 million people are internally displaced, many of
them multiple times. The scale is staggering, but so is
the duration. Some 80 per cent of that population have
now been displaced from their homes for at least five
years. Many were driven from their homes years ago
by conflict. Now a growing portion are forced from
location to location in search of basic services and
livelihood opportunities.
4/19

27/04/2023

Durable solutions are needed for this crisis, starting
with an end to the conflict. Until then, humanitarian
actors are seeking more sustainable ways to assist
displaced persons, including by expanding earlyrecovery and livelihood support. Since January
2022, almost 500 early-recovery projects have been
implemented across all parts of Syria, the vast majority
under Syria humanitarian response plans. The total
funding received for those projects exceeds $640 million,
an almost $80 million increase since February. That is
an encouraging development given the need for greater
recovery assistance and livelihood opportunities.
The United Nations and its partners continue to pursue
all available means to reach people in need, wherever
they are located. Emergency measures implemented
since the earthquakes, such as fast-tracked visas and
travel permits, and blanket approvals have enabled the
United Nations and humanitarian partners to rapidly
adapt and scale-up operations in Government areas.
In north-west Syria, United Nations agencies and
their partners continue to utilize all three available border
crossings — Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Bab
Al-Rai — to reach millions of people each month. The
near-daily inter-agency missions have enabled United
Nations staff to monitor operations, meet beneficiaries
and conduct assessments to ensure that cross-border
assistance responds to the most urgent needs. The
United Nations hopes those modalities will be extended
to continue facilitating urgent humanitarian operations.
Similar progress has not been achieved in crossline operations to north-west Syria, despite a concerted
effort. Dialogue continues at all levels to resume
planned convoys in a safe manner, and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs hopes to have
more positive developments to report next month.
The response in support of earthquake recovery
efforts from a wide collection of donors, particularly
from the region, has been incredibly generous. The
Syria flash appeal is almost fully funded, with more than
$384 million in contributions reported. That support
for the three-month plan has been vital, particularly
in allowing the United Nations and its partners to
expand operations, reallocate stocks and sustain
emergency programmes.
But much more is needed. The Syria humanitarian
response plan remains severely underfunded, with only
$363 million received towards the $4.8 billion required
before the earthquake. That is less than 8 per cent of the
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

total requirements. The Brussels conference in June will
be a vital moment for Syria. Generous support from a
breadth of donors, as seen following the earthquake, is
needed now more than ever.
Almost three months removed from the earthquakes
of 6 February, the gravity of the wider humanitarian
situation in Syria has only become more evident, both
in its scope and complexity and the vulnerability of the
Syrian population. Sustained support — from donors,
authorities on the ground, Member States and the
Security Council — remains essential to keep pace with
the humanitarian needs of today, and even more so those
of tomorrow.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Doughten for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.
We are grateful to Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Director Lisa Doughten of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for their briefings on
the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
We continue to see no alternative to promoting a
political settlement process in Syria, one that is Syrianled and Syrian-owned, with the assistance of the United
Nations and strictly in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
In that context, we support Mr. Pedersen’s mediation
efforts to advance the Syrian settlement process in a
manner that respects the principles of the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic and without any outside interference.
At the same time, we consider it important that
Mr. Pedersen strictly adhere to the mandate enshrined
in the relevant Council resolution, at the heart of which
is facilitating intra-Syrian dialogue, including within the
framework of Constitutional Committee as the optimal
format for direct intra-Syrian dialogue. We firmly
believe that the difficulties that have arisen in connection
with a resumption of its work can, with political will, be
surmounted taking into account the interests of all Syrian
parties. The fact that there are unresolved technical
aspects related to a full resumption of the work of the
drafting committee should not become an excuse for any
passivity. At the same time, we believe that the principal
decisions on the parameters for further rounds inter-Syrian
consultations should be taken by the Syrians themselves.

S/PV.9313

Against that background, the situation remains
fraught with tension. There is the persistent threat of
a military operation in the north. There is an ongoing
illegal foreign military presence by the United States
and its allies in the trans-Euphrates and At-Tanf regions.
And we remain alarmed about the smouldering hotbeds
of terrorism, primarily in Idlib. We are troubled by the
intensification in Israeli air strikes on the territory of
Syria. Since the beginning of the year, more than 10
such attacks have been committed, as a result of which
Aleppo International Airport was twice disabled.
That is an airport through which humanitarian aid is
delivered to victims of the devastating earthquakes.
Similar military actions in violation of Syria’s
sovereignty and that of neighbouring Arab countries,
as well as the lack of any response from the leadership
of the United Nations, are a cause of deep regret
and condemnation.
Among the positive news, we note the accelerated
pace in the natural process of Syria returning to the
Arab family. With our assistance, there is ongoing
normalization of relations between Damascus and
Ankara by leveraging the benefits of the Astana
format. Together with our partners in the Astana
process — Iran and Türkiye — we intend to continue
to make a contribution to the achievement long-term
normalization in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Turning to humanitarian aspects of the situation in
the country, as we heard today, that remains extremely
difficult and continues to deteriorate. The consequences
of the earthquakes along the Syrian-Turkish border
have not yet been overcome. We cannot but note that
growing needs and problems endured by ordinary
Syrians across the country do not stop Western donors
seeking to politicize the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, using it as a tool to exert pressure on
Damascus, as well as undermining the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria. In practice, Western
aid and United Nations assistance is currently only
reaching areas not controlled by Damascus. Despite all
the tricks, Western countries cannot conceal that. The
numbers speak for themselves. The OCHA flash appeal
for the earthquakes is funded at 97 per cent, while
the traditional United Nations humanitarian plan for
Syria, designed to deliver assistance to Governmentheld territory, is only 8 per cent financed. However,
the United States, which, like its European partners,
has robbed Syria of its natural resources, misses no
opportunity to reiterate that unless a political transition

23-119665/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

has been set in motion it will not provide a cent to
aid Syria’s post-conflict recovery, lift sanctions or
ease the isolation of Damascus. Meanwhile, Westsponsored militants from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham are
openly undermining the cross-line convoys to Idlib and
demanding bribes for allowing their passage to those
in need. That kind of action is a direct challenge to the
international community and the Council. We cannot
accept the fact that despite the Security Council’s
consensus-based decisions, since August 2021 only
10 convoys have been dispatched to the de-escalation
zone, of which the most recent and so far the only one
this year was sent on 8 January. Apart from that there
have been three restricted missions to Tell Abyad. It
seems that in practice the permission that Damascus
granted the United Nations to use two additional border
crossings, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai, for three months
in addition to the permit for Bab Al-Hawa, whose
mandate will expire on 10 July, has ended enthusiasm at
the United Nations for unblocking cross-line deliveries.
We want to emphasize that, if our Western colleagues
on the Security Council continue to pretend that nothing
is happening and ignore the fact that internationally
listed terrorists are sabotaging the Council’s decisions,
we will draw the necessary conclusions and take
them into account when formulating our position in
the context of the upcoming renewal of the crossborder mechanism in July. The mechanism long ago
exhausted its potential and is certainly not serving
humanitarian goals, as was clearly evidenced by the
tragic events in February. Furthermore, the problems
created by the negative impact of Western sanctions
on the international humanitarian response in Syria
are worsening before our eyes. We continue to urge
the United Nations not to remain silent or to sweep
the issue under the rug but to evaluate it properly. At
the regular informal interactive dialogue on Syria
yesterday, we heard a number of examples of the direct
impact that unilateral sanctions have had on the lives of
ordinary people in Syria. That is why any claim by the
United States and its allies about the targeted nature of
sanctions and their allegedly effective exemptions will
sound particularly hypocritical today.
Considering the trends and facts we have
enumerated today, there can be no doubt that we are
nearing a moment of truth with regard to the provision
of humanitarian assistance in Syria. The double-dealing
of our Western colleagues and their attempts to use
humanitarian leverage as a tool for exerting pressure
6/19

27/04/2023

on Damascus have become too obvious for the United
Nations leadership to continue to ignore. It is time to
call a spade a spade. Without fair assessments and
genuine willingness on the part of the Security Council
to help all Syrians in need, there is little point in
striving to maintain the Council’s current parameters
for providing humanitarian aid to Syria. The choice is
up to our Western colleagues.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Director Doughten
for their briefings.
Thirteen years ago, Bashar Al-Assad responded to
peaceful protests with a brutal crackdown. His regime
has detained, tortured and murdered civilians, including
children, and has rejected diplomatic efforts to end a
war that has claimed more than 500,000 lives, destroyed
Syria’s economy and forced millions from their homes.
The Council and the international community have
an agreed pathway to ending the conflict, through
resolution 2254 (2015). Despite the diligent efforts of
the Special Envoy and his team, the Al-Assad regime
has refused direct negotiations and has undermined the
work of the Constitutional Committee for years. Russia
claims to support a Syrian-led political process, but has
thrown up additional roadblocks to the Constitutional
Committee for reasons that have nothing to do with
Syria or the Syrian people.
As a result of the lack of political progress, the Syrian
people continue to face immense challenges. More
than 130,000 Syrians are unaccounted for, languishing
in regime prisons or detention centres or missing and
believed murdered by the regime, terrorist groups such
as Da’esh or other parties to the conflict. Al-Assad’s
April 2022 amnesty, which we hoped would be followed
by additional releases, instead resulted in the release of
only 500 people, many of whom were emaciated, with
some having reportedly lost their memory or suffering
from trauma or mental illness, while others sustained
physical injuries. Since that release, the brutal practice
of the arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance
of innocent men, women and children has not stopped.
Syria continues to radiate instability to the broader
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9313

region. The regime has allowed Russia to use Syria as
a logistics node to export its destabilizing activities to
Africa and has flooded the region with illicit drugs.

for their valuable updates. The information they shared
makes it clear that the humanitarian situation in Syria
is dire, with needs more significant than ever.

Against that backdrop, the United States will not
normalize its relationship with Al-Assad, and we have
strongly discouraged others from doing so. We will not
lift our sanctions on Al-Assad or support reconstruction
absent genuine, comprehensive and enduring reforms
and progress on the political process. We renew our call
for a nationwide ceasefire and for the humane release of
the unjustly detained, as well as for clarification on the
fate of the missing, including those who are deceased,
and for the Al-Assad regime to finally engage in the
political process in good faith.

The protracted armed conflict in Syria has created
one of the most serious humanitarian crises of our time.
The effects of the earthquake have led to additional
suffering and trauma for civilians in Syria. It is
important to consider the long-term impact of a natural
disaster of great magnitude that will go well beyond the
scope of the initial emergency response. The increasing
food insecurity that is now affecting as many as
12 million people across Syria, and a growing inability
to maintain their livelihoods, makes the situation of
many Syrians even more challenging.

On the humanitarian front, the needs of the Syrian
people are at their greatest since the conflict began. As
we heard today, millions remain internally displaced
or have sought refuge in neighbouring countries or
further afield. We welcome reports that the United
Nations has scaled its cross-border operation back
up to pre-earthquake levels and that United Nations
assistance is once again reaching millions in northwestern Syria with food, health, shelter, water and
hygiene supplies transported across the border. Clearly,
that expanded access is having a positive impact on
the Syrian people. It remains clear that there is no
substitute for cross-border access. We are committed
to supporting the implementation of resolution 2672
(2023), including delivering assistance cross-line. We
urge all parties to remove the obstructions to cross-line
humanitarian deliveries to all parts of Syria.

The impact that the past 12 years have had on both
the water and health infrastructure of the country has
contributed to the outbreak of cholera in Syria, affecting
small children in particular. Limited access to water
and inadequate sanitation increases the risk of disease
outbreak. The erosion of the social and economic fabric
risks accelerating the collapse of critical infrastructure,
such as water systems, which could trigger further
public health issues. The earthquakes have added
another dimension of vulnerability to overburdened
communities. Overcrowding in inadequate shelters,
displacements and unequitable access to water and
health services are inhumane living conditions and
further contribute to increasing those risks.

Finally, the United States continues to reject any
suggestion that humanitarian assistance is being
blocked by United States sanctions. We maintain
robust humanitarian exceptions for those sanctions
and welcome good-faith discussions with the United
Nations and others to address any specific instances
in which humanitarian actors have been unable to
pursue humanitarian activities due to actions of the
United States.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I deliver this
statement on behalf of Brazil and Switzerland, as
co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian file.
I would first like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen
and Ms. Doughten, Director of the Humanitarian
Financing and Resource Mobilization Division in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,

In order for the United Nations and its partners to react
to and prevent such challenges, the funding of both the Syria
earthquake flash appeal and the country’s humanitarian
response plan for 2023 is crucial. It is important that all
pillars of the humanitarian response plan receive funding,
including the third pillar. Resilience and early-recovery
activities contribute to enhancing livelihoods and
increasing access to basic services. As clearly outlined
in the Secretary-General’s 60-day report (S/2023/284),
cross-border assistance remains an indispensable part
of ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
the most vulnerable. The measures introduced by the
Government of Syria in the aftermath of the earthquakes
have contributed to broader access, including on the part
of United Nations staff, to vulnerable populations. We
hope that expanded and facilitated access continues for
as long as necessary, in line with OCHA’s assessments.
Brazil and Switzerland reiterate the calls on all the
parties to facilitate timely, unimpeded and sustainable
access for humanitarian assistance. All modalities

23-119667/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

of aid, including cross-border and cross-line, are
necessary. In that regard, we welcome the improved
humanitarian access in north-west Syria, including
the opening of the two additional border crossings
and the high number of United Nations inter-agency
cross-border missions. Furthermore, we once again
recall that all the parties must abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law. That includes
taking concrete measures to prevent and minimize
the effects of armed conflict on the most vulnerable,
such as children. Without a political solution, there can
be no lasting peace in Syria and humanitarian needs
will remain prevalent. The international community
has a moral and humanitarian duty not to abandon the
Syrian people at a time of acute need. The Security
Council should place the well-being of the Syrian
people at the centre of its decisions and unite behind
the humanitarian imperative.
(spoke in French)
Let me add a few points on the political situation in
Syria in my national capacity.
As we just heard from Special Envoy Pedersen — and
I thank him for his briefing — resolution 2254 (2015)
remains relevant today. The efforts currently under way
in the region should focus above all on paving the way
for the Special Envoy to achieve a political solution that
will ensure peace and security in the country and in
the region, in accordance with the criteria defined in
resolution 2254 (2015). Switzerland supports the efforts
of the Special Envoy in that regard, and we also remain
ready to host any talks or initiatives in Geneva aimed
at promoting lasting peace in Syria. After more than
12 years of conflict and numerous violations of the
fundamental rights of Syrians, it is essential to enforce
a ceasefire at the national level. In all regions of the
country, the suffering of the population, in particular
children, is exacerbated by the continuation and
sometimes the resurgence of hostilities. In that respect,
Switzerland calls on the members of the Security
Council to remain united in their call for de-escalation.
There can be no lasting peace without justice.
In the face of the serious violations of international
law, Switzerland would like to reiterate its full
support for the Human Rights Council’s Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
8/19

27/04/2023

Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, whose
work is fundamental in the fight against impunity. The
commitment of all components of Syrian society is
also necessary to advance peace. In accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), Switzerland once again stresses
the importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of Syrian women in decisions that affect
their future, needs and aspirations. That includes their
involvement in political processes and all efforts to
resolve the conflict. In that regard, it is essential that
Syrian women be free from any fear of discrimination
or gender-based violence.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Director Lisa
Doughten for their briefings.
The political process in Syria is still at a deadlock.
Terrorists remain active inside Syria. Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen continues to work, under very difficult
circumstances, to reconvene the meetings of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee and encourage a
rapprochement between the parties based on the stepfor-step approach in order to build mutual trust. China
commends those efforts. No matter how long the conflict
lasts, it will ultimately require a political solution.
China encourages all the parties to actively cooperate
with the Special Envoy in the interests of the Syrian
people and make progress on the political track as soon
as possible. The recent positive interaction among Syria
and the countries of the region has sent a positive signal
to the wider international community. It is our hope
that such progress will inject new momentum into the
political process in Syria. The international community
must make joint efforts to combat Da’esh, Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, the East Turkestan Islamic MovementTurkistan Islamic Party and other terrorist groups in
Syria in order to reduce their scope of activities, control
their harmful effects and work together to put a stop to
any actions that condone, harbour or politically exploit
terrorist forces.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
dire. The international community should effectively
combine humanitarian assistance to Syria with postdisaster reconstruction efforts in order to promote
a fundamental improvement of the humanitarian
situation in the country. The cross-line mechanism
must be vigorously promoted. China commends the
Government of Syria’s simplification of the approval
process to facilitate cross-line deliveries. We urge
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

those in actual control of north-west Syria to stop
creating hurdles to hinder cross-line operations.
Sufficient humanitarian assistance must be ensured.
In the face of disasters, humanitarian input should and
must be scaled up — not scaled down. We call on the
international community to provide adequate financial
support for the humanitarian emergency response plan
for Syria. Early-recovery projects must be promoted
and implemented in a coordinated manner, and it is
incumbent on the Secretariat to consult closely with all
the parties and actively draw up plans.
Over the past month, at least 115 Syrian civilians
have been killed by explosive remnants of war, and the
relevant work in that regard should be incorporated
into the scope of early recovery as soon as possible.
Illegal unilateral sanctions must be fully lifted. The
countries concerned announced a temporary easing or
suspension of unilateral sanctions against Syria in the
aftermath of the earthquake. However, that adjustment
cannot conceal the systemic damage caused by the
long-term unilateral sanctions. The relevant countries
should immediately and unconditionally lift the illegal
unilateral sanctions against Syria so as not to exacerbate
the humanitarian disaster.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Lisa Doughten
for their helpful briefings. Let me also commend the
work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations in the particularly challenging
circumstances that have prevailed in recent months.
The earthquakes in February exacerbated the dire
humanitarian situation and added further complexity to
operations in the north-west. Meanwhile, as the Special
Envoy outlined, the conflict continues. Between
6 February and 10 April, ground-based attacks by the
Syrian regime and its allies were conducted near the
camps where earthquake victims are taking shelter.
A school, medical facilities, markets and places of
worship were hit.
It is clear what humanitarians need to operate:
regular and predictable humanitarian access through all
modalities and to all Syrians. Ms. Doughten’s briefing
underlined that point. Not knowing if the border
crossings at Bab Al-Rai and Bab Al-Salam will remain
open beyond next month undermines humanitarians’
ability to plan and operate safely. The people who pay
the price are the Syrians who need their help. I want to

S/PV.9313

make it clear that the Council must be ready to act to
ensure that humanitarians have access to all Syrians,
including the 4.1 million people in north-west Syria.
As we have said many times, and will say again
today, a political solution is key to ending the suffering
of the Syrian people. Resolution 2254 (2015) remains
the cornerstone of a future peaceful Syria that does
not destabilize the wider region. Without a ceasefire,
Syrians will not be able to rebuild their lives. Without
national reconciliation and commitments on the release
of detainees, refugees will not be assured of a safe
return to their country. Without information on missing
persons, families will forever suffer from not knowing
what happened to their loved ones. Those elements
represent a pathway towards a sustainable peace. We
welcome meaningful efforts to advance that, and we
urge the regime to engage immediately and in good faith.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Doughten for their briefings. I
would like to stress two points.
The only thing that will put an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people is a political solution to the conflict
in Syria. As we repeat every month, the war in Syria is
still not over. That is why France calls for an immediate
national ceasefire and reminds the Council that strikes
on civilian infrastructure are a violation of international
law. Implementing the provisions of resolution 2254
(2015) would make it possible to build the foundations
for a lasting peace. However, that road map has been
ignored by the regime and its allies. The regime refuses
to engage in good faith in a United Nations-led political
process, while the Constitutional Committee has been
held hostage by Russia and has not met for almost a
year. Against that backdrop of deliberate obstruction,
France reiterates its full support for the mediation
efforts led by Special Envoy Pedersen.
In view of the seriousness of the crimes committed
in Syria, France will continue its fight against impunity.
Those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity must be held accountable for their actions. The
United Nations has widely documented the systematic
practice of sexual violence in the regime’s prisons and
detention centres, which is just one example of the
regime’s brutality. The European sanctions are aimed
at hindering the perpetrators’ room to manoeuvre.
The drive for normalization that has begun
since the recent earthquake will not stabilize Syria
in a sustainable way. In the absence of a political

23-119669/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

process, Syria will continue to destabilize the region,
and corruption, terrorism, the drug Captagon and
the impossibility of returning refugees will remain
realities. That is why the European Union recently
adopted new sanctions targeting individuals and
entities involved in trafficking Captagon. The lack
of prospects is unacceptable to the Syrian people, the
States of the region and the international community
as a whole. We will therefore continue to be demanding
where the political process is concerned, which means
that the regime must take tangible action to launch a
genuine process.
To be clear, meeting the humanitarian needs of
Syrians is a moral imperative, but it does not constitute
a political solution. As it has been for the past 12
years, France is mobilized to support and assist the
Syrian people. We have donated €26 million since the
earthquake, in addition to the 40 tons of emergency
equipment that we have shipped. The 6 February
earthquakes further complicated an already dire
situation, and we must now deal with that new reality.
It will be essential to ensure the delivery of aid by all
available means. The earthquake demonstrated the need
for multiple cross-border access points, but thanks to
the nature of the regime, the difficulty of humanitarian
operations in Syria continues. The delivery of aid
through the cross-border mechanism and cross-line
convoys remains a dual necessity, and France deplores
the cessation of the cross-line convoys since the end of
January. The brutality of the past 12 years of repression
has caused the largest population displacement of the
twenty-first century. The 12 million displaced persons
and refugees aspire to return to their homes in Syria
once the necessary conditions are in place, but that is
still not the case.
The international response to the earthquake
cannot eliminate the reality. The responsibilities
cannot be turned back. The humanitarian situation in
Syria is catastrophic primarily because the regime has
committed massive crimes against its population.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Ms. Doughten for their briefings.
The Syrian people have just entered the thirteenth
year of their descent into deeper despair, destitution
and destruction, without an end in sight. The magnitude
of the humanitarian catastrophe that has befallen them
is simply unimaginable. The disastrous earthquakes
and flooding and the ongoing violence only magnify
10/19

27/04/2023

the endless misery. In such unbearable adversity, the
people of Syria should be able to count on our empathy
and commitment to putting their plight at the heart of
our deliberations. It is never justifiable to politicize
humanitarian aid and access to those in dire need. Aid
must be people-centred and needs-based. It is in that
spirit that we support uninhibited humanitarian access
to all those in need across the Syrian territory. Needs
must determine access. The reopening of the Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai crossings is a welcome measure
aimed at meeting the ever-growing needs, and they
must be kept open for as long as necessary. We reiterate
our position that aid must reach those in need through
all modalities, including cross-line and cross-border
assistance. We count on the Council to find the resolve
and unity to ensure that all impediments to aid are
removed. We will continue to work constructively with
all to ensure that the Council renews the cross-border
mechanism in July.
The Syrian people find themselves in this
intolerable situation because of the Syrian regime and
its allies, which are responsible for gross violations
of human rights, including by deliberately targeting
civilians. We, the international community, must renew
our efforts to end the violence. We call on the Al-Assad
regime to halt its indiscriminate air strikes and shelling
of civilians once and for all, and to respect international
humanitarian law.
We need to continue our quest for a lasting and
comprehensive political solution in Syria and to
pave a path towards a genuine and inclusive political
transition, with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and civil society, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). We fully support the efforts
of Special Envoy Pedersen to implement that Council
resolution in full, including his step-for-step approach
in furthering the political process and resuming the
work of the Constitutional Committee. There is a
need for coordinated and sustained diplomacy at the
regional and global levels in order to move the political
process forward.
The political transition to a democratic Syria
cannot happen without transitional justice and full
accountability for all the gross violations committed
against the Syrian people. Without justice, the
possibility of peace, democracy and prosperity
remains a mere illusion. If we condone impunity, we
jeopardize the future of Syria. That is why we support
all efforts and mechanisms aimed at ending impunity
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and delivering justice, including the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the creation of a new body to clarify the fate
of missing persons.
We strongly support the Council’s referral of Syria
to the International Criminal Court to investigate the
atrocities committed there. Our response to the legitimate
demands of the Syrian people for justice and dignity is a
test of our determination, as the international community,
to uphold basic norms and principles. We must renew the
faith of the Syrian people in the international community
and redouble our efforts to meet their aspirations with
concrete action, starting from within the Council.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Lisa
Doughten for their important briefings.
The political situation has long failed to show any
signs of diplomatic progress that would suggest the
possibility of ending the Syrian crisis, which has entered
its thirteenth year. We therefore stress the need to step
up efforts in order to overcome the current stalemate
on the political track in a way that maintains Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. In
that context, the United Arab Emirates believes that Arab
diplomacy can make important contributions to ending
the Syrian and other Arab crises. Accordingly, we stress
the outcomes of the final statement of the consultative
meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Egypt, Jordan
and Iraq, held in Jeddah this month, which reaffirms that
a political solution is the only way to overcome the Syrian
crisis and underlines the need for Arab leadership’s role
in all efforts to that end. That includes establishing the
necessary mechanisms and intensifying consultations
among Arab States to ensure the success of such efforts.
We appreciate the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and its initiative to hold that important meeting.
We also stress the importance of supporting
international efforts and the work of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria. At the same time,
we reaffirm the need to end the paralysis that has been
imposed on the Constitutional Committee in the recent
past. The Committee is the only platform for conducting
a constructive, national, Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
dialogue, without external interference or imposition,
in order to advance the constitutional process. In

S/PV.9313

conjunction with the efforts made at the political level,
it is imperative to continue to address security gaps in
order to create an environment conducive to restoring
stability. That includes countering terrorism, especially
as terrorist groups continue to launch attacks, as we
recently saw in the countryside of Deir ez-Zor and
Hama. A comprehensive national ceasefire must also
be achieved throughout all regions in Syria, and foreign
interference in the country must end.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we believe
that, despite its importance, urgent relief assistance
has proven to be insufficient for improving the acute
humanitarian crisis in Syria, because it is a temporary
and unsustainable solution. Work must be done to find
radically different and long-term solutions, especially
given the grave impacts on the Syrian people of the
6 February earthquake. Above all, it is essential not
to politicize the humanitarian situation and to support
projects aimed at the rehabilitation and reconstruction
of infrastructure and public utilities. Syrians deserve
to live in dignity and have access to essential services,
such as drinking water, electricity and health care. We
note that hundreds of thousands of Syrians live in tents
that lack the most basic necessities and are unreliable
in difficult weather conditions. From that standpoint
and in the context of the humanitarian efforts of the
United Arab Emirates to support the recovery and
rehabilitation phase, we have started a project to equip
1,000 prefabricated housing units to accommodate
almost 6,000 earthquake-affected Syrians located across
seven areas in Latakia governorate.
As we continue to explore sustainable ways to
respond to the growing humanitarian needs, we stress
the need to reach all earthquake-affected areas by
all suitable routes. It is regrettable that cross-line
assistance has not been delivered to north-west Syria
since the earthquake occurred, owing to terrorist
groups’ arbitrary obstruction, in blatant disregard
of humanitarian values and principles, which has
exacerbated the suffering of civilians. We stress the
need to work to ensure that cross-line assistance reaches
those in need without hindrance, in accordance with
resolution 2672 (2023). We also stress the need to make
every possible effort to facilitate the voluntary return of
Syrian refugees to their homeland safely and securely,
as well as in dignity and honour. We also highlight that
it is imperative to respond to their humanitarian needs
and take that into account during the implementation
of early-recovery and reconstruction projects.

23-1196611/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, it is urgent to make efforts at many
levels so that the Syrian people can overcome their
challenging humanitarian ordeal — which has gone on
for more than 12 years — return to their normal lives
and resume their historic role of enriching Arab culture
and civilization.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Director Doughten for their remarks today.
As we just heard, the people of Syria continue to
grapple with a multitude of complex humanitarian,
protection and political crises. Such levels of needs
are a stark reminder of the urgent need for real and
just political progress in Syria. In the aftermath of the
Türkiye-Syria earthquake in February, the immediate
humanitarian needs have also given way to new and
compounded protection needs. Examples of that can be
found in the collective shelters that were rapidly set up to
support families who lost their homes. According to the
assessments carried out in Syria by the protection sector
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, overcrowding, the limited availability of
safe spaces and the inadequate distribution of water,
sanitation facilities and hygiene supplies have increased
exposure to gender-based violence. Respondents
also reported acute psychological stress and trauma
since the earthquakes, which are especially prevalent
among children, who exhibit unusual levels of crying,
sadness, nightmares and fear of loud noises. While we
understand the enormous scale of current needs, we
call on the United Nations and all its implementation
partners to ensure adequate and appropriate shelter for
women and children, who require their own specific
privacy and protection needs.
Within the context of the unfolding tragedy, we are
once again dismayed to hear of continued shelling and
air strikes in the north-east and north-west of Syria,
which have led to further civilian deaths. Malta was
also gravely disturbed by the brutal murders of more
than 30 civilians in Hama governorate on 16 April,
which were attributed to Da’esh. That incident is yet
another grim reminder of the dangers that ordinary
civilians in Syria face on a daily basis. Malta once
again underscores the importance of rapid, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all those who need
it in Syria, including those in the Rukban camp. We are
pleased to see the sustained delivery of humanitarian
assistance through Bab Al-Hawa, supported by the
recently authorized crossings at Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai. It is essential that those crossings remain open
12/19

27/04/2023

and be renewed and that the flow of the life-saving and
life-sustaining aid that passes through them remain
free from impediments.
In that regard, we also express our desire to see
an increase in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
through the United Nations cross-line plan into the
north-east and the north-west. We regret that no
missions to the north-west have been conducted since
our previous meeting (see S/PV.9291). We call on
all parties and those who have influence on them to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid through
all modalities in Syria. Despite more than a decade
of war, no one group can resolve the conflict alone.
Malta once again underscores the importance of
political progress in Syria in line with resolution 2254
(2015). Such progress must include the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women. Credible, inclusive
and sustainable political transition is what is needed
now more than ever. There is no military solution to
this conflict.
We remain convinced that actions moving forward
must also be rooted in the concept of a just peace. In this
regard, Malta reiterates its support for accountability
and transitional justice based on due process when it
comes to those who have committed grave violations
of international law. We call again on the parties to
reconvene the work of the Constitutional Committee in
Geneva. The millions of Syrians who seek and deserve
peace must be placed at the centre of politics.
Information on the whereabouts and fate of the
missing remains critical. It is within the power of the
parties to meaningfully make progress on the transparent
and verifiable release of those arbitrarily detained in
Syria and give information on the whereabouts and fate
of the missing. Such steps would help alleviate the pain
and suffering felt by thousands of families desperate to
know what has become of their loved ones.
To conclude, the people of Syria require simultaneous
political progress and humanitarian certainty. We in the
Security Council have a responsibility to do our part in
supporting that, just as the parties on the ground have a
responsibility to do theirs.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to make this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council (A3), namely, Ghana, Mozambique
and my own country, Gabon.
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and the Director of the
Humanitarian Finance and Resource Mobilization
Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Lisa Doughten, for their
enlightening briefings.
We welcome the participation of the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and the Republic of Türkiye at today’s meeting.
Since 6 February, Syria, which had already been
facing 12 years of conflict, descended into unspeakable
chaos when it was hit, along with neighbouring
Türkiye, by several earthquakes and aftershocks.
The toll is extremely heavy, with loss of human lives,
suffering and destruction of infrastructure. In Syria,
6,000 people died, with tens of thousands injured and
350,000 internally displaced, not counting the massive
damage caused to infrastructure, which the World Bank
estimates to be $5.2 billion.
The ongoing humanitarian crisis has affected the
ability of Syrians to meet their immediate food needs
and maintain their livelihoods, with approximately
12.1 million people facing acute food insecurity.
Reliable access to safe and sufficient water throughout
northern Syrian Arab Republic remains a challenge,
all against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease and
cholera pandemics.
We would like to salute the unwavering
commitment on the ground of the United Nations and
its partners alongside the Syrians. The international
community’s mobilization is not to be outdone, with
the international donor conference held in Brussels on
20 March, in support of the populations of Syria and
Türkiye. Nonetheless, we call for broader support for
the Syrian humanitarian response plan, including for
early recovery and livelihoods, which unfortunately
remains underfunded.
(spoke in French)
The A3 is concerned about the continuing hostilities
in Syria, despite the additional suffering triggered by
the earthquake and the numerous calls for a ceasefire
throughout the country. In northern Syria, hostilities
continue to exacerbate the suffering of civilians,
exposing them to death, injury and displacement.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, a total of 58 civilians,
including four women and eight children, have been

S/PV.9313

killed as a result of the hostilities. In addition, at least
33 civilians, including eight women and seven children,
were injured.
We therefore reiterate our call on all parties to the
conflict to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including ensuring that civilians and
civilian objects are consistently spared in the conduct
of their military operations. At the same time, we call
on all States with influence over the parties to the
conflict to convince them to ensure the protection of
civilians in Syria.
We also reiterate our call for an immediate ceasefire
in Syria to facilitate the delivery of aid to victims. We
urge all parties to put aside their differences at this time,
when humanitarian need and urgency must prevail. For
the A3, access to emergency relief is the cornerstone of
the mobilization. Accordingly, we welcome, once again,
the decision of the Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad to
authorize the opening of the two new crossings, at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai, for a period of three months, in
addition to the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. We hope that
in July 2023, given the highly elevated humanitarian
stakes on the ground, the Syrian Government will
authorize the extension of the cross-border delivery, in
cooperation with the United Nations, of humanitarian
aid to reach all those in need. We note with interest
that, following the opening of the two additional border
crossings, humanitarian access to north-western Syria
has improved. Some 47 inter-agency cross-border
missions have been carried out by the United Nations
in north-western Syria since 14 February.
It is important to address the issue of detainees,
including facilitating the release of such vulnerable
detained groups as the elderly, women and children.
Clarifying the status of missing persons would also be
an important confidence-building measure. Progress
in this area will further contribute positively to
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen’s progressive approach
to the political track. Furthermore, while noting the
recent introduction of permanent earthquake-related
exemptions in several unilateral sanctions regimes, we
reiterate our call for the lifting of these sanctions so as not
to impede relief efforts for the Syrian population in need.
Mozambique, Ghana, and Gabon believe that the
parties to the conflict must seize the momentum of
support and attention generated by the earthquakes to
engage in a political process to resolve the fundamental
issues that fuel the conflict in Syria. This means engaging

23-1196613/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

in the path of Syrian-Syrian dialogue in an inclusive
manner under the auspices of Special Envoy Pedersen,
with a view to a comprehensive settlement of the Syrian
crisis in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
We closely follow Special Envoy Pedersen’s
consultations with civil society, including women, as
an essential component of the political process and the
building of a lasting peace. We encourage the Syrian
Government to develop legislative and policy measures
to ensure gender equality, and we call for respect for
the human rights of women and girls by all parties.
In conclusion, the A3 calls on all stakeholders
and the international community as a whole to act
within a strictly humanitarian framework, far from any
politicization, in the interest of the Syrian people.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen
and Ms. Doughten for their insightful briefings.
The Syrian crisis is now entering its thirteenth
year while the devastation stemming from February’s
earthquakes continues. The plight of the people of
Syria, living amid cholera and lacking shelter, water,
and electricity, remains desperate.
The opening of the two additional border crossings
of Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai since February, in addition
to Bab Al-Hawa crossing, has been a lifeline for
delivering emergency aid to the affected areas. Still,
the scale and lingering effects of the disaster means
greater international support is urgently needed.
The initial three-month period for those two
additional crossings agreed between the United Nations
and the Syrian Government will expire in mid-May.
Given that the majority of people in north-west Syria
are utterly dependent on United Nations assistance, we
strongly appeal to the Syrian Government to extend
its decision.
This month, Japan hosted the Group of Seven
Foreign Ministers’ meeting, where we reaffirmed
our continued support for the earthquake victims and
stressed the importance of unhindered humanitarian aid.
The recent visit of our colleague Mr. Miyake, Special
Coordinator for Syria, to Aleppo with the support of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme, gave
us first-hand experience of the dire conditions on the
ground. We call on international donors to engage more
with Syria’s humanitarian response plan in addition to
the United Nations flash appeal.
14/19

27/04/2023

Only a political settlement can truly resolve the
Syrian crisis, and Japan remains committed to the
process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). We therefore
regret that the political track remains stalled with
no resolution in sight. We urge all relevant parties to
constructively engage with the step-for-step approach
of Special Envoy Pedersen. We are also concerned that
the Constitutional Committee has not been convened
in almost a year. That body is an important platform
to achieve a comprehensive political solution, and it
should not be undermined for any political reasons
unrelated to Syria.
Finally, the issue of more than 100,000 missing
Syrians remains a key concern. Japan is grateful for
the Special Envoy’s continued prioritization of this file,
including his engagement with the Syrian Government.
We also appreciate the Secretary-General’s report
(A/76/890) proposing to establish a new body through
the General Assembly to clarify the fate of the missing
and to provide adequate support to victims, survivors
and the families of those missing, and we will
constructively engage on that proposal.
There is no magic wand to solve the Syrian crisis,
but we must seek to aid those in need while building
trust among the parties to finally achieve a political
resolution. The Security Council must send a strong
and united message that it will not abandon the
Syrian people.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks
Special Envoy Pedersen and Director of Humanitarian
Financing and Resource Mobilization Division of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Ms. Lisa Doughten for their informative briefings
and updates.
On the humanitarian file, Brazil aligns itself
with the intervention delivered by the representative
of Switzerland in the name of the co-penholders. I
will now speak in my national capacity regarding the
political aspects of the conflict.
Brazil remains deeply concerned about the
overall situation in Syria. We are appalled by the
fact that hostilities continue, especially in the northeast, causing suffering to civilians, exposing them to
death and injury and further displacement even in the
immediate aftermath of the earthquake. Brazil echoes
the Secretary-General’s calls on parties to exercise
maximum restraint, respect Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and maintain the agreed-upon
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

ceasefires. All attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure must immediately cease in accordance
with international humanitarian law.
As the Secretary-General points out in his most
recent report, the situation in Al-Hol and other camps
in the north-east of Syria remain tragic. We echo, in
that regard, the Secretary-General’s call to support the
voluntary return of residents of those camps to areas of
their choosing in safety and dignity.
Brazil firmly believes that only a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process will lead to a lasting political
resolution to this long-lasting conflict. Resolution
2254 (2015) provides a road map that could pave the
way to sustainable peace, restoring Syria’s unity and
sovereignty. We thank the Special Envoy for the efforts
put forward to promote the implementation of its
provisions, including the continuous engagement with
key stakeholders.
Re-establishing the path for genuine dialogue
among the parties is key and that includes reconvening
the small body of the Constitutional Committee. Brazil,
nonetheless, agrees with Mr. Pedersen’s assessment
that counting formal meetings is not enough. We need
renewed political will. If the small body resumes its
activities it should be to genuinely engage in bridging
differences and working towards results conducive to
peace, stability and reconciliation. Concrete outcomes
are long awaited. We note with appreciation that the
Special Envoy continues to promote Syrian-Syrian
dialogue through the Women’s Advisory Board and the
Syrian Civil Society Support Room.
In his most recent report (S/2023/284), the
Secretary-General expresses the hope that the support
and attention in the aftermath of the earthquakes
be channelled into renewed energy and meaningful
progress on the political track to address the fundamental
issues driving the conflict. That is also our hope. Brazil
believes that the collaboration seen in the aftermath of
the earthquakes, including within the regional arena,
demonstrates that a way forward is possible. We expect
that the current dynamics in the region will contribute
positively to Syria’s stability.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the information provided by
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and by Director of the
Humanitarian Financing and Resource Mobilization
Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs Ms. Lisa Doughten.

S/PV.9313

As predicted, the humanitarian situation in Syria
continues to deteriorate dramatically. The prolonged
war and the effects of the earthquakes have left
8.8 million people affected in a multidimensional crisis
situation, the costs of which amount to $5.2 trillion,
according to the World Bank.
In this complex scenario, in which we are seeing
an increase in cholera cases, a crisis over access to safe
water sources and the collapse of health-care services,
my delegation recognizes and supports the work of
Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations teams
on the ground to continue assisting the Syrian people
who depend on humanitarian support to survive.
We commend the results of the earthquake response
plan, thanks to which schools have been reopened,
debris has been removed from densely populated areas,
emergency shelters have been set up and interventions
to ensure the water supply and sanitation have been
carried out, in addition to the early-recovery projects,
which promote the re-establishment of productive
activities through the opening of small businesses.
However, we are concerned about the high number
of people who have been forced to move throughout
Syria. It is estimated that 350,000 Syrians do not have
a permanent place to live. The risks and threats for
those in a situation of human mobility, particularly
women and unaccompanied children, are one of the
greatest challenges.
We also see a growing number of people facing
food insecurity, escalating prices of basic necessities,
the lack of decent employment and hopelessness about
the real prospects of creating conditions conducive to
a political solution to the conflict, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).
We join the Secretary-General’s call for the Syrian
Government to provide urgent answers on the fate of
approximately 100,000 missing persons.
Ecuador stresses the urgent need to ensure that
existing mechanisms can carry out exhaustive,
independent and impartial investigations into violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law so
that the responsible parties are prosecuted before the
competent entities.
My delegation deplores that security incidents
continue to be recorded amid this precarious situation
for the civilian population. Such incidents include air
strikes, detonations of improvised explosive devices,

23-1196615/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

selective assassinations, kidnappings, bombings and
attacks on checkpoints, all of which threaten the life
and security of civilians and strategic infrastructure
and are contrary to the provisions of international
humanitarian law.
Ecuador urges the parties to establish a definitive
ceasefire in all regions of the country, thus allowing
untrammelled humanitarian assistance to those who
need it most. We also hope that the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai border crossings will remain open indefinitely
in order to guarantee the permanent distribution of
humanitarian aid through all possible means.
My delegation once again reaffirms its commitment
to support the initiatives of the Security Council that
contribute to the settlement of the grave situation of
the Syrian population. The political will of the Syrian
Government and the commitment of the countries of
the region and the international community, as a whole,
are indispensable to start the path towards sustainable
peace and the improvement of living conditions in
that country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Doughten for
their briefings.
At a time when the Syrian people are struggling to
face the difficult and complex humanitarian situation
and the repercussions of the devastating earthquake
that hit Syria on 6 February, the Israeli occupation
forces have intensified their attacks on the sovereignty
of Syrian territories over the past weeks and days.
American forces illegally present in the north-east of
the country have persisted in their attacks on Syrian
sovereignty and the looting of Syrian resources and
wealth. In addition, various terrorist groups continue
to attack civilians, thus preventing humanitarian
assistance from reaching our people in the affected
areas in the north-west of Syria. Moreover, measures of
economic terrorism and collective punishment continue
to be imposed on the Syrian people as a result of illegal
unilateral measures that prevent the improvement of
the humanitarian situation and the fulfilment of the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people.
In the spirit of Syria’s commitment to forging
brotherly relations with Arab countries, Syria is working
to strengthen its relations with them. This serves an
Arab and regional interest and plays a necessary role in
16/19

27/04/2023

supporting and helping the Syrian people to overcome
the current challenges, including restoring stability
throughout Syria and liberating all of its lands.
Syria has sought to engage in a process that would
lead to joint Arab action. It has sought to strengthen its
bilateral relations with brotherly Arab States. To that
end, the President of the Republic made important visits
to the Sultanate of Oman and the United Arab Emirates.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
and other Syrian officials also made work visits to
Egypt, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Algeria and
Tunisia, during which they discussed unifying Arab
efforts made to reach a political solution to the crises
facing our peoples in a manner that preserves their
unity and territorial integrity and supports their State
institutions. During those visits, the importance of
enhancing security and stability, combating terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and enhancing
cooperation in countering drug smuggling and
trafficking was also emphasized.
Israel has continued its attacks on Syrian
territories, which have affected residential buildings,
civilian airports and infrastructure in and around
Damascus, the southern region, Aleppo, Homs and its
countryside. This has led to innocent civilian deaths,
injuries and significant material damage. And in a
clear coincidence, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) terrorist organization has continued to
repeatedly target unarmed civilians. It launched an
attack on the people in the eastern countryside of Hama
while they were collecting the truffle crop, during
which 26 citizens were killed.
Those simultaneous and coordinated attacks
reveal similarities between ISIS terrorism and Israeli
terrorism and prove that they are two sides of the same
coin, aiming — beyond a doubt — to prolong the Syrian
crisis and deplete Syria’s resources.
The Syrian Arab Republic once again warns Israel
and its sponsors of the dangers of these reckless policies,
which are pushing the region towards a large-scale
escalation and another phase of insecurity and
instability. It calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities in condemning those violations, working
to stop them, ensuring that they are not repeated and
holding Israel accountable for them.
In a related context, the forces of the United States of
America, illegally present on Syrian territory, launched
an attack on some areas in Deir ez-Zor governorate, which
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

led to several victims and material damage. This is a
true embodiment of the crime of aggression, from which
various other crimes and violations stem — committed
by those forces against Syria and its people. Any pretexts
used by the United States Administration in that regard
are a failed attempt to justify its flagrant violation of the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, the
Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international
law and relevant Security Council resolutions.
My country renews its call on the United States
to stop its hostile approach against Syria, to end its
illegal military presence on Syrian territory, to end its
sponsorship of terrorist entities and separatist groups
and to stop its systematic looting of natural resources
and national wealth.
Syria calls on the Security Council to condemn all
forms of violations of the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
and interference in its internal affairs, including repeated
attempts to infiltrate Syrian territory by delegations
of Western States, some of which are members of the
Security Council. The most recent such attempt was
the illegal infiltration by a number of French senators,
on 31 March 2023, of the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic in the north-eastern region of the country.
It is an example that reflects the colonial mentality of
Europe generally and of France specifically. It is a
flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and a
clear violation of relevant Security Council resolutions.
The efforts made by Syria to deliver cross-line
humanitarian assistance to all those in need, including
our people in the north-west, especially following the
earthquake, have faced a major challenge, as terrorist
organizations present in that region refused the passage
of assistance convoys. In addition, they attacked safe
areas and Syrian forces present in the de-escalation
zone. What is unfortunate is the suspicious silence and
paralysis shown by the Security Council in the face of
all these practices. The Syrian Arab Republic has made
exceptional efforts to deal with the repercussions of the
earthquake, including the opening of two additional
border crossings, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai, by a
sovereign decision, for a period of three months to
ensure the flow and delivery of urgent humanitarian
assistance to our people in the north-west of Syria. It has
provided blanket approvals for the delivery of assistance
from within, in addition to granting visas at a record
speed to allow United Nations staff and humanitarian
workers to enter to perform the tasks assigned to them.

S/PV.9313

However, the humanitarian response to the
repercussions of the earthquake is much more complex
and is broader than simply meeting the urgent needs of
those affected. Therefore, it is important to intensify
efforts and to take real initiatives to expand the scope
of humanitarian activities, including by doubling the
size of early-recovery projects. Yesterday, the Syrian
Government adopted a comprehensive plan to deal with
the repercussions of the earthquake, aiming at unifying
the efforts of State institutions, civil society actors and
international organizations to rehabilitate the affected
areas. The national work plan is human-centred and
seeks to ensure the conditions for a life of dignity.
Illegal unilateral coercive measures imposed by the
United States and the European Union on Syria continue
to represent a growing challenge to improving the
humanitarian situation and represent a tool of collective
punishment against the Syrian people. The talk, by
those States, about a partial and temporary suspension
is a propaganda attempt to mitigate the pressure and
criticism directed at them. The complexities of the
sanctions regimes do not help dispel the uncertainty
of Member States, humanitarian actors, donors or
financial institutions that may wish to engage in the
process of providing assistance to Syria. Therefore,
these exceptions are not tools that are adequate or
sufficient to respond to humanitarian needs, especially
in emergency situations and natural disasters, which
require a more comprehensive response.
Syria demands that the United States of America and
the European Union respect the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and human
rights instruments and immediately and unconditionally
lift their illegal coercive measures imposed on it.
Before I conclude my statement, I would like to refer
to the continued attempts by some States to interfere in
the internal affairs of Syria. The most recent attempt
was an attempt made by a group of States seeking to
impose a new, politicized mechanism. Those States
are claiming that this mechanism would clarify the
fate of missing persons in Syria. They are relying on
lies propagated by the United States and their Western
allies. My country has expressed its rejection of the
establishment of any mechanism that does not serve
the best interests of the Syrian people and without the
consent of the Syrian Government.
Syria affirms that it will continue to play its national
role in searching for persons who went missing at the
hands of terrorist groups or as the result of the crimes

23-1196617/19

S/PV.9313

The situation in the Middle East

27/04/2023

and attacks of American forces and their allies illegally
present on Syrian territory. It will also continue its
engagement in the Astana format, which includes a
special focus on the issue of missing persons.

commitment to assisting the United Nations and other
international organizations by providing facilities to aid
in the delivery of relief and support to areas affected
by crises.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Islamic Republic of Iran.

In a sovereign decision, the Syrian Arab Republic
has opened two additional border crossings to facilitate
the humanitarian response in areas impacted by the
conflict, including those under the control of terrorist
organizations. The Secretary-General’s report indicates
that the opening of these two additional border crossings
has improved humanitarian access to north-west Syria.
We appreciate these efforts and call on all parties to
continue working towards ensuring safe, timely and
effective humanitarian access to all those in need.

Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Doughten for their updates and
informative briefings on the most recent situation
on Syria.
Despite the diligent efforts of the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations, the humanitarian
situation in Syria remains challenging, particularly after
the 6 February earthquake, as highlighted in today’s
briefings. We are concerned about the current level of
funding of the Syrian humanitarian response. According
to the most recent United Nations report, as of 20 March,
only 5.6 per cent of the total funding requirement for
2023 has been received.
The provision of impartial and non-politicized
humanitarian assistance to all regions of Syria is
crucial for saving lives. However, it is also essential
to plan humanitarian assistance in a way that helps
restore infrastructure, rebuild and strengthen the
Syrian economy, and support sustainable, long-term
development in the country. The continued imposition
of unilateral sanctions is a major obstacle to improving
the humanitarian and economic situation in Syria.
These illegal measures have had a detrimental impact
on the economy and living standards of the people and
have limited the Government’s ability to provide basic
services. The recent earthquake in Syria has made it
even more critical to lift these unjust measures.
We reiterate our call for the full and balanced
implementation of resolution 2672 (2023) and stress the
importance of focusing on early-recovery projects to
meet the urgent needs of all Syrians affected by the crisis.
Also, significant efforts are required to enhance crossline delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria, as emphasized
in the resolution. Despite the importance of increasing
cross-line delivery, the United Nations report shows that
no progress has been made in cross-line relief operations,
particularly in north-west Syria, where affected areas are
under the control of terrorist organizations.
We emphasize that any assistance mechanism should
be delivered in coordination with the Syrian Government
and with full respect for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We commend the Syrian Government for its
18/19

We are steadfast in our support of the Special Envoy’s
efforts and his active engagement with all parties. We
support the resumption of the Constitutional Committee
meetings at the earliest opportunity to continue the
progress made toward resolving the crisis.
Iran, along with its Astana format partners, is
committed to working towards long-term and sustainable
normalization in and around Syria. We express our
support for the continuation of the Syrian-Turkish
dialogue as part of this effort. Iran also supports efforts
and cooperation within the Astana format to reveal the
fate of missing persons. It is also of utmost importance
to make every possible effort to facilitate the safe and
dignified return of Syrian refugees to their homeland and
to meet their humanitarian needs.
The illegal presence of foreign military forces,
including the United States forces in Syria, constitutes a
blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and is the primary source of insecurity
in the country. We call for the immediate and complete
withdrawal of these unlawful forces, which is essential
to creating a conducive environment for resolving the
crisis and restoring peace and stability in the region.
We welcome improvement of Syria’s diplomatic
relations within the region and beyond, especially
with our brotherly Arab countries, to ensure Syria’s
security, stability and prosperity. Strengthening these
relationships can also facilitate the safe and sustainable
return of refugees and internally displaced persons. We
are committed to supporting these efforts.
In conclusion, we strongly condemn once more the
ongoing violations of Syrian sovereignty and territorial
integrity by the Israeli regime through its continued
aggressions and terrorist attacks. These attacks have
23-11966

27/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East

caused significant harm to Syrian civilians and critical
infrastructure. The Security Council must abandon its
double standard and respond constructively to Syria’s
repeated appeals for action to put an end to these acts
of aggression.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I too would like to thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Director Doughten for
their briefings.
The earthquakes in February in Türkiye and Syria
worsened the humanitarian situation in Syria. The
catastrophe demonstrated once again the urgency of a
settlement of the conflict in all its dimensions. Since
the beginning, Türkiye has advocated that a lasting
solution can be found only through a political process
that addresses, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), the
fundamental issues underpinning the conflict. The
ongoing deadlock in the political process compounds the
gravity of the situation on the ground and increases the
prevalent sense of despair.
Türkiye’s long-standing priorities in Syria are
clear and consistent: overcoming the deadlock in the
political process, combating terrorism, preserving
the territorial integrity and political unity of Syria,
facilitating uninterrupted humanitarian access and
creating conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of refugees. Quadrilateral meetings
that we have launched in Moscow are aimed at realizing
these priorities through a process without preconditions
and in a results-oriented manner.
In the aftermath of the earthquakes, we are witnessing
signs of a tendency toward greater engagement in the
region. We think that every initiative is important and
valuable insofar as it is part and parcel of a holistic and
coordinated approach to find viable solutions to the
existing problems through a credible political process.
In this connection, I would like to underline once again
the need for increased alignment of the positions of all
main stakeholders.
The United Nations cross-border assistance
mechanism remains a vital lifeline for millions of
Syrians and an indispensable modality for meeting
increasing humanitarian needs in the country. In the
aftermath of the earthquakes, its functionality has
become all the more important. The operationalization of
two additional border crossings, namely, Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai, for the delivery of humanitarian aid has

S/PV.9313

proven to be useful in terms of expanding the scope of
the cross-border humanitarian response. We call on the
international community, including the United Nations,
donors, implementing partners and non-governmental
organizations, to make better use of all these border
crossings in order to scale up the desperately needed
humanitarian aid. In this connection, I would like to
emphasize the importance of extending the mandate of
the cross-border mechanism in such a way as to ensure
predictability and reliability for donors and implementing
partners. This step would also facilitate more effective
implementation of early-recovery and resilience projects,
which in the medium to long term could help to mitigate
the overall humanitarian grievances.
Similarly, we support the delivery of cross-line
assistance inside Syria, in line with resolution 2672
(2023). And we continue to encourage all relevant parties
to carry out these activities on a regular basis.
The disasters that befell Türkiye and Syria might
indeed have a silver lining if the cooperation in the
humanitarian dimension could also help to create a
renewed political momentum for the settlement of the
Syrian crisis. We hope that this can open a window of
opportunity and that it can be seized by all stakeholders.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of France has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation apologizes for taking the floor again.
We do not want to respond to any particular
accusations, but to provide some clarification. It not a
matter here of giving a lesson on the law or constitutional
law, but it was mentioned that French deputies were
present on Syrian territory. A democratic country such
as France is based on what we call the separation of
powers, between the executive, legislative and judiciary.
I wanted to clarify that the French Government did
not exercise any control over French parliamentarians,
their actions or their movements. But it is true that you
must be a democratic country that respects fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law to know that.
The President (spoke in Russia): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

23-1196619/19
