UNITED NA TIONS
SECURITY

c~fj~#~jtf,

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2223rd

MEETING:

MA

20 MAY 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2223)

.. ... ... .. .. .. ... ... .. ... . ... ... ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 16 May 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13941) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2223

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates -a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yea.rly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2223rd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 20 May 1980, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. IdC OUMAROU (Niger).

3. Mr. MILHEM: I greatly wish that Mr. Blum were
present at the moment.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

4. Mr. President, thank you for having given me the
opportunity to address the Council today. I extend my
gratitude also to those who strove to make my presence
here possible.
5. ‘I am speaking to members of the Council not only
as a father of nine, who was kidnapped, seized from
home and family and thrown across borders, but also
as a member of a people which has suffered so much
harassment since the Balfour Declaration of 1917.
Over the last 60 years Palestinians have resisted the
denial of their inalienable right of national selfdetermination, and the colonization of their land by
non-Palestinians.

agenda (S/Agenda/2223)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 16 May 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13941)
The meeting

6. In 1937 the Peel Commission reported that the
continuous rise of Jewish immigration would result
in an intolerable prospect of Palestinian Arabs being
ruled by Jews. Now, in 1980, about 1.5 million Palestinians are ruled by Jews. Another 3 million or
thereabouts dispossessed Palestinians are also subjugated by the extended striking arm of the Israeli
army and the Israeli Mossad, both of which receive
aid from the United States. The endless flow of billions
of American dollars has enabled Israel to expropriate
Palestinian land, to settle on it, to harass the Palestinians in the occupied territories-not
in the
liberated territories, as Mr. Begin put it-and to raid in
southern Lebanon. When I crossed southern Lebanon
I saw no soldiers other than Israeli soldiers, who
escorted me up to the Nigerian check-point. The
Israelis also raided refugee camps, killing and
destroying indiscriminately.

n’as called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 16 May 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13941)

1. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretation from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the
2222nd meeting, I invite the representative of Jordan
to take a place at the Council table, I invite the representative of Israel to take the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber and 1 invite the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
. to take a place at the Council table.

7. This intolerable persecution of our people has
intensified over the last 13 years. The Israelis have
demolished thousands of Palestinian homes. In this
connexion, I refer the Council to today’s edition of
The New York Times, which reports that a number of
stores in Hebron were demolished on 2 May. To whom
did they belong? They belonged to one of the residents
of Hebron (Al-Khalil), whose name is Idris Hirbawi,
whose family in 1929 were hosts of and gave protection to 20 Jewish families. Now their reward is that
Mr. Hirbawi’s stores and house have been demolished.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Blum
(Israel) took the place reserved for him ar the side of
the Council chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The first speaker is Mr. Mohamed Milhem, Mayor of
Halhoul, to whom the Council, at its 2222nd meeting,
extended an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

S. In 1968, Israeli bulldozers levelled the old sector
of my town of Halhoul, and it is open, anybody can
dee it. The Israelis have expelled thousands of Pal-

1

estinian residents and have thrown thousands more into
prisons. Many are detained, and I dare say not a single
family in any town or village is without a member
who has been detained or imprisoned for periods
ranging from life to a month or two. Why? The Israelis
say it is for security reasons. The Palestinians are
imprisoned without trial, suffer inhuman conditions
and are subjected to torture. On the day of my deportation, the mother of a prisoner in my town-her name
is Urn Jehad-told me that her son, who was serving
a life sentence in Ashkelon gaol, had difftculty sleeping
because his cell was too small for him even to stretch
his legs. There are hundreds of such examples.
9. On 15 March 1979, in my town, Halhoul, a boy
named Nasri Anani and a girl named Raba Shelaldi
were killed. It was said at the time that the soldiers
had been shooting in the air and thought that the boy
and girl were flying birds. The killers were identified
and detained, but later released. The reason given for
their release was-and it was published in Israeli
newspapers-that they had killed the two students in
self-defence-I am quoting the newspapers.. Selfdefence? Who was acting in self-defence? The killers
carrying sub-machine-guns? Or the two young students
with nothing in their hands but Palestinian flags? Moreover, after the two innocent students were killed, a
curfew was imposed on our town of Halhoul. I ask
here: Who should be put under curfew, the victims or
the killers? What is the rationale for punishing the
victims by imposing a curfew on them instead of on
the killers? And one of the killers is a settler in Kiryat
Arba.
10: Additionally, during the curfew windows in
scores of houses were smashed. Why? Because when a
child or a woman happened to cross the doorstep,
the soldiers would come right to the house and smash
every single piece of glass in that house. Israeli
soldiers broke into three homes and helped themselves to jewellery and other valuables. The names in
the cases are to be found in the police station in
Hebron. They have cases; they have folders; and
they have been investigating for the last 14 months or
so. Some of the members of the Council may not know
that Halhoul is a small agricultural town; mostly farms
and vineyards, and the worst thing of all is that during
the curfew farmers were prevented from spraying their
fields, and March is the spraying month. Those farmers
caught in the early hours of the morning trying to
reach their fields were badly beaten-and I have names
and they have records in the hospital in Hebron-and
their spraying machines were confiscated.

12. As I said before, they are inviting us to autonomy,
which, as Mr. Begin and his Cabinet put it. means
no rule over land, no rule over sources of water or
power, no rule even over telephone communications.
What kind of rule is that? I had enough authority
over my wife and children before I was deported. We
have enough authority over our school students. So
autonomy means the continuation of the present
situation, the perpetuation of the occupation.
13. So we have been rejecting this ever since it
started: the perpetuation of a brutal occupation and the
efforts to legitimize it. We said “No” to settlements.
We said “No” to the killing of innocent students in
Jerusalem and Anabta. I believe that last month in
Anabta a student was killed. And how was he killed?
The Governor of Tulkarm, whose name is Massafi,
came at the end of a peaceful demonstration by the
high-school students and, when the students were
going back into the school, he called the boy who was
later killed. But the boy ran away; he was afraid.
Massafi shot him in the leg. The boy fell down. Then
Massafi followed him and shot him in the head. Where
is Massafi now? He is the Governor of Tulkarm. He
has the law in his hands.
14. We said “No” also to the destruction of our
homes and property. Two months ago, 150 cars were
destroyed or smashed in Ramallah and about 40 in
Haihoul by the Gush Emunim and the Kahane
followers. When the Mayors of the towns concerned
received telephone calls to the effect that someone
was smashing the cars and so on, they got in touch
with the Governor’s offtce because the Mayors under
the occupation are not in charge of the police force.
We have no police force. We have no authority at
all, as Mr. Blum put it, to keep order. We were supposed to keep order. How? The police forces are under
their control; their soldiers and settlers have submachine-guns and they are roaming the streets
indiscriminately killing and destroying. The Mayors
of Al-Bireh and Ramallah called the Governor in
Ramallah and told him: “There is something wrong
happening and cars are being smashed and we are
receiving a flow of telephone calls”. Do you know
who was in the office? The secretary of the Governor,
who was half asleep, and he told him: “Wait until
the Governor comes in some 10 hours”.
15. How can we keep order? Who has law and order
in his hands? If a mayor cannot contact Jerusalem
six days every week, where is the law, where is the
order?

11. Ironically, on 26 March 1979, while we in the
West Bank town of Halhoul were under the strictest
curfew, the Camp David accords were being signed
at the White House. What kind of peace process is
this that means practically no peace for our people
or our land? And now why were the three of us
expelled? It was only because we, as well as the people
who elected us, have rejected the proposed autonomy
plan.

16. We said “No” to the conversion of the Holy
Mosque of Abraham. And you see here the Imam who
preaches in the Mosque. It is an Islamic mosque,
and now it is almost changed into what looks like a
synagogue.
17. We said “No” to Israeli torture, which has left
some of our people in hospitals. Some are paralysed
2

and in hospitals, and some are in insane asylums.
There are 20 of them in the Bethlehem Asylum. They
are insane because they have been beaten on the
head. And others are in graveyards-from the prison
to the graveyard.

600 dunums of wheat and barley, and all the crops
of the poor farmers are now ashes. And also about
100 dunums of olive groves in the west sector of
Hebron district. When the journalists wanted to visit
the place, there was a check-point with 20 soldiers,
who did not allow them to go there. If what was
done was lawful and justified, leave it open for the
whole world to see.

18. We said “No” to the imposition of heavy
taxation, not on merchants and traders but on municipal projects and services. I have a water project.
I have to give the authority taxes. Instead of giving
me money to help with the project, they take taxes
from me as Mayor, and from the contractor, too.

23. Mr. Blum talked about the Defence (Emergency)
Regulations of 1945, and he said that they were implemented by Jordan, and he brought in the name of Jaffa.
It seems that Mr. Blum does not know much geography. Jaffa is part of Jordan. These Regulations were
issued by the British Mandatory authorities, and the
British Mandate is no more. He alleged that those
Regulations were enforced by Jordan prior to 4 June
1967. Such an emergency law did not in fact exist under
Jordanian rule, nor does it exist now. Consequently,
the Regulations were never applied by Jordan in what
Mr. Blum calls Judea and Samaria. What are Judea and
Samaria? Judea and Samaria are the occupied West
Bank. He is changing the names of towns and areas.
They are disfiguring things. And the bulldozers are
disfiguring the land.

19. And, above all, we said “No”, and we will continue to say “No”, and the world will continue to say
“No”, to occupation.
20. To all of this we said “No”. And who among us
would agree to the continued persecution of his people, of any people, by an occupying power? We said
“Yes” in the mean time. We are not rejectionist forces
who say “No, no, no”, as it is put sometimes. We
said “Yes” to self-determination for our people,
“Yes” to control over our natural resources and land,
and “Yes” to the security and the prosperity of our
people, to their ensured well-being. Who is it who
needs security? The Mayor of Hebron or the Sheikh
or the Mayor of Halhoul, or the officer, the Governor
of Tulkarm who killed the boy and who is still
Governor? He is still there, on my land. We said
“Yes” to the right of Palestinians to establish their
sovereign State on their soil. We said “Yes” to
repatriation.

24. Moreover, may I remind Mr. Blum of article 49
of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.’ He says
they do not recognize the Geneva Convention; they do
not recognize the Red Cross; they do not recognize
the resolutions of the Security Council. What do they
recognize? They do not recognize the existence of a
people, of the Palestinians. And sometimes they say
that we have tails. Look: I do not have a tail. Article 49 of the fourth Geneva Convention states:

21. Now I should like to refer to Mr. Blum’s statements, in particular to his statement of 8 May
[2221sr meeting] in which he spoke of freedom of
expression. As members are aware, I was expelled
about 18 days ago. I wonder if by freedom of expression Mr. Blum means the ban currently imposed on
the elected Mayors which prohibits them from talking
to the press? Does he mean the ban on the elected
Mayors which restricts their travelling beyond the
borders of their towns? It is being implemented now.
Does he mean the scores of check-points that have
often prevented Palestinians from reaching the AlAqsa Mosque for the Friday prayers? Does he mean
the electronic devices placed in the telephones of the
elected Mayors and the representatives of labour
unions and chambers of commerce and benevolent
societies-the bugging of our telephones? Every word
I say is recorded. Does he mean the isolation of the
towns of Al-Khalil (Hebron), Anabta and Halhoul and
the Jalazon Dhaisha and Nur Shams refugee camps
from the rest of the world?

“Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as
deportations of protected persons from occupied
territory to the territory of the Occupying Power
or to that of any other country, occupied or not,
are prohibited, regardless of their motive.”
25. According to today’s newspapers, including The
Nero! York Times, two families, one from Beit Sahur,
were transferred to an abandoned refugee camp near
Jericho. Do members know what lives in the camps?
Snakes and wild dogs. Those families were transferred
there. It is desert, and very hot in summer. One family
consists of a father, who is an employee; his daughter,
who is an employee; and his son or daughter, who
is, I think, at Bir Zeit University. Of course, no
one can go to his job, and the students cannot go to
their colleges. But they can stay in the refugee camps
near Jericho.
26. If, as Mr. Blum put it in his statement of 8 May,
“International terrorism has been brought under
control worldwide” [ibid., para. 351, I should like to
ask members of the Council and the whole world who
is going to bring under control the terrorism and the
persecution of our Palestinian people in the occupied
territories. The delegations that were supposed to go

22. How can freedom of expression include censoring
the local newspapers in the occupied West Bank, or
suppressing the voice of our people, or even prohibiting the journalists who had wanted to see the
600 dunums of destroyed wheat crops in the Hebron
district? Three months ago helicopters sprayed about
3

to the West Bank were banned by Israel; they could
not reach it. So how can the terrorism that is being
practised by day and by night be stopped? Who will
stop the terrorism that has been practised not only
by gangs of Gush Emunim and settlers-and this is
very importantAut also by the army of a State Member of the United Nations? Who is going to put an end
to the military authority’s practice of rejecting or
disapproving our municipal projects, like the drinkingwater project in Hebron? The Mayor and Council of
Hebron wanted to dig a drinking-water well in Bani
Naim village, but the Israelis said “No”. Is there anything against the security of the Middle East in that
or in the wholesale fruit and vegetable market and
the agricultural road in Halhou!? If Mr. Blum were
asked he would say, “The market is close to the
schools”. I know what he would say, and I tell the
Council that I would accept that any member of the
Council would show interest in and care for the
welfare of our students, but not Mr. Blum, whose
soldiers interrupted the classes and beat the students,
whose blood still stains the class-room floors. The
wholesale market could not be either a nuisance or
a disturbing factor to our schoolboys.

breaking into supermarkets, assaulting the shoppers
and destroying the merchandise. They were cutting
down vineyards around Kiryat Arba.
29. Once, a journalist asked me: When did your
forefathers come to Palestine? I told him : “Mv forefathers came right after Adam. Waves of Greeks and
Romans and Jews and others came and went, and
I was sitting on my doorstep watching those waves
come and go, tind I stayed there.”
30. I should like to make a final comment on
Mr. Blum’s statement. The last man qualified to talk
about what he called the Soviet occupation of
Afghanistan is Mr. Blum, and I would remind him of
this proverb: “People in glass houses shouldn’t throw
stones.”
.“.
31. Let us work for genuine peace under the umbrella
of the United Nations and its resolutions. Let our
wives and children live under the care of both parents.
Incidentally, the wife of the Sheikh died two ‘months
ago, so that his four children are left without a father
or mother, and when he wanted to call them-he ‘has
a telephone in his house-he could not because the
telephones had been disconnected. He wanted to ask
his sons whether they were we!! provided for, how
their health was, and so on, but he could not reach
them; he could not talk to his sons. Their mother is
dead and their father is expelled. -Where is the law?
This is jungle law, in the twentieth century. Let US go
back to the people who elected us and who are badly
in need of our services. Let us return to our people
so that we may attend to the ambitious projects
we had in mind for them.

27. In his statement Mr. Blum spoke of Jewish
worshippers-and this is very important-in Al-Khali!.
Let us speak quietly. I wish Mr. Blum were here at
the moment. Jewish worshippers go to synagogues,
not to mosques. Since we have no synagogues in
Hebron, the Jewish settlers are trying to convert the
holy Mosque of Abraham into a synagogue. What
were Eli Hazeev-whose name was James Mahon Jr.and his gang doing in the streets of AI-Khali! with
sub-machine-guns? Were they praying, with no synagogues in Hebron.3 Who is Hazeev and what does
his story mean for the inhabitants of Palestine and, in
particular, for the inhabitants of Hebron? How does
Hazeev’s story contribute to the horrors of our life
under Israeli occupation? Here is a man, born in
Virginia and raised as a Christian. Having developed
a taste for violence and killing in Viet Nam, he
travelled to Israel, became a convert to Judaism and
was granted Israeli citizenship. The Israeli settlements
on the occupied West Bank provided the perfect setting
for this man, who valued violence and who was
committed to war. He came to Israel expressly to
fight Arabs and served as a sharpshooter in the Israeli
elite corps. Last May he was gaoled for breaking into,
Arab homes in Hebron, beating the residents and
smashing their furniture and possessions. Shortly
after his release he was arrested, but not charged, for
smashing car windows in my town of Halhou!.

32. We have always voiced the as&&ions of our
people to all--and when I say “to a!!” I include the
Israelis. Phantoms and sophisticated weapons do not
bring peace. The only way to peace is through recognition of and respect for the right of the Palestinian
people to return to our homes and to exercise our
inalienable right to self-determination and the ‘establishment of our sovereign State in our homeland,
Palestine. We are not a people committed to war, and
Mr. Weizman and Mr. Bar-Lev put it correctly when
they said that the operation in Hebron would have
happened even if the Mayors deported had said not a
single thing. We are not a people committed to war,
nor do we value violence. The presence of our State
would preserve peace, while its continued negation
only threatens peace.
33. Israel is committed to abiding: bv the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the articles of the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. However, it
violated those texts, with grave consequences, and
now it has again violated those agreements, first by
expelling us and then by denying us re-entry. The
Israelis expel!ed us without charging us and without
giving us the right to defend ourselves. They did not
take us to court, but told us falsely that we would be

28. I ask the Council again: Were such people, with
such convictions and with sub-machine-guns, praying?
No; they were doing everything but worship. They
were tearing the Holy Koran in the Abraham Mosque
back in 1976. They were breaking into houses at midnight, terrorizing women and children. They were
smashing private cars in Halhou!, Ramallah and
Shufat, which is a village near Jerusalem. They were
4

taken to the office of the Minister of Defence. We
never saw anybody. We were masked and thrown
across the border. After we had been denied re-entry
at the bridge-and members know about that-the only
weapon we had was the Security Council resolution.
We had it in writing, but the Israelis said “No”,
despite the almost unanimous decision of the Council.
34. I am sorry that I have taken up so much of the
Council’s time. Let us implement the resolution; let us
go hand in hand with the Secretary-General, let us go
back to our homes. We need no escorts, we need no
guards, because we have no sub-machine-guns, and
the Secretary-General and members of the Council
have only to say the word of truth that will preserve
peace in the world.

city. At that time we protested about the illegal Israeli
decision to the Security Council, which immediately
convened to consider that illegal action. The SecretaryGeneral, acting upon the request made by this body,
extended an invitation to me, in my capacity as the
Mayor of Al-Khalil, to appear before the Council and
testify on the dangerous situation resulting from the
very grave decision of the Israeli Cabinet. However,
as the Council may recall, Israel rejected that decision
of the Council and thus prevented me from travelling
to the Headquarters of the United Nations. Consequently, on 29 February, I sent a letter to the Council, which was circulated in document S/13830. In my
letter I described some of the illegal and inhuman
activities of the settlers, as well as those of the occupation authorities, against the people of Al-Khalil.

35. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from French):
The next speaker is Mr. Fahd Qawasma, Mayor of
Al-Khalil, whom the Council, at its 2222nd meeting,
invited to participate in the discussion, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

41. I do not intend to abuse members’ indulgence or
to tax their patience by repeating the contents of that
document. Nevertheless, since the international community and world public opinion have been seized
repeatedly of the tragic events which have engulfed
our beloved city, I believe it helpful to highlight several
aspects of our plight.

36. Mr. QAWASMA: I come to the Council from
Al-Khalil, the second oldest city in the history of
mankind. Gur Patriarch, Abraham, after several
sojourns in Ur of the Chaldees, was hospitably
received by the people of Al-Khalil. There, in the good
city of AI-Khalil, Abraham chose to remain until his
death. Throughout history Palestinians of all faiths
have lived in Al-Khalil in amity.

42. The acts of vigilantism committed by henchmen
of Rabbi Levinger and the atrocities committed by
the Zionist forces of occupation against the unarmed
citizens of the city of Al-Khalil are living testimony
to the racist character of those who are intent on
colonizing our land, uprooting us from our homes and
property and depriving us of our freedom.

37. Suliman Abdul Malik built Al-Ibrahimi Mosque
1,300 years ago to venerate the memory of our
Patriarch. Al-Ibrahimi Mosque stands as one of the
,holiest shrines to Moslems all over the world. Religious freedom in Al-KhaIil weathered the storms of
history-a tribute to our Patriarch, Abraham. It was
not until the early part of this century that the
encroachment of the Zionist’ movement wrought
turmoil and division among the citizens of Al-Khalil.
38. In 1967, when the city fell under Israeli occupation, the Israelis, in absolute defiance of all basic
human and legal standards, violated the religious
sanctity of the Mosque by dividing the holy shrine and
establishing a synagogue in it. And now Moslems
may pray only in half of the Mosque, and then only
under Israeli guns.
39. In 1968, the Zionist occupation forces, attempting
to fortify their expansionist policy, approved the establishment of Jewish settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories. That was done in violation of article 49 of the fourth Geneva Convention, which
prohibits the occupying Power from transferring its
own population into the occupied area.
40. On 10 February of this year the Israeli Cabinet
approved the settlement of Jews in the midst of the

43. Since the very first day the settlers arrived in
our city, they have been terrorizing our women and
children. Just five days ago, the Israeli army entered
my house; they went right into the house and beat
the women and children inside the house, after I had
been deported. They have been terrorizing our women
and children, shooting at our houses and destroying
our crops. This is continuing up to this very moment
as the Council is in session. Only two days ago, the
Israeli authorities themselves announced the detention
of Rabbi Meir Kahane and some of his followers
because of his plans to commit heinous crimes against
the Palestinian citizens of the occupied territories.
44. It is in this context that I would like to call the
attention of the members of the Council to the fact
that those barbaric ‘and brutal erimes have not been
conlt’ined to our city of Al-Khalil: they have involved
every single Palestinian city and town. Neither the
Palestinian population nor the land has been spared
violent mutilation by the occupying Power.’ The Palestinian land, the Palestinian people, were and are its
victims.
45. We protested by peaceful means. We complained
to the IsraeIi authorities, who, under international law,
are obliged to guarantee our safety as citizens under
occupation. But our complaints went unheard. On the
contrary, the Israeli army offered protection to the

perpetrators and in most cases were party to the
crimes. And when we came to the Security Council,
which is entrusted with the maintenance of peace
and security in the world, the Council adopted resolution 465 (19801, which strongly deplored those Israeli
practices and declared them illegal and in violation
of United Nations resolutions. With total contempt
for the international will expressed in the resolution,
the Israeli authorities intensified their oppression of
our people by imposing curfews on the towns and
cities, limiting the freedom of movement of the inhabitants, enforcing collective punishment, destroying
houses and restricting the political activities of the
elected officials and leaders of the community.

declaration of war against our right to self-determiuation, against our- right to live in freedom and
against the right of the Palestinian to return to his
homeland. Those accords are aimed at undermining
the national unity of the Palestinian people and at
perpetuating the occupation of our country and the
subjugation of our people. The Zionists decided to
expel us before we fought against the Israeli policies
of settlement of our lands. They decided to expel
us because of our resistance to all the illegal measures
and practices adopted by Israel, such as the demolishing of houses, the illegal detention of our people
in prisons, the collective punishment imposed upon
our people and the expulsion of community leaders.
They expelled us because we exposed the ugly face of
Zionist policies and philosophies to world public
opinion. They expelled us because we sent letters to
the Council describing the inhuman and brutal realities
of occupation. Those were the real reasons for our
expulsion on 2 May, and not those alleged by Israel.

46. ‘As is to be expected of any people that is subjected to alien and oppressive domination, our people
continues its struggle by peaceful as well as by armed
means. In the same way as the French people fought
against nazism and the people of South Africa continue their struggle against racism, our people brought
their struggle to its culmination with the events that
took place on 2 May at the site of the designated
location of the Jewish settlement in the heart of my
city, Al-Khalil.

51. Allow me to ask you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council, and through you to
put a question to the conscience of the entire world:
Who deserves to be expelled-the victims or the
victimizers, the oppressed or the oppressors, the
colonial settlers or the indigenous people? I ask the
Council who should be expelled: Rabbi Kahane of
Brooklyn or the Mayor of Halhoul? Who deserves to
be expelled: Rabbi Levinger of Germany or Judge
Attamimi, whose family ties extend back 2,000 years
in Hebron history? Who deserves to be expelled:
those who enter Al-Khalil bearing machine-guns or
those who are elected by the people of Al-Khalil?

47. On that same day, despite the Israeli authorities’
knowledge that we had no connexion with that act of
resistance, the Zionists expelled my colleagues and
me from our homeland to Lebanon. Our expulsion
was conducted in a very dramatic and brutal fashion.
They kidnapped the three of us from our homes and
from among our families in a despicable manner,
similar to that of the Nazis. This was done without any
respect for our position as elected officials, and this
greatly insulted the integrity of our highest religious
authority, Sharia Judge Rajab Attamimi, by putting
canvas bags over our heads from the beginning of
the journey until we arrived in southern Lebanon.

52. The Council is facing a challenge at this very
moment. Its credibility is at stake. If the Council,
the highest organ of the United Nations, is unable to
ensure the return of three individuals expehed
illegally from their homes, how can it expect a whole
people to have faith in its decisions?
53. In my closing words, I wish to address the representative of the United States and ask him: Sir, your
Government claims that it is committed to human
rights, democracy, equality and liberty-and to peace
and security in the Middle East. And now, if on this
moral issue, which is clearly one of basic human
rights, your Government chooses to remain silent,
then how can we, the Palestinian people, have any
confidence ortrust in you? How can we trust the United
States when it announces in a clear way that the
settlements are illegal and, at the same time, gives
Israel $3 billion yearly to build settlements on our land?
How can we trust the United States when we listen to
it say that it wants peace in the Middle East and, at
the same time, it is sending all kinds of weapons,
tanks and aircraft to Israel to kill the Palestinian
people on the West Bank, in the occupied territories,
in Lebanon and elsewhere? How can we trust the
United States when it speaks about human rights but
now is silent and does not support our return as free
persons to our homeland?

48. On 8 May, the Council was convened once again
to discuss our expulsion by the Israeli authorities. On
that occasion, the Council resolved to call upon Israel
to rescind its illegal action and permit our return
to our homeland. Following the decision of the Council,
my colleagues Mr. Milhem and Judge Attamimi and
I proceeded towards the King Hussein bridge carrying
signs bearing the text of the Council resolution. The
Israeli officers, acting upon instructions from the
Military Governor, prevented us from exercising this
basic human right.
49. The Israeli Zionist authorities gave, as a justification for the expulsion of my colleagues and myself,
the pretext that statements made by us created the
environment for violence in my city, Al-Khalil. This
is sheer nonsense; this is a fallacy.
50. The decision to expel us was made long before
the events of early May. The Zionists decided to expel
us when we opposed the Camp David accords and
the autonomy plan. Our people consider both as a
6

54. The Council has granted me an opportunity to
express our plight. Mr. President, I wish to thank you
and the other members of the Council. I assure you
that we are determined to return to our homes by all
means. Freedom is indivisible and justice will prevail.

consequences of that isolationist policy which it is
following, especially against human rights and the
exercise of human rights in the world.
60. It was no surprise this morning that the representative of Tel Aviv should have told the Council
that Israel

55. The PRESIDENT (intrrpretarion from French):
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before
it [S/13949]. If I hear no objection, I shall put it
to the vote.

“does not recognize the formal application of the
fourth Geneva Convention in the administered
areas, it nevertheless does apply, on a de facto
basis, the humanitarian provisions of that Convention” [2222nd meeting, para. 571.

.

A vote wus taken by show of hands.

In fuvour: Bangladesh, China, France, German
Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger,
Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia
Against:

Abstaining:

That was no surprise because back in 1968 a certain
Professor Yehuda Zvi Blum, who now represents Tel
Aviv, presented an Israeli argument which denied the
applicability of the Convention to the West Bank and
Gaza. Israel’s argument was based on its contention
that the Convention applied only to the occupation of
territory legitimately held by a contracting party. If
a party is not a contracting party then the law of the
jungle prevails and the Convention is open to violation
by everybody. It is a well-established fact that in the
Convention the word “territory” includes, in addition
to de jure title, mere de facto title to that territory.
In the specific case of occupied Palestinian territory,
de jure and de facto title to the territory and sovereignty over that territory rest with the people of
that territory: the Palestinian people. The presence of
Israel in that territory remains illegal and has the
capacity of a military occupation. To that extent, the
world is unanimously agreed. In its resolution 465
(1980), which was adopted unanimously, the Council
clearly affirmed that the fourth Geneva Convention
is applicable to the Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, including Jerusalem.

None
United States of America

The draft resolution was adopted by 14 to none, with
I abstention (resolufion 469 (1980)).

56. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of America): The position of my Government on the issue
before the Council was set forth in the United States
statement of 8 May [222fst meeting] and has not
changed. My delegation therefore abstained in the
vote on the draft resolution.
57. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, who has asked to speak.

61. It is a well-known fact that the military administration of any territory by an occupying Power is never
benign. Military occupation and administration are of
necessity brutal because alien military occupation
against the will of a people is a violation of its rights,
and the people will resist. Consequently, the occupying
Power has to be brutal. I am not justifying brutality,
but armed resistance is engendered by the brutality
of the foreign occupation force.

58. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Well, here is a poor excuse again from the United
States, flouting its commitment with respect to the
fourth Geneva Convention. This is a very dangerous
moment in the history of treaties and conventions.
Article 1 of the fourth Geneva Convention states that:
“The High Contracting Parties”-and I take it
that the United States is one of them-“undertake
to respect and to ensure respect for the present
Convention in all circumstances.”

62. In its resolution 465 (1980), the Council reaffirmed that the Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, including Jerusalem, should be protected
by the fourth Geneva Convention. Nevertheless, the
allegation was made this morning that resolution 465
(1980) was agreed upon by hypocrites and was the
product of hypocrisy, a selective conscience and
eclectic vision. That is what the fuehrer of Tel Aviv
and of the Zionist movement said. But if Tel Aviv is
right, then the rest of the world is wrong.
’

The United States has openly declared and put on
record its failure to ensure respect for the Geneva
Convention. I do not see any reason why the United
States still considers itself to be a party to that Convention.
59. It makes no difference whether or not the United
States votes in favour of this resolution. The resolution is there and our people know that the world is
backing them with full support. If the United States
wants to single itself out and remain as a minority of
one, that is its right. But then it must think of the

63. The representative of Tel Aviv repeated the
source of laws and regulations which are in force in
the occupied territories. First and foremost among
7

them are the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of 1945
issued by the British Mandatory authorities. I am not
here to explain why they were issued, but I agree that
those Defence (Emergency) Regulations were brutal
and anti-human and constituted a flagrant violation of
basic human rights, to the extent that some Palestinian
Jews described them as befitting only a Nazi regime.
A Zionist regime, a Nazi regime, what is the difference?
In essence they are both exclusivist, expansionist and
aggressive. So the application of those regulations
against the Arab population of the occupied Palestinian territory is only further proof, if that were
needed, of the colonialist and racist nature of the
Zionist movement. In the words of an Israeli journalist:

‘I
.

.

.

the Council has agreed:

‘6. . .
“To consider once more that a!! legislative and
administrative measures and actions taken by Israel,
including expropriation of land and properties
thereon and the transfer of populations, which tend
to change the legal status of Jerusalem, are invalid
and cannot change that status, and urgently to call
upon Israel once more to rescind a!! such measures
already taken and to desist forthwith from taking
any further action which tends to change the status
of Jerusalem.” [/969th meeting. para. 41.1
67. How did Tel Aviv respond? How did Washington
respond? Let us start with Washington. Since 1976
Washington has, I think, poured or pumped into Israel
more than $10 billion, if not as encouragement, at least
out of pity; but at the least it led to the crimes that
are being committed. How did Tel Aviv respond? The
answer is in the books and in the verbatim records of
the Council, if we are to judge by the number of
meetings that the Council has had to hold to consider
the situation in the occupied territories as a result
of Israeli-Zionist atrocities.

“The policy and practices of Israel are imitations
of the practices of the British Mandatory Govemment and are a form of punishment that is hard to
accept. If people have committed crimes, they
should be brought to trial. In special cases they
could be allowed to choose between exile and
prison.”
64. The expelled leaders the Council has kindly
invited to address it committed only one crime: they
voiced their opposition to occupation and illegal Israeli
rule over them. If that is a crime, then further expulsions are warranted and Israel may not be far from the
day when thousands more will have to be treated the
same way. Then we shall be faced with thousands more
Palestinian Arabs being expelled simply because they
voice their opposition. As a matter of fact, on 9 May,
Arie! Sharon, a Cabinet member in Tel Aviv, told
“We have expelled two
the newspaper Mu’uriv:
mayors and nothing has happened to the world. Then
why not expel 20 others?” Of course, the Israelis may
be depending on an eventual veto by the United States.
Well, the Sharia Judge and the elected Mayors voiced
their opposition to Israeli occupation and to Israeli
practices.

68. I cannot fail to protest in the strongest possible
terms at the behaviour of the Mayor of New York,
who, only the other day, joined in a procession
celebrating defiance of United Nations resolutions
and rejection of the declared policy of the Government
of the United States regarding the situation and status
of Jerusalem.
69. The Mayors who appeared before us here today
are not officials of the Administration and much less of
the military occupation authorities. They are elected
by the people to discharge responsibilities for the
benefit and welfare of the people. They are not just
messenger boys or secretaries. They are elected by the
people to perform duties. And if, as appears from
today’s cables, the forces of occupation are thinking
of finding some new appointees as Mayors of Hebron
and Halhou!, I can tell them from here that they will
fail because there are no quislings among our people.
They have elected persons to those posts; they will
fight for their elected representatives to be enabled
to perform their duties until the day they elect others
in their place.

65. The Prophet Mohammed addressed the Muslims,
saying-and I beg indulgence for my translation as
I do not know how exact it is:
“Whoever seesa vice or evil, let him try to adjust
it by action; if not by action, then by words; and
if not by words, then by hope and that is the most
feeble of a!!.”

70. There is a beautiful article in The New York
Times today that speaks of Israel taking a tougher
stand against Arab violence. I have just. read that
article, and what did I find? what is Arab violence?
A 17-year-old boy throwing a stone at an army car?
The result was collective punishment against his
family, including his father who is 60 years old, and,
as was stated by the Mayor of Halhou!, the removal
of the entire family.

What the expelled leaders did was simply to raise their
voices in rejection of and opposition to a vice and an
evil. What is a greater vice and evil than prolonged
illegal occupation and its derivatives, be they expropriation of land, illegal detention, murder of students,
defoliation of land, spraying of poison on agricultural
products, or whatever?
66. On 11 November 1976, the President of the Council made the following statement to which the representative of the United States was a party:

71. I can understand that criminals commit acts and
try to justify them. But they also tell lies. Apparently
8

as the result of a beating and being kicked by the boots
of the soldiers, the boy had to be transferred to a
hospital where he is recovering from surgery. The
official Israeli version was that the boy fell off his
bicycle; a 17-year-old boy gets on a bicycle for the
first time and hits a car. And yet other officers confirmed that there was a beating. The boy was beaten
and taken to surgery. And think of the crimes and
violence of demolishing houses and the Kristullnacht
when the cars and the windows were smashed by
henchmen of Begin, by henchmen of the Zionist
movement, by people who receive hundreds of millions
of Israeli pounds to maintain their activities against
the Arabs, to create an atmosphere of terror so that
the rest of the Arabs would leave their homes. But
they will not. We shall not respond to the Kristallnacht by keeping quiet; we shall fight back.

to be prevented from having a wholesale market for
vegetables. A mayor is also responsible for liberating
his people from foreign occupation. Those in the Council who fought against the Nazis all recall that the
first task of their priests, their mayors, their elected
representatives was to liberate their country from the
occupation forces and not to become quislings.
75. And now I come to the following statement, and
here I hope in fact that my intelligence misleads me.
We were told this morning that “Today, the Supreme
Court of Israel, sitting as a High Court of Justice,
decided to grant the petition”
[ibid., puru. 631 and to
hear the case. Well, does that mean that the expelled
persons will be permitted to return in order to appear
before the court and defend their case? Or will there
be a judgement
passed in absentia? Or will it be
something completely different? After the innocent is
executed in a gas chamber or hanged, is the court to
meet to decide whether the action was legal or illegal?
I would say, if there is any justice, that these persons
should be permitted to return immediately
in order to
prepare their case and appear before the court, because there is no court of justice that can listen to
and argue a case in the absence of the party concerned. Otherwise, that would be a judgement
in
absentia, which would really be a mockery of justice.

72. In his statement this morning. the rem-esentative
of Tel Aviv complained that the Mayor of Hebron was
calling “for the day of battle and triumph and to use
the oil weapon against the United States and Israel”
[2222nd meeting, puru. 491. I do not know if it is a crime
for the mayor of a city under occupation to appeal to
his brethren, his friends, that they should use their
resources in order to alleviate his grievance and to
right injustice. Only the other day we saw Mr. Muskie,
the United States Secretary of State, fly to Europe
and ask the Europeans to impose sanctions on Iran
because that country is holding 50 American hostages.
Well, how should the other Arabs and Moslems
respond when there are 4 million Palestinians taken
hostage? Is it not our right to appeal to all our
brothers-and
not only them but also our friendsthat they should use whatever resources they have,
whether it is oil or anything else, in order to alleviate
that situation? That is not a crime.
-I

76. Then we had some pontificating
this morning.
Of course, the Council does not require that those
appearing before it come with clean hands. I just leave
it to the members of the Council to interpret it the way
they want.
77. Finally, we were reminded of a statement made .
by Chairman Yasser Arafat, President of the Executive
Committee
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the representative of the Palestinian people, the internationally recognized representative of the Palestinian
people, which was quoted in The New York Times
concerning a threat to Western Europe that its interests
would be gravely affected by any non-compliance
with his demands. Well, that is a distortion. Chairman
Arafat did not threaten, “If you do not comply with
my demands I shall threaten your interests.” That is
the mentality of the fuehrer who sits in Tel .Aviv.

73. And, trying to pretend ignorance, the representative of Tel Aviv this morning, referring to the fourth
Geneva Convention, said:
“Presumably
this refers to the fourth Red Cross
Convention of 12 August 1949, and not to the Geneva
Convention on road.trafIic.”
[Ibid., puru. 57.1
Now, that is an insult. Of course, since he accused
everybody of being a hypocrite, why not insult the
intelligence?
He knows very well that what we are
referring to is the fourth Geneva Convention
and
that the Council, in its resolution 465 (1980), indicated
that the Convention was applicable to the territories
under occupation.

78. Of course, we know that the rest of the world
should understand our plight. We really are happy that
some of them are understanding us more and .supporting us more and more. We see that reflected here.
We have not become desperadoes that threaten to
demolish the world.

74. Also in that statement he tried to invoke “the
Jordanian Municipal
Council Law, No. 29 of 1955,
which stresses the obligation of a mayor to act for the
municipal good and public order” [ibid., puru. 601.
What can a mayor do but liberate his town? That is
the best he can do for his town. A mayor’s duty is
not only to have a drainage system, or an irrigation
system, open a school or act in such a way as not

79. I am sure that the Council and the SecretaryGeneral will see to it that the expelled leaders are
permitted to return as soon as they can-if I may say
so, even immediately-to
their country to perform
their duties. Should the resolution just adopted also be
disregarded, we shall still have faith. The Charter has
the remedy. We shall come back to the Council at the
earliest possible date and try to get the Council to
9

perform its duties and shoulder its responsibilities.
There is a remedy in the Charter, and we know that
it is within the power of the Council to implement
its resolutions. Otherwise, I assure the Council, it will
see us here again. On 8 May we said we should be
back, and we were back, again with a further appeal
to the Council that the two Mayors and the Judge
should be permitted to return to do their duty for their
people. And, as a father, I would say that they should
be back with their families, with their wives and
their children.
80. Mr. MTJTUKWA
(Zambia): Mr. President, it is an
honour and a privilege to see you, a distinguished son
of Africa, presiding over the deliberations of the Council. We have worked hand in glove in the true spirit
of African unity and solidarity since your country
became a member of the Council at the beginning of
this year. The full co-operation of the Zambian delegation with the presidency for the rest of this month can
therefore be taken for granted.
81. / I wish to make a few remarks, because the
Zambian delegation is appalled by the serious turn
of events in the occupied territories. Once again the
Security Council is confronted with the defiance of a
Member State in the implementation
of its resolutions.
Israel has again flouted a resolution of the Council
with impunity and characteristic arrogance. The Council should ensure that the resolution which has just
been adopted is implemented
in full.

case. These distinguished
victims of Israeli brutality.

85. The Zambian Government has repeatedly stated
that, unless the inalienable rights of the Palestinians
are respected, observed and restored, there can be
no settlement or peace in the troubled region of the
Middle East. This must be a truism by now, and the
Israelis must know it for a fact. Palestine belongs
to the Palestinians. It is also time for those who support human rights to come forward and be counted on
the side of the Palestinians, whose human existence is
in mortal danger. We demand justice for all on principle, and we condemn the double standards of those
who practise such vices.
86. I wish in conclusion to place on record the
abhorrence of the Zambian delegation at the moves
of Israel to annex the Holy City of Jerusalem, which
it dubiously claims to be the capital of Israel. This is
a great illusion which cannot succeed.
87. It is now a fact that the Israeli regime is by its
actions bent on provoking a catastrophe in the Middle
East by continuing
to pursue its provocative
and
aggressive policies of conquest, confrontation
and
defiance. Our simple advice is for them to know that
the only way in which Israel can secure a peaceful
future is through conciliation and justice.
88. The PRESIDENT
(interprekdon
from French):
There are no more speakers. The Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

83. The Council has just heard a sad account of how
Israel continues to oppress and repress the people of
Palestine in the occupied territories it has colonized.
It is distressing that human beings can sink so low in
treating others. We have before us the heroic Mayor
of Hebron, Mr. Qawasma, the Mayor of Halhoul,
Mr. Milhem, and the Sharia Judge of Hebron, who
have come here to plead what must be a very obvious

Nations,

New York

are the latest

84. Israel continues to prevent the Palestinians from
returning to their own native cities in their homeland
of Palestine. They have no other home to go to. Israel
must be told unequivocally
that it is totally illegal
and inhuman to prevent the 3 million Palestinians
from returning to their homes, whether by force or
by any other means. We, the members of the intemational community,
will not and cannot be wooed by
Israeli propaganda justifying
those barbaric acts
against fellow men. We condemn such acts.

82. The Zambian delegation is of the firm view that
all States, especially States Members of the United
Nations, are obliged to accept and give effect to the
decisions of the Council, which is the custodian of
international
peace and security. That applies to all
States. On the other hand, all members of the Council
must, as a matter of principle, ascertain and ensure
that a civilized code of conduct in observing decisions
of the Council is enforced. The Charter prescribes
methods of dealing with recalcitrants such as Israel
and the racist apartheid regime of South Africa.

Litho in United

Palestinians

The meeting

rose at 5.10 p.m.

NOTE

’ United Nations, Treaty

00300

Series,

vol.

75,

p. 287.

83-61462-September

19862,050
