154

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

15. Invites the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the President ofthe World Bank
to examine the possibilities of further co-operation between
the Programme and the World Bank regarding utilization
of facilities available to the two organizations, and requests
the Administrator to report thereon to the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Programme;
16. Reaffirms the exclusive responsibility of the Govemrnent of the recipient country regarding formulation of
its national development plan or priorities and objectives,
as set out in the consensus set forth in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
and emphasizes that the integration of the operational activities of the United Nations system with national programmes would enhance the impact and relevance of these
activities;
17. Requests the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operation to include in his 1983
comprehensive policy review an examination of the extent
and implications of the growing practice of contributions
being provided to organizations with conditions attached to
their use;
18. Takes note ofthe measures being pursued to reduce
costs and to improve efficiency described in the report of
the Director-General for Development and Intemational
Econornic Co-operation, and urges the Secretary-General
and the executive heads of organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to seek to minimize administrative and other support costs without affecting the field
programmes and the network of United Nations Development Programme offices in developing countries and bearing
in mind the need to maintain an appropriate leve) of support
functions, with a view to increasing the proportion of resources available to improve the programme delivery to
developing countries;
19. Requests the organs and bodies of the United
Nations system receiving resources of an extrabudgetary
nature, such as support cost payments, to include information un these resources and their utilization in the reports to
their goveming bodies, and invites the goveming bodies
of the organizations of the United Nations system receiving support cost payments from Govemments and voluntary funds to examine information thereon;
20. Requests the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operation to report on the implementation of paragraphs 18 and 19 of the present resolution and to include in bis comprehensive policy overview
a comparative analysis of the relationship between programme delivery and administrative costs pertaining to operational activities for development executed by organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system;
21. Urges ali organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, in the light of the recommendations
contained in section III of the report of the Director-General
for Development and Intemational Economic Co-operation,
to take the necessary steps to ensure the harmonization of
administrative, financia), personnel, planning and procurement procedures, and requests the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to report, in its annual overview
report of 1984, on specific action taken;
22. Reiterates the importance of co-ordination of
multilateral development assistance at the field leve! and
requests the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operation to pay particular attention, in the comprehensive policy review of operational
activities of 1983, to the need for improved coherence of
action and effective integration at the country leve) in accordance with section V of the annex to resolution 32/197
and paragraph 11 of resolution 35/81, including a report on

measures taken to date in this regard, together with his
recommendations thereon, with specific reference to the role
of resident co-ordinators in the co-ordination of operational
activities of the United Nations system;
23. Invites the Administrative Committee on Coordination to report to the Economic and Social Council at
its second regular session of 1983 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the outcome of the review
of the arrangements for the exercise of the functions of resident co-ordinator in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970, 32/197 of
20 December 1977 and 34/213 of 19 December 1979, and
also requests the Committee to develop, within ayear, the
register on development activities in conformity with Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/71 of l O November 1982.
113th plenary meeting
20 December 1982
37/227.

Critical situation of the financial resources of
the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Econornic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and intemational economic co-operation,
Recalling a/so its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Stressing the urgent need to strengthen multilateral cooperation for development, particularly through a substantial
increase in the flow of multilateral official development
assistance,
Emphasizing the importance of multilateral technical cooperation in the process of economic and social development
of developing countries and the urgent need to provide the
necessary leve) of financia! resources on an increasingly
predictable, continuous and assured basis to enable the United
Nations Development Programme to continue its unique and
important role in that process,
Reaffirming the validity of the consensus as set forth in
the annex to its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December
1970,
Having considered the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Programme for the year
1982 194 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/
53 of 29 July 1982 on the report of the Goveming Council,
Having a/so considered the critica) financia! situation of
the United Nations Development Programme in the light of
the outcome of the 1982 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities 189 and its serious impact
on the leve) of technical assistance to developing countries
through the Programme,
Aware that, together with efforts to obtain additional voluntary contributions, steps are being taken to increase further the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the United
Nations Development _Programme,
Aware a/so that the Intersessional Comrnittee of the Whole
of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme has undertaken to study, inter alia, options and recommendations for strengthening the work of
the Goveming Council,
'

94

lbid .. Supplement No. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev. l).

V.

Resolutions adopled on th_e reports of the Second Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Programme for the year
1982 and the decisions contained therein; 195
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/53 of 29 July 1982, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note of decision 82/5 of 18 June 1982 of the Goveming
Council ofthe United Nations Development Programme, 195
by which the Goveming Council reaffirmed its decisions
80/30 of 26 June 1980 196 and 81/16 of 27 June 1981, 197
including, in particular, those provisions relating to the indicative planning figures, the assumed overall average annual rate of growth of voluntary contributions and the leve!
of resources envisaged for the third programming cycle,
1982-1986, for the purposes of forward planning, and welcomes the establishment of an Intersessional Committee of
the Whole to study options and recommendations for the
longer-term financing of the Programme and for strengthening the effectiveness ofthe work ofthe Governing Council;
3. Notes with deep concern the result ofthe 1982 United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities
and the serious consequences it would have on the proposed
programme delivery for the third programming cycle, 19821986, of the United Nations Development Programme;
4. Expresses its appreciation to ali Governments, of
both developed and developing countries, which, at the 1982
Pledging Conference, announced contributions or their intention to contribute to the United Nations Development
Programme for 1983 in amounts approaching, equalling or
exceeding an average annual increase of 14 per cent in their
contributions, and to those Governments which have consistently maintained their contributions at a high leve!;
5. Urges ali other Governments, especially those whose
voluntary contributions may not reflect their capacity to
contribute, to renew their efforts to provide the United
Nations Development Programme with the resources necessary to establish a sound financial basis for the implementation of its planned activities for the third programming
cycle, 1982-1986, which, for the purpose of forward planning, would assume an overall average annual growth of
resources of at least 14 per cent;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme for his tireless
efforts to obtain the necessary level of resources envisaged
for the third programming cycle, 1982-1986, in order to
secure the financia! viability of the Programme and to improve further its quality, efficiency and effectiveness, and
encourages the Administrator to continue those efforts, taking into account, inter alia, the need to restrain administrative expenditures in order to maximize programme delivery
in accordance with paragraph 4 of Goveming Council decision 81/16;
7. Expresses its hope that the Intersessional Committee
ofthe Whole ofthe Goveming Council ofthe United Nations
Development Programme, in accordance with its mandate
as set out in decision 82/5, will succeed in identifying measures, in accordance with the principies and objectives as
reflected in the consensus, as set forth in the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV), that would enable
the implementation of the Programme's planned activities
for the third programming cycle, 1982-1986, and beyond.
113th plenary meeting
20 December 1982

••• /bid., annex l.
196
/bid., 1980, Supplement No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev.1), chap. XI.
1 1
•
/bid., /981, SupplementNo. JI (E/1981/61/Rev.l). annex l.

37 /22.8.

155

Role of qualified national personnel in the social and economic development of developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolutions 33/135 of 19 December 1978
and 35/80 of 5 December 1980 on the role of qualified
national personnel in the social and economic development
of developing countries,
Recalling its resolutions 320 l (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,
Desiring to promote full implementation of the provisions
of the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade conceming training
of qualified personnel for the developing countries, 198
1. Takes note of the report of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme on the role of
qualified national personnel in the social and economic development of developing countries; 199
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the U nited Nations Development Programme to ensure
and monitor further implementation of General Assembly
resolution 35/80;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the executive heads of the organizations concemed, with a view to facilitating the exchange of information
and experience, to ensure, within available resources, the
preparation and distribution among Member States of periodic analytical surveys of national reports on the experience of ali countries in the field of human resources
development and intemational co-operation in training qualified personnel of developing countries;
4. Invites Govemments of Member States to make
available to the Secretariat, on a regular basis, information
on their experience in establishing and developing their national systems of training of qualified personnel and on the
implementation of the provisions of the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly;
5. Invites developed countries and relevant organizations of the United Nations system to direct their assistance
to developing countries in the field of education and training
of qualified personnel towards, inter alia:
(a) Establishing and developing national systems of education and training of personnel as an integral part of the
social and economic development programmes of developing countries;
(b) Promoting the most effective use of qualified national personnel in national development;
(e) Implementing the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 35/80, especially paragraph 5 thereof;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with Member States and relevant organizations of the United Nations
system on possible elements of general guidelines on principies, objectives and structures of education and training
of personnel of developing countries, taking into account
the need for further development of their national systems,
and to report on his findings to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a progress report on the implementation ofthe present resolution,
including the proposed elements of the above-mentioned
19 "

1""

Resolution 35/56, annex. para. 47.
DP/1982/9 and Add. 1
