VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

recommendations, including a draft body of guidelines,
principles and guarantees, to the General Assembly at its
forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social
Council,
Endorsing Commission resolution 1988/62 of 9 March
1988, 27
Taking note of Sub-Commission resolution 1988/28 of
1 September 1988, 79
Expressing deep concern at the repeated evidence of the
misuse of psychiatry to detain persons on non-medical
grounds, as reflected in the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission,
Reaffirming its conviction that detention of persons in
mental institutions on account of their political views or
on other non-medical grounds is a violation of their human rights,
l. Welcomesthe progress made by the Working Group
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, which enabled the SubCommission, at its fortieth session, to adopt the draft body
of principies and guarantees for the protection of mentally-ill persons and for the improvement of mental health
care;
2. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to consider the subject at its forty-fifth session in the light of the
Sub-Commission's recommendations.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/110.

Human rights and scientific and technological
developments

The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress is one
of the decisive factors in the development of human society,
Reaffirming once again the great importance of the Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3384 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Considering that implementation of the Declaration will
con tribute to the strengthening of international peace and
the security of peoples and to their economic and social
development, as well as to international co-operation in
the field of human rights,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, so
Realizing that the science and technology of our times
create possibilities for providing an abundance of material
wealth on Earth and establishing conditions for the prosperity of society as well as the all-round development of
every person,
Seriously concerned that the results of scientific and
technological progress could be used for the arms race and
the development of new types of weapons to the detriment
of international peace and security and social progress,
human rights and fundamental freedoms and the dignity
of the human person,
Emphasizing the growing importance of intellectual
work, of interaction between science, technology and so-

79 E/CN.4/!989/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1988/45, chap. II. sect. A.
so Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

187

ciety, and ofthe humanistic, moral and ethical orientation
of science and of scientific and technological progress,
Convinced that in the era of modern scientific and technological progress the resources of mankind and the activities of scientists should be used for peaceful economic,
social and cultural development of countries and for the
improvement of the living standards of ali people,
Recognizing that the establishment of the new international economic order calls in particular for an important
contribution to be made by science and technology to economic and social progress,
Bearing in mind that the exchange and transfer of scientific and technological knowledge is one of the important
ways to accelerate the social and economic development of
the developing countries,
1. Stresses the importance of the implementation by ali
States of the provisions and principies contained in the
Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological
Progress in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of
Mankind in order to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Calls upan ali States to make every effort to use the
achievements of science and technology in order to promote peaceful social, economic and cultural development
and progress and to put an end to the use ofthese achievements for military purposes;
3. Also calls upan States to take ali necessary measures
to place ali the achievements of science and technology at
the service of mankind and to ensure that they do not lead
to the degradation of the natural environment;
4. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system to take into account
in their programmes and activities the provisions of the
Declaration;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give special attention, in its consideration of the
ítem entitled "Human rights and scientific and technological developments", to the question of the implementation
of the provisions of the Declaration;
6. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to take
appropriate measures and to assist the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities in preparing the study requested by the Commission in its resolutions 1982/4 of 19 February 1982, 56
1984/29 of 12 March 1984, 58 1986/11 of 10 March 1986 60
and 1988/61 of 9 March 1988; 27
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the ítem entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments".
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/111.

Human rights and scientific and technological
developments: the right to life

The General Assembly,
Reajjirming the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth
ofthe human person, to maintain international peace and
security and to develop friendly relations among peoples
and international co-operation in promoting and encouraging universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
