V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seco·nd Committec

- - - - - - - ~ - · - - ·----

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 5 concerning the findings and recommendations of a high-level
mission, which assessed the conditions of the displaced
population and assisted in the formulation of an interim
assistance programme focusing on the urgent
humanitarian and rehabilitation requirements of the displaced,
1. Expresses its solidarity with the Government and the
people of the Sudan in facing a grave and complex
humanitarian and economic situation;
2. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to Governments and international and non-governmental organizations that provided support and assistance to the Government of the Sudan in its relief and rehabilitation efforts;
3. Recognizes the valuable efforts of the Government
of the Sudan to provide assistance to the people affected;
4. Recognizes also the importance of intense and wide
co-operation with international relief organizations, as
well as non-governmental organizations, to ensure the
provision of humanitarian assistance where needed in ali
areas affected;
5. Takes note of the interim assistance programme
contained in the report of the Secretary-Genera!; 5
6. Calls upan ali States to contribute generously to
programmes for the relief and rehabilitation of displaced
persons;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to make the international community more
aware of the enormous difficulties facing the displaced
population and to mobilize assistance to the Sudan;
8. Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General to
organize, as requested by the Government of the Sudan
and in close co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank, a meeting of
bilateral donors and pertinent international institutions
and non-governmental organizations in order to mobilize
resources needed to implement a follow-up emergency assistance programme covering the rehabilitation and resettlement needs of displaced persons;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of
1989 of his efforts and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session.
70th plenary meeting
6 December 1988

43/53.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind

The General Assembly,
Welcoming with appreciation the initiative taken by the
Government of Malta in proposing for consideration by
the Assembly the ítem entitled "Conservation of climate
as part of the common heritage of mankind",
Concerned that certain human activities could change
global climate patterns, threatening present and future
generations with potentially severe economic and social
consequences,
Noting with concern that the emerging evidence indicates that continued growth in atmospheric concentrations of "greenhouse" gases could produce global warming with an eventual rise in sea levels, the effects of which
could be disastrous for mankind if timely steps are not
taken at ali levels,

5 A/43/755.

133

Recognizing the need for additional research and scientific studies into ali sources and causes of climate change,
Concerned a/so that emissions of certain substances are
depleting the ozone !ayer and thereby exposing the earth's
surface to increased ultra-violet radiation, which may pose
a threat to, in ter afia, human health, agricultura! productivity and animal and marine life, and reaffirming in this
context the appeal, contained in its resolution 42/ 182 of
11 December 1987, to ali States that have not yet done so
to consider becoming parties to the Vienna Convention for
the Protection of the Ozone Layer, adopted on 22 March
1985, and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, adopted on 16 September 1987, as
soon as possible,
Recalling its resolutions 42/186 and 42/187 of 11
December 1987 on the Environmental Perspective to the
Year 2000 and Beyond and on the report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development, respectively,
Convinced that changes in climate have an impact ondevelopment,
A ware that a considerable amount of valuable work, particularly at the scientific leve! and in the legal field, has airead y been initiated on climate change, in particular by
the United Nations Environment Programme, the World
Meteorological Organization and the International Council of Scientific Unions and under the auspices of individual States,
Welcoming the convening in 1990 of a second World
Climate Conference,
Recalling also the conclusions ofthe meeting held at Villach, Austria, in 1985, 6 which, in ter alia, recommended a
programme on climate change to be promoted by Governments and the scientific community with the collaboration
of the World Meteorological Organization, the United
Nations Environment Programme and the International
Council of Scientific Unions,
Convinced that climate change affects humanity as a
whole and should be confronted within a global framework so as to take into account the vital interests of ali
mankind,
1. Recognizes that climate change is a common concern of mankind, since climate is an essential condition
which sustains life on earth;
2. Determines that necessary and timely action should
be taken to deal with climate change within a global
framework;
3. Reaffirms its resolution 42/184 of 11 December
1987, in which, inter alia, it agreed with the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
that the Programme should attach importance to the
problem of global climate change and that the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme
should ensure that the Programme co-operates closely
with the World Meteorological Organization and the lnternational Council of Scientific Unions and maintains an
active, influential role in the World Climate Programme;
4. Considers that activities in support of the World Chmate Programme, approved by the Congress and Executive Council of the World Meteorological Organization
and elaborated in the system-wide medium-term environment programme for the period 1990-1995, which was approved by the Governing Council of the United Nations

6
See Unired Naiions Environment Programme. Annual Report of the
Executive Director. 1985 (UNEP/GC.14/2), chap. IV, paras. B8-140.

134

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Environment Programme, 7 should be accorded high priority by the relevant organs and programmes of the
United Nations system;
5. Endorses the action of the World Meteorological
Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme in jointly establishing an Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change to provide internationally coordinated scientific assessments of the magnitude, timing
and potential environmental and socio-economic impact
of climate change and realistic response strategies, and expresses appreciation for the work already initiated by the
Panel;
6. Urges Governments, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and scientific institutions to
treat climate change as a priority issue, to undertake and
promote specific, co-operative action-oriented programmes and research so as to increase understanding on
all sources and causes of climate change, including its regional aspects and specific time-frames as well as the cause
and effect relationship of human activities and climate,
and to contribute, as appropriate, with human and financia) resources to efforts to protect the global climate;
7. Ca/Is upan all relevant organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to support the
work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
8. Encourages the convening of conferences on climate
change, particularly on global warming, at the national,
regional and global levels in order to make the international community better aware of the importance of dealing effectively and in a timely manner with all aspects of
climate change resulting from certain human activities;
9. Ca/Is upan Governments and intergovernmental organizations to collaborate in making every effort to prevent detrimental effects on climate and activities which affect the ecological balance, and also calls upon nongovernmental organizations, industry and other productive sectors to play their due role;
10. Requests the Secretary-General of the World
Meteorological Organization and the Executive Director
ofthe United Nations Environment Programme, utilizing
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, immediately to initiate action leading, as soon as possible, to a
comprehensive review and recommendations with respect
to:
(a) The state of knowledge of the science of climate
and climatic change;
(b) Programmes and studies on the social and economic impact of climate change, including global warming;
(e) Possible response strategies to delay, limit or mitigate the impact of adverse climate change;
(d) The identification and possible strengthening of
relevant existing international legal instruments having a
bearing on climate;
(e) Elements for inclusion in a possible future international convention on climate;
11. A/so requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of all Governments,
as well as intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and well-established scientific institutions with expertise in matters concerning climate;

12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
theGeneral Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include this question in the provisional
agenda of its forty-fourth session, without prejudice to the
application of the principie of biennialization.
70th plenary meeting
6 December 1988

43/178.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/166 of 11 December 1987,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1988/54 of 26 July 1988,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 8
Recalling the Programme of Action for the Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the lnternational
Conference on the Question of Palestine, 9
Taking into account the intifadah ofthe Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, against the Israelí occupation including its economic
and social policies and practices,
Affirming that the Palestinian people cannot develop
their national econorny as long as the Israelí occupation
persists,
Taking into consideration the recent steps taken by Jordan concerning the occupied Palestinian West Bank,
A ware of the increasing need to provide economic and
social assistance to the Palestinian people,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; IO
2. Regrets that the programme of economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people has not been developed as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 42/166;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to charge the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
with supervising the development of the programme and
to provide it with the funds needed to engage twenty experts to prepare an adequate programme, in close cooperation with the Palestine Liberation Organization, taking into account the intifadah of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
and its implications;
4. Expresses its appreciation to those States, United
Nations bodies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations that have provided assistance
to the Palestinian people;
5. Urges Member States, organizations of the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disburse their aid or any
other forms of assistance to the occupied Palestinian territory solely for the benefit of the Palestinian people and in a
manner that will not serve to prolong the Israelí occupation;
6. Calls for the provision of emergency assistance to
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian terri8 Resolution

1514(XV)
Report of the lnternational Conference on the Question of Palestinc,
Geneva, 29 August-7 September 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.1.21), chap. I, sect. B.
IO A/43/367-E/l 988/82 and Corr. l and 2.
9

7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 25 (A/43/25), annex, decision SS.1/3.

Assistance to the Palestinian people
