~I

If j W UStT

"'P$'illlY' '5' - i - ' Y " j i "

-"":'~"i'-'-fT!~'·:·--""'··"WCtC€ArrU"· i

595tb

United Natiow

GENERAL
i\.SSEMBLY
TENTH SESSION
Official ReoorU

•

CONTENTS

PLENARY MEETING
Wecl~day,

14 December 1955,
at 9 p.m.
NetD York

AGENDA ITEM 21

Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Canada, Chile, Colombia.
Against: Cuba, Greece, China.
Abstaining: Dominican Republic, Nether1ands, Philippines, United States of America, Belgium.

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(continued) *

The recommendation was adopted by 48 votes to
3, with 5 abstentions.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):

8. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
Vlfe shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Jordan.

Agenda item 21:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(contitlued)

" •••••••••••••••••••••••••••

433

President: Mr. Jose l\f.AZA. (Chile).

The General Assembly has bdore it·two documents in
connexion with this item: a letter from the President
of the Security Council to the President of the General
Assembly [AP099], and a draft resolution proposed
by 'forty-one countries [AjL.208] providing for the
admission to the United Nations of Albania, Jordan,
Ireland, Portugal, Hungary, Italy, Austria, Romania,
Bulgaria, Finland, Ceylon, Nepal, Libya, Cambodia,
Laos and Spain.
2. I would ask representatives to limit their statements to explanations of vote, which should be made
after the voting has been concluded.
3. I call on the rep.esentative of Cuba on a point of
order.
4. Mr. NU1\!EZ PORTUONDO (Cuba) (tmnslated
from Spanish): I should like to ask whether the
President intends to put each of the countries to the
vote separately, in accordance with the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.1
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
If the representative of Cuba so requests, each country
will be voted on separately.
6. Mr. NU1\!EZ PORTUONDO (Cuba) (translated
from Spanish): I should also 1ike to ask for a 1'011call vote.
7. The PRESIDENT (trtf.nslated from Spanish):
We shall vote first on the recommendation concerning Albania contained in the joint draft resolution [Aj
L.208].
A vote was taken by roll call.
Costa Rica, having been drawn by lot by the Presi-

d~nt, was called upon to vot~ first.

In favour: Costa Ric~, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Guatemala, Hoilduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealand,

A vote was taken by roll call.
Greece, having been drawn b:y lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
I'It favour: Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom or Great Britain
and Northern Ire1and, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, 'Yugoslavia, .Afghanistan,
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, France.
Against: None,
Abstaining: Israel.
The recommendation was adopted by 55 votes to
none, with 1 abstention.
9. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Ireland.
A vote was taken by roll call.
Norway, having been drawn by lot b)' the President,
was called upon to vote first.
1'11, favour: Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Po1and, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet. Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, ByelorussianSoviet Socialist Republic,
Canada, Chile, ,China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
·AjPV.555

General Assembly -

Tenth Session -

Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecua~
dor, Egypt, Et Salvador, France, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua.
Against: None.

The recommendation was adopted by S6 votes to
fume.

10. The PRESIDENT (translated fr01tl Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Portugal.
A 'Vo~e was taket~ by roll call.

The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, having
been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon
to vote first.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist. Republic,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Repub1ic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand.. Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazi1, Burma.
A!)'lIinst: N Qne.
The recommendation was adopted by 56 votes to
fume.

11. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation conc,erning Hungary.
A 'l/ote was taken by roll call.
Gre,?ce, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was ccdled upon to vote first.
In favmtr: Guatemala, Honduras,.: ~cel~nd, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, LIbena, Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicara;gua, l~ orway,. Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland, SaudI ArabIa; Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Gleat Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela, Ye!Uen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan,
Argentina, Austra1ia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, France.
Againstr: China, Cuba.
Abstaining: Greece, Netherlands, Philippines, United
States of America, Dominican Republic.
The recommendation was adopted by 49 votes to 2,
with 5 abstentions.
12. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Italy.
A vote was taken l.1y roll call.
Afghanistan, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.

Plenary Meetings

I n favo~tr: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bel~
glum, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Repub1ic, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Domi~ ~
nican Republic, Ecuarior, Egypt, El Salvador, France,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indo- ~. .
nesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxem~i
bourg, Mexico, Nethedands, New Zealand, Nicar<.>gua, :
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poiand,
Sau~ .Arabia,. Swe4er:, Syria,. Thail~nd, Turk~y, '1l
UkraIman SOVlet SocIahst Repubhc, Umon of Soviet:
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain '••1
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Urugoay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia.
Against: None.
•:

t
f

The recommendati01~ was adopted by 56 votes to

ii
I

11

A vote was taken by roll call.
Honduras, having been drawn by lot by the p1'esident, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria,
Tnailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela,. Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica; Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, France, Guatemala.
Against: China, Cuba.
Abstaining: Netherlands, Philippines, United States
of America, Dominican Republic, Greece,
.
The recommendation was adopted by 49 votes to 2,
with 5 abstentions,
.

A vote was ta
Uruguay; havi
'lUGS called upon
In favour: Ur
Afghanistan, Ar
Brazil, Burma,
Canada, Chile,
Denmark, Ecua
FIance, Guatem
sia, Iran, Iraq, I
Mexico, New Z
Pall'lma, Peru,

1.

none.
.
13. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We sha:l1 now vote on the recommendation concerning Austria.
1
I
A vote was taken by roll call.
i
El Salvador, having been drawn by lot b'j' the Pres-. '
id(!l't:t', was called upon to vote first.
.
In favou1': El Salvador, France, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Ice'land, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, .Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, Phili.ppines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,
Syria., Thailand, Turkey,. Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burnm, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic; Canada, Chile, China, Co10mbia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt.
Against: None.
The recommendation was adopted b:v 56 votes to
none.
14. The PRESIDENT (translated tram Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Romania.
.

15. The PRE
We shal1 now
ing Bulgaria.

Thailand, Turke
Union of Soviet
of Great Britai
Against: Chin
Abstaining:
lands, Philippin

The recomme1
with 5 ab~tentio
16. The PRE
We shall now 'Ii
ing Finland.
.(:1. vote was ta
Burma, havin
was called upon

In favour:
Republic, Cana
Cuba, Czechoslo
Ecuador, Egypt,
Guatemala, Hon
Iraq, Israel, Le
Netherlands, Ne
tan, Panama, Pe
Sweden, Syria,
Socialist Republi
United Kingdo
land, United Sta
Yemen, Yugosla
lia, Belgium, Ba
Against: Non
The recO!1iT,'me
none.

17. ThePRE

We shall now
it).g Ceylon.

A vote wasta
Chile, having
was called upon
In favour: Ch'
Czechoslovakia,
dor, Egypt, El
Guatemala, Hon
Iraq, Israel,Le
Neth,erlands, N
kistan, Panama
Arabia, Sweden,
Soviet Socialist

555th m~ting - 14 December 1955

.

I

15. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We shaH now vote on the recommendation concern1, cl ing Bulgaria.
· '1
A vote was taken by roll call.
.Uruguay, ham"ng been drawn by lot by the Prt!sident,
~ws called upon to vote first.

~tl

H
: ~I"

~t I

~1
1

t

;- .1

I,'

In favour: Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvadm", Ethiopia,
Ffance, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan,
Pan.'lma, Peru, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Sociaiist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Repubiics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Against: China, Cuba.
Abstaining: Dominican Republic, Greece, Netherlands, Philippines, United States of America.

The recommendation was adopted by 50 votes to 2,
,I. with
5 ab$fe1ttions.

16. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):

1,

We shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Finland.

"

I,
I,

A vote was taken by roll call.

it

d
l,

Burma, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.

:-

'-

In favour: Burma, Bye10russian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Canada, Chile, China, Co10mbia, Costa' Rica,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fran~e, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg; Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil.
Against: None.

l,

The recmn·mendation was adopted by' 57 votes to
none.

I,

:t

l,

1-

o

1-

i

j

r

17. The PRESIDENT (tra';'slated from Spa~ish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation concernit;lg Ceylon.

"

I,
l,
"

n
l,

,.

,
"

I

A vote was taken by roll call.
Chile, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France,' Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Israel,Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netb,erlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua. Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,Philippines, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Sweden" Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist RepubHc, Union of Soviet Socialist

Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain :md
Northern Ireland, United States of America,Uru~
guay. Vene?;uela, Yemen, Yugnslavia, Afghanistan,
Argentina, Australia, Belgium.• Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada.
Against: None.
The recommendation was adopted by 57 votes to
none.

18. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation concerning Nepal.
A vote was taken by roll call.
Burma, ha'ving been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Repub1ic, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist, Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan,Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bo1ivia, Brazil.
.Against: None.
The recommendation was adopted by 57 votes to
none.

19. The PRESIDENT (tra.,tslated from Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recommendation'concerning Libya.
A vote was taken by roll call.
Canada, having been drawn by lot by the Pr.esident,
'lvas called ztpon to vote first.
'.
.
In favour: Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
France, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines,' Pqland,
Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, .Turkey,
Ukrainian Soviet Socia1ist.Republic, Union. of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan,
Argentina,. Australia, Belgium,. Bolivia. Brazil, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet .Socialist Republic,
Against: None.
.
Abstaining: Israel.
The recommendati01~ was adopted by 56 votes to
none, with 1 abstention.

20. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish}:
We. shall now vote· on the recomrnenda:tion concern
ing Cambodia,
..
N

A vote was taken by roll call.
Saudi Arabia, having been drawn by Idt by the President, was called upon to vpte first.
'.

,',

436

General Assembly -

Tenth Session -

In f~Off.r: Saudi Arabia) Sweden, Syria, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukrainian Sovif't Socialist Republic: Union
Qf Soviet Socia1ist Republics, United K.ingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vene.roela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist RepubHc,
Canad.:., Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt. El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland.
Against: None.
The recommendation was adopted by 57 votes to
not&e.
21. ,.. .le PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
"Ve saall now vote on the recommendation concerning Laos.
A vote was take.n by roll call.
Iraq, having· been drawn by .lot by the President,

was called upon to vote first.

In fcrvou-r: Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia,. Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, NIcaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great· Britain
and Northern Ireland; United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan,
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, B01ivia, Brazil, Burma,
Byelorussian .S?viet Sociali~t Republic, Sanada, Chi~e,
China, .ColombIa, Costa Rica, Cuba, czechoslovakIa,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran.
Against: None.
The recommendai~on was adopted by 57 votes to
none.

22. .The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
We shall now vote on the recoIll11.lendation concerningSpain.
. A vote was taken by roll call.

.. Uruguay,· nav~ng been dra'wn by lot by the President,
.
'
.

was called
... upon to vote first..

. In favou~: Uruguay, ,venezuela, .Yeme~, .Yugosl~­
via AfgbanIstan, Argentma, Austra1ta, .BolIVIa, .Brazl1,
Bu~a,Byelorus5ian Soviet Socialist· Republic, Canada Chile, China, 'Colombia, .Costa Rica, Cub~, Czechosiovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia! Fr;:J.n~e, ~reece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, IndIa, IndoneSIa, Iran, Iraq,
Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistari, Panama,
Peru· .Philippines, .Poland, Saudi Arabia, .Sweden, Syria 'Thailand,' Tllrkey, Ukrainian .Soviet Socialist
Republic,' U nibn. of Sovi~t .Socialist Republics, _United
K.ingdom of Great Bntam and NOl"thern lfe1and,
United States of America.
Against: None;
Abstaining: Belgium, Mexico,

Plenary Meetings

The recommendation was adopted by 55 votes to
none. with 2 abstentions.

conviction of tl
thougl1t that the
23. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):' its persuasive p
interest in this 1
With these separate votes the General Assembly has
a;;cepted each of the sixteen countries recommended by ~ 33. The credit
the Security Council.
,I resound all over
no nation. It r
24. If the General Assembly agrees, ! shall consider
many
nations a:
the draft resolution as a whole as having been adopted.
reflection of th
25. I call on the representative of Cuba on a point
an iudication of
of order.
power of this (
wise counsels, an
26. i\!Ir. NuNEZ PORTUONDO (Cuba) (translated
to
extend the ap
from Spanish): I request that Cuba's abstention be
delegations whic
shown in the record.
ing our efforts
The draft resohetion as a whole was adopted. with
speak of support
.1 abstention.
the proceedings,
tion and encourc
27. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
so helpful in tl
We have by this vote fulfilied a deep desire whi<;h has
34. Whatever
existed in the General Assemb1y for many years-the
enterprise we hl
desire to overcome the obstacles preventing the United
international CO-(
Nations from becoming a cOp""'letely international
ly relations betv
organization representing all peal" :5 and erijoying true
ceedings on this
universality. It is trua that the goal has not yet been
and in the Secu
achieved. There are still some notable absences, but
on the whole b)
the progress made today marks a historic advance
The deliberation
along this way, which cannot but increase the prestige
belief that the
and vigour of the United Nations.
is a centre for
28. May I be allowed to express to the Security
the attainment 0
Council our satisfaction that its action should have
demonstration tl
made possible the event which we are celebrating.
there is a will to
29. Mr. MARTIN (Canada): I have come to this
35. During the
rostrum. not with a prepared speech, but with a keen
been difficult ne
desire to take advantage of the libera1 interpretation
ferences with cl
which the President·..will place upon the role of ex-,·
pected th~ point
plaining one's vote. That desire is to express, on behalf
has ever sugges
of my country, what I know all of us would desire
not in the inter
an opportunity to say, and I am grateful to. the Presnations of the w(
ident for the opportunity to speak at this moment,
ening this Orga
although I recognize there are. more deserving spokes36. We have b
men and countries to whom this privilege should have 1 tonight, sixteen
bep-n given ahead of mine.
'j one-quarter of tl
I
30.· The President has sensed the greatness of this
ization, founded
oc~asion. He has ind;-::ated the opportunity which toyet on. My coun
night's decision gives to the United Nations. I should
the omission of
like to join him in expressing to the members of the I deep regret, and.
Security Council our great appreciation of the n::spon- ~ tunity, which w
sible way in which, during the last two days, they! Japan the oppo
have dealt with the very important recommendation I Organization of
whiCh flowed from one of the Committees of this
37. Let no one
Organization and from the General Assembly. itself.
decision of toni~
.May I be permitted to associate with this expression of
our time. These
gratitude for the work or the members of the Security
as vividly as be
Council-the great Power's and the non'-permanent
Organization, an
members-a special tribute to my frienc, ~e present
better to deal
President of the Security Council, Sir Leslie Munro.
have perhaps inb
provocations,bu
31. I hasten to pay a tribute as well to the outstandmen who recogn
ing work of the representative of Peru, Mr. Belaunde,
resolve, and it v
whose great. contribution to this outcome, as head of
to resolve that
the Committee of Good Offices, is so well known
to us all.
. ..
were not timid
tonight, speakin
32. This Assembly, of course, has played its part in ' and of our peop
the decision of tonight. There were some who thought
not timid. We h
that the role of the General Assembly should foll?w
nations to add t
that of the Security Council. Recognizing the dIfshall look forwa
ficulties of the members of the Security Council, and
expectancy and
at the' same time conscious of the deep and widespread
responsibility wi

l!

555th Dmeeting -- 14 ])eceDmbet 1955

~

I!

conviction of this Assembly, there were many who
thougl,1t th(~.t the Assembly. s~ould ~ake ~dvantage of
its persuaS1ve power and md1cate 1tS w1de and deep
interest in this matter.
33. The credit for tonight's decision, which will
resound all over the world, belongs to no man and to
no nation. It restl.lts from the collective effort of
many nations and of many representatives. It is a
reflection of thf collective effort of so many and
an iudication of the potential strength of the collective
power of this Organization itself. There have been
wise counsels, and I should like to take this opportunity
to extend the appreciation of my country to so many
delegations which joined in sponsoring and supporting our efforts to solve this great problem. When I
speak of support, I refer not only to votes cast during
the proceedings, but also to the expressions of direction and encouragement and wise counsel which were
so helpful in the prosecution of this matter.
34. Whatever the results, I am sure that in this
enterprise we have all gained something in terms of
international co-operation and the promotion of friendly relations between the States concerned. The proceedings on this issue, both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council, have ,been characterized
on the whole by restraint and sincerity of purpose.
The deliberations here have served to strengthen our
belief that the United Nations can be and, in fact,
is a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in
the attainment of common ends. We have seen a clear
demonstration that differences can be resolved when
there is a will to succeed.
35. During the processes of discussion, there have
been difficult negotiations,. negotiations involving differences with close friends, and ea,ch of us has respected th~ point of view of the oth~r and no one
has ever suggested that the purpose of the one was
not in the interests of better relations between the
nations of the world o. not in the interests of strengthening this Organization.
36. We have brought, or will bring, by our decision
tonight, sixteen new Members to the United Nations,
one-quarter of the present membership of this Organization, founded while the Second World vVar was
yet on. My country is pleased with the result, and yet
the omission of one country is for us an occasion for
deep regret, and we shall look forward to the opportunity, which will come .soon, I hope, 1.0 extend to
Japan the opportunity of playing its part in this
Organization of the nations of the world.
37. Let no one think, however, that because of the
decision of tonight we have. resolved the problems of
OUr time. These problems stand out as strongly and
as vividly as before, but we have strengthened this
Organization, and, as a result, we will be able all the
better to deal with some, of these questions. We
have perhaps introduced new irritations and occasioned
provocations, but this Organization was founded by
men who recognized that there would be problems to
resolve, and it was because there would be problems
to resolve that the Organization was created. They
were not timid men, and we, their successors here
tonight, speaking in the name of our Governments
and of our peoples, have shown likewise that we are
not timid. We have given new opportunities to other
nations to add their voices to our counsels, and We
shall look forward to the future with courage, with
expectancy and with prudence, and a sense of deep
responsibility will attend all our efforts.

4l!7

38. Membership in the United Nations is not a
mere honour. It was not because we wanted to honour
certain nations that we extended the privileges of
membership. We wanted to bring other nations into
this Organization to share with us the resp,)nsibilities
which the Charter of the United Nations imposes on
all of us, and so, along with privileges, will go obligations for thes~ new nations.
39. Our decision tonight, on the part of anyone
of us, does not mean, I repeat again, the acceptance
of any particular form of government or any particular ideology. It simply means that this Organization,
made up of many nations from all the continents, has
now applied, to a greater extent than before, the
principle of universality. And we will be given an
opportunity, which confrontation ...\Till give us, of
meeting headlong, face to face, around the table,
those whose policies we feel are not in the interests
of good relations between the various States of the
world.
40. My country was moved, as I am sure other
countries were moved, to prosecute this great purpose
which is now about to be consummated, ,because We
have a. great belief in the United Nations. We know
the frustrations of the last ten years. We know wherein we have achieved, and we are conscious of the
occasions where we have failed. But we believe in
my country that the United Nations is a great force
and can become a greater force for the good of nations
and the good of the peoples of the world. Because of
that, one of the corner-ftones of the foreign policy
of Canada is its belief in the United Nations. Because
of that belief, we are now given the opportunity of
strengthening the ma:hinery which came into being
while war was yet on.
41. I am sure that we are all grateful to the Pre~
ident of the General Assembly. My delegation'is
grateful likewise to the Secretary-Genei'al for his wise
suggestions. My country wekomes this occasion tonight as an expression of confidence in the United
Nations, as a gesture of goodwill to those nations
which we shall now .welcome and, above all, as a
demonstration of the effectiveness of the principle
of collective security.
42. The· spirit of G€neva is something that we have
talked about during these months. This is not the moment to say whether that spirit still prevails. But
surely it is the occasion to point out that the heads
of the four great and most powerful Governments
in the world did, while they 'met in Geneva, give an
expression to the kind of spirit which I know animates
us at this time. We must make sure that that spirit now
is translated into deeds, and by tonight's decision We
have made some progress in that particular venture.
43. In this, ,the first year of the second .decade of
this Organization, we may, by our decision tonight,
give hope to all peoples and strong purpose to the
Charter of the United. Nations which, if' allowed to
play its part fully, could mean, in this interdependent
world, freedom, security and peace for all mankind.
44. Sir Leslie MUNRC (New Zealand): I am honoured to follow my friend, Mr. Martin, who may be
justly described as the chief architect of. this successful and historic event.
45. Today,' as President of the' Security CoU\nd~ I
had the hQnour to transmit to the President of the
Assembly a positive recommendation. on the. subject
of .new Members [Aj3099]. This fact in itself must

"

458
General
- Tenth Session- Plenary Meetings
------------give us all great satisfaction. It is true that it will
Hon. We are very glad indeed that the Security Council
Assentb~y

not give complete satisfaction. The Security CounciPs
recommendation is nauower in scope than the resolution adopted by the General Assembly six days
ago [552nd meeting]. In particular, one great nation
has not been included, a nation which undoubtedly
satisfies the criteria laid down in the Charter.
46. I 1.."110W that my delegation's regret at this developinent will be widely shared. \Ve trust that the admission of Japan, an island country like my own in
that vital area, the Pacific Ocean, will not be long
delayed, In spite of this serious omission-and its
early rectification we are entitled to expect-the
Security Council's recommendation will be welcomed
as an end to a deadlock which has threatened to depdve our Organization of much of its vitality.
47. In acting promptly and decisively to admit to
membership the sixteen States whose candidatures
were today endorsed by the Security Council, the
General Assembly has enriched the life of the United
NatIons md provided it with new opportunities to
achieve the aims c.."Cpressed in its Charter. I would
not ,vish. these. words to be regarded as no more than
a _,rh~torical.iesponse to the demands o~ a great
occaSIOn.
48. It has been said, and said truly, that in supporting partiCular applications for membership many of
us ·have performed acts of faith. With all goodwill,
I. say that we do not disguise from ourselves the
fact that the wol'ld is divided, even dangerous~y divided, by profound political differences.

49,. We recognize that the ~reat conceptions of the
Charter are construed in different ways in different
parts of the world. This is true of the conception that
the United Nations is based on the freely expressed
will of. the peoples who c;ompose sovereign States.
It is true of the affirmation in the Charter of fundamental· human rights.
50. We deplore the existence of these differences.
But we cannot concede that they constitute in themselves a valid reason fol'. restricting tlie membership
of the United Nations. On the contrary, we feel that
such differences give greater urgency to our efforts
to make the United Nations a meeting place in which
reason and goodwill can and will be brought to bear
on· all international problems.
51. W.e have tonight risen to the opportunity which
we pray will bring this ideal much closer to realization. The admission of sixteen new Members witt
inevitably produce changes in the character of this
Organization.. Change is inherent in life itself. And,
in the case· of a. body such as ours, change is the
only alternative to stagnation. It is to be welcomed.
l' am convinced that tonight we have acted in the
spirit which animated the founders of the United
Nations, . the spirit .of tolerance and of ~ood .neighbou.rliness.We. have given the Unit~d Nations new
life andqew hope. It is now our task to ensure that
t}tis great hope is realized for the benefit of ull
rr.tankind.
52. Sir-l'ercy SPENDER (Australia): As the representative of Australia, it gives me very great pl~asur~ to. indicate to the Assembly the extreme delight
that I feel ·on the occasion which we celebrate.
voted.for the group of eighteen States
Throughout,
which was prev.iously before the Council. As you k11(",,",
Australia was a very early co-sponsor of that resolu-

we

~__,..

be with us, becaus
was prepared to recommend the sixteen nations whose
resentatives from
, other delegations
admission has been effected this evening.
ours should by ir
53. We congratulate all those Members wh.~::.'r have
been admitted tonight, and we should like to say a
59. I would clos
few words of congratulation to those whose. efforts
not my pleasant d
have brought this about.
. .
Mr. Schurmann,
lands. and Mr. R
54. I especially single out, if I may say so, Mr. Martin
who .for two ye
of the Canadian delegation~ who has laboured for
effort that canno
many weeks now to king about this result. We
was silent and un
knO\..r what a -deep debt of gratitude we owe to him
unremitting. I 511
for all that he has done. I should also like to pay my
General Assembl
tribute to the representative of Peru, Mr. Belaunde,
ciates of mine.
'who, with his colleagues in the Committee of Good
Offices, laboured for this result during the last year.
60. And I shoul
I would like, also, to mention the Ambassador of
is being given w
been done by oth
Ceylon, Mr. Gunewardene, who, perhaps as much
forgotten: the
as anybody else, laboured in the last three on four
American de1ega .
we~ks to achieve the result which. we have tonight.
Mt. Urquia, pres
55. We voted for illis re::.olution but wc did not cothe problem thor
sponsor it, although we had co-sponsored the original
contribution mad
draft resolution [A/AC.80/L.3]. The reason why we
sentatives of the
did not co-sponsor it was because it did not include the
of joy our tha
name of Japan. In supporting the first draft resolution
which came before the Ad Hoc Political Committee,
61. And 'there ar
zatioll, which has
we made our views plain as to why we did so. We
may finally be str
indicated that we had to depart from principles to
may diminish ~ s a
which we had adhered over many years. We felt we
should do so because there was no other. way in which
mankind will alwa
our zeal and ioya
we could break the log-jam which prevented us from
from all corners
accepting further Members into this Organization. We
had to go back upon those principles; and perhaps
mankind that see
nations, like humans, are entitled now and again to be
62. Great dange
right despite their principles. And so it is that we
great Russian wr
decided that the correct thing to do was to make this
sorrows, confront
arrangement under which a number of nations were
. pointments of fa
to be admitted.
.
.
,
united at heart, a
56. With regard to Japan, which W35· one of the
:1 must not be divi
nations mentioned in the original draft resolution, we 3 us must respect th
listened to the discussions in the Security Council, and ~ But here, united
it was evident thatt.~erp. was no possible objection 1 facing new horiz
whatever to its admission. It is· with great .regret
hear the heartbeat
indeed that I noted tonight that weh;td. failed to
be .the heartbeats
admit that country. We do know that there is. to be
63.
Before this s
ai-wther meeting of the Security Council tomorrow,
integration,
and a
and I believe that, having regard to the views exall schools of tho
pressed by every member of the Council, the proper
with their cultur
course tomorrow would be to recommend Japan. for
of Europe, .whiadmission to the United Nations.
taking their righ
57. As the'President has said, tonight is an historic
with certain count
occasion on which a number of nations have been
us both their age
admitted to the United Nations. For my part, I forget
born of freedom,
all the past. I hope that these new nations, in entering
born to ,serve m
this Organization, will accept in truth the responsiand Portuguese
bilities which rest upon them as Members,:. and that
universality-:-Ame
they will do all they can to make this q.I1 effective
this glorious and
instrument for peace. I wish to assodate,.lnyself with
memorating. the si
the remarks that the President has made,this evening.
made at San Fra
could. commemor
58.' Mr. BELAUNDE (Peru) (translated from
speech is· always
Spanish): The great emotions of joy. and hope are
it better today,· b
mute, and for that reason Idqnot w1sh to profane
understanding an
my word" the deep emotion we all feel today. It is
which was· intend
an emotion of joy, because an ideal for which so many
in character, has a
of us have been striving since·. the signing. of. the
ten .years:aftei- it
Charter at San Francisco, and more particularly since
1949, has beertlargely fulfilled. ,~nd,atthesame
64. And allow m
time, it is an occasion forhop~, for we cannot'forget
deepfeelil1g .that
those who are not yet among us. We hope they .will
tinguished Latin

"~'-'~ -,,"~"" . '-'·"="hc..l/::~"'~'~Il.1'f~:li~~~;P?S!I~.Q!II!t!l!!f!!f~,llI~m~~~~~"F",~.?jlJR"",\~~

I

)1.

,

',;.,"1'

"

"

555th meeting -' 14 December 1955

be with us, because our dream-the dream of the representatives from the Americas, which \s shared by
other delegations as well-is that this Organization of
ours should by truly universal.
59. I would close my remarks at this point were it
not my pleasant duty to pay a tribute to my associates,
Mr. Schurmann, the representative of the Netherlands. and Mr. Ramadan, the representative of Egypt,
who' for two years took part, at my side, in an
effort that cannot be forgotten, because, although it
was silent and unobtrusive, it was both constant and
unremitting. I should li1<:e my words to convince the
General Assembly of the credit due to these associatesof mine.

439

Assembly that, was destined to issue this call to all
the peoples and to give hope to those not yet among
us, thereby 'proclaiming our immortal ideal of universality.
65.. Mr. DE FREITAS VALLE (Brazil):: Brazil
supported the admission to the United Nations of
eighteen candidates, and we regret very m.uch that
Japan has been left out. For ten years we have advocated the admission here of Italy. We tried to help
Spain and Austria to gain admission.
66. We welcome all the sixteen new Members, but I
cannot conceal the fact that our great .ioy today is
to s·ee the admission to the' United Nations of our
mother country Portugal, our· old glorious Port.ugal,
the land of· the navigators that discovered half the
world and. brought Western civilization to all corners
of. the earth. I feel sure that the collaboration of
Portugal in the United Nations will be fruitful for
all 0'£ us. Portugal will bring its spirit of adventure
and its determination to face reality with decision.

60. And I should also like, at this time when credit
is being given where it is due, to recall all that has
been done by other delegations which should not be
forgotten: the Argentine delegation and the Central
J
American delegations, one of whose representatives,
Mt. Urquia, presided over a committee that studied
the problem thoroughly; I must also mention the
contribution made by" the most distinguished repre67. I think that we should all be happy. about this
historic day.
'
.,
sentatives of the Latin A1nerican nations. At this time
68. Sir PiersonDIXQN. (United Kingdom): This
of joy our thanks should go to them also.
61. And 'there are great hopes too; that ourOi:garii~
is an historic ~nd a moving occasion at our Headzation, which has lived through such sorrowful times,quarters in this~greatmetropoiis of the United States.
may finally be strengthened, that international tension
69. ~ow that th~ recommendations of the. Secttrity
may diminish c s a result of this "'TJIlbolk action which
CounCIl have be~n approved by the General Assembly,
mankind will always remember anL, lastly, that, through
we shall be welcoming into our ranks sixteen new
our zeal and loyalty, and together with our brothers
Members, and that will add by more than a quarter to
from all corners of the world, we may create a new
our. present membership and will' help to convert the
mankind that seeks nothing hut justice and peace.'
United Nations ·into an international body with' a rt~al
, 62. Great dangers, like great ideal:>, unite men. A
claim to being the world Organization for whicJ:t its
fo~ders planneq.
.
great Russian writer has said that, faced with life's
sorrows, confronted by certain injustices. and disap~
70. Her Maj~sty'~.Govern:mentin the United King:pointments of fate, men .should come together, be
dom· has~de dear on.,many.occasions. its ardent
united at heart, and feel that they are brothers. We
desire to see the deadlock on 'the admission of new
must not be divided by ideological disputes: each of
Members broken. We ',have doU:e eyerything in our
us must respect the different points of view of others.
power. to .achi~vethis and are naturally g-ratifiedby
But here, united in the pur~;uit of a common ideal,
the re::,ultof the vdting in'the Security Coundland
facing new horizdns and identical dangers, we shall
in the. Genera,l Assembly today.
hear the heartbeats of this Assembly" which will also
71~.· Although .we. were ready to, vote for eighteen
be the heartbeats of mankind.
applicants, and indeed did so, my delegation has never
63. Before this spectacle of a world thaUs achieving
beenalllongstthose who accepted the proposition :
integration, and at this historic hour when peoples of
eighteen or nothing.'
.
.
all schools of thought and tradition are enriching us
72. We note with satisfaction the action of the
with their cultural heritage, when certain countries
Sovie~ Union ,in not' insisting on the candidature of
of Europe, which had been unjustly'forgotten, are
Outer Mongolia. It is a welcdmeindication of the
taking their rightful places in bur midst, together
reco'gnition that in international, relationships fruitful
with certain countries of Asia and Africa which bring
co-operatioriis no~ possible withdutan element' of
us both their age-old culture. and a new-found youth
give-and-take.:
born of freedom, Ainerica-'-Our America, which was
born to ,serve mankind, .which, through its Spanish
73. Our' first and natural concern was td see our
and Portuguese origins, has always had a sense of
friends here with us and to see the Unifed Nations
universality-America proclaims to the world that on
more truly represel.J.tativeof the world as it is."W'e
this glorious' and memorable day we are worthily COmwere prepared' in .' cpl1sidering the'. a:pplications df all
memorating the signing of the Charter. The speeches
concern~d topushtblerance to its utmost limits, promade at San Francisco, admirable though they were,
vided that others were ,<tilling td do thesall1e. We
could. commemorate it . but ,imperfectly, for, human
were even prepared to go to the length of supporting
speech is' always imperfect ; we are commemorating
the applicqHon' of Albania, a country' whose past
it better today,' by
finest example' of tolerance,
actions had caused 'us to have legitimate misgivings.
This decision may,Ihope, have made a. ndtinsignifunderstanding andharmony,an4 our Orgahization,
which was intended by its founders' to be universal
icann~ontribution to the solution nowreach~d.
in character,' has achieved' that' magnificent' universality
74: .·.'Qn a. day of.s~b(isatisfaction, .our dwn keenest
ten years after its foundation.
pleasure springs from the unanimous vote in favour
64., .And allow me, a~ 'an American, to point out with
of the admission of Ceylon, our' dear and close friend
deep .feelirtg ,that Providence ,has willed that a diswithin the Commonwealth. T should also like to. salute
with partiCular warmth: the' arrival in our midst of
tinguished Latin American should preside over the

the

""', ., .'~.

4iO

~

'. \ ..

~

General Assembly -

Tenth Session -

J;Ilany of our. other friends and close associates in
different parts of the world.
.
75. Th~ result~ achiev~d ~ere today could hardly have
been ach1eved W1thout tne tireless and patient efforts of
the C;ommittee of Good Offices, headed by that out~
stanqmg statesman, t..~e representative of Peru, Mr.
Belaunde.
76. Let me pay a tribute, too, to the work of the
Canadian delegation, under the indefatigable and farsighted leadership of Mr. Martin. Indeed, the Com~nonwealth as a whole, I' think I may say without
Immodesty, has not failed in making its contribution
to the breaking of the deadlock.
77. There is one reverse which casts a shadow On
oui" proceedings. That is the fact that we have not
succeeded in securjng the admission of Japan this
year. We view itsabserice with deep regret. I cannot
believe. that its exclu?ion wi11"con~inue for long. My
delegatIOn for one w1ll not relax 1ts efforts to seC11re
it~ admission.
78. I have no doubt that the sixteen new Members
of the United Nations which have just joined. us will
enter this Organization in full determination to respect in, all ways the obligations which membership
nnposes. I have no doubt that their inclusion in this
Organization will contribute to making the United
Nations a more effective centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations and a more influential force in the
,~orld in the essential task which we have of helping
to preserve peace and security.

79. Mr. ALPHAND (France) (translated from
French): This has, been a historic day. The United
Nations, which is hardly ten years, old, has acquired
in one. everting sixteen new Member States. This
is an event, of enormous significance, which has very
greatly enhanced the authority, the prestige and the
influence of our Organization.
80. Some ef the States which have entered our
Organiz~_tion, such as Italy, have made valuable contributions to civilization, and have an important place
in the, modern world; others have acquired their present structure andthe.ir independence only recently.
81.'1 should like to give a special welcome to Cambodia and Laos, to which France is attached by legal
ties and by sentiment.
82. The French delegation is happy to welcome all
the new Members here. It is convinced that they will
all make a real contributiQn to our Organization and
assume their share of the" responsibilities which we
must bear before the peoples of the world.,
83. Now that a new chapter in the history of the
United Nations has been opened by the decisions we
have taken today, the French delegation has only one
,regtet:tha': is that a great nation with which my
COtultry maintains friendly relations in06t one of
those admitted. I should like to see in the statement
made by the representative of the Soviet Union, Mr.
Sobolev, in the Security Council this afternoon. [705th
meeting], an assurance that, Japan will be with us
at the next session of this Assembly.
84. I -Would also like to say that I am sorry ,that
the candidature of two countries for which France 1ms
voted on several occasions in the past could not pe
taken into consideration.
.
85. Let me express the hope tonight that, strengthen'edby :sixteen new Member States, our Organization

Plenary Meetings

sion [552nd meetin
still hope that the
to recommending so
admission of the tw
94. It is of great
Assembly at this s
break a ten-year-ol
new Members. We
sive victory on the
the United Nations.
95. We recognize
the Security Counci
we appreciate even
today and the displ
so large a measure
appeared hopeless te
96. I do not wish
the views of my; del
ciple of universality
land, as we hope, p
cations. All this ca!'
United Nations ov
cannot leave this
deserved tribute, to th
bly and to his effort
ing of the Assembl
Mr.
Belaunde and f
88. Vie welcome the first group of countries in the
which has worked
certainty that they will 'strengthen the eagerness of
difficulties, to break
the Unite~' Nations to affirm human freedom, to proI wish to express th
mote socml welfare and to maintain international
the leadership that
peace. We welcome the second group in the confidence
towards universality
that pr{)xin~ity to so many peace-loving nations will
achieve today's res
sho.w them \\he road to complete freedom along which
leled devotion to the
theIr peoples\ yearn to travel, and that their contact
with us will make it easier for them to fulfil the \ . honour to his great
of the United Natio
i~te~tion and. ~e promise which they make on being
aamltted to thIS body, namely, that they will hence- l 97. Mr. URQUIA
forth conduct themselves in accordance with the
Spanish): The actio
principles of the United Nations Charter, and espe- ,j and the General As
cially with the requirements of Article 4.
:1
ber 1955 will henc
the most important,
89. As a Latin American, I welcome the circummost noteworthy, d
stance that. this enc.ouraging and substantial expansion
Nations. Through th
of the Umted Nations has occurred under the presithe deadlbck that fo
dency of a distinguished son of Latin America., who
has played such an important part in the progress that ~ delegations from set
at last been broken.
has brought us to this happy hour.
98. The utmost effo
90. C;osta. Rica expresses the hope that the S~ct1rity
and it is well to re
CouncIl wIll very soon recommend the admisslOn of
have worked so hard
Japan, so that immediate action may be taken in that
certainly deserve th
connexion.
of
the countries co
91. Allow me, as a priest, to interpret the religious
as
a
whole, but als!
feeling of the peoples today admitted to this Organindividuals who, eveJ
ization, and of those which are already Members, and
into existence, have
to call upon the help of Divine Providence, that this
problem
and striven
Organization may succeed in achieving peacefqr the
99. I should like to
world and well-being for man.
Ar~entinian, Mr. Jo
92. Mr. MATES (Yugoslavia): Yugoslavia is in
gaflons of many c
the singular position of welcoming among the sixteen
the wcrld, but esp
new Members of the United Nations no fewer than
leading part in tho
six of the seven countries whic1J, are its immediate
played by Mr. Bela
neighbour.s. We hope that inside the United Nations
delegations-and
M
we shall continue to develop with them the friendly
mention the fact a
relations which we have developed until now.
contributed, even if
93. My delegation voted for the admission of atl
a solution.
sixteen countries recommended by the Security Coun100. We have at
cil, We would have voted for ,the other two countries
problem
has'not bee
covered by the resolution ad.opted earlier in this seswill levote itself more than ever to the constructive
tasks which are its purposes under our Charter-the
promotion of better standards of Hving and social
progress, the development of friendly relati,r 'among
peopl~s and the maintenance of pt:Rce throt. .11 respect
for law and for treaties.
~
86. Mr. NuNEZ (Costa Rica) (translated from
Spanish): Costa Rica voted in favour of the admission of the sixteen countries which have just been
made Members of the United Nations, for it has
alway., maintained that universality would enable the
O!ganization to achieve the purposes and principles
laid down in its Charter, which is its constitution.
87. The application of the principle of universality
in the membership of the United Nations has benefited
a number of countries whose political and social
syste'.ns deserve our ful1 sympathy and approval becaUSI~ they are in keeping with that respect for human
digr.ity, and freedom which is the essence of the
der.lOc:acy enjoyed by the Costa Rican people.. Other
ccu,utnes have also been favoured whose political and
social systems we cannot, unfortunately, endorse in
':he sam~ way, because they involve the application
o~ tctalitarian doctrines which violate the dignity of
the pe?ple~ concerned, as well as their right to seHdetermm:;.tlOn.

. :'l~!JI!~~,~~!j,~~1{"i~!~-#~~~-9t,'#'!li!tfii::f'~~i~"'''9~J~~~~\,~.r,'.'i~C;:;"Z:""C""""5""" ", ••~;'

ji

I

I

\'. i,' i·~,',

"

,_•. \ 'I

~

"

442

General Assembly -

Tenth. Session -

107. As I made clear by actions in the Security
C<";iilcil today, we keenly. regret that Japan was not
electw, but we will continue to work for its admission.
108. We cordially welcome all the new Members
and believe chat their presence here will greatly add
to the usefulness uf the United Nations.

Plenary Meetings

era! Assr:::nbly and in the Security Council. However,
as a result of the veto exercised by the representative
of Chiang Kai-shek, who illegally occupies a seat in
the Security Council, all eighteen States could not
be admitted. \Ve regret that as a result the Mongolian
People's Republic cannot take its place in the United
Nations today.
~09. Prince WAN WAITHAYAKON (Thailand): 118. In its desire to promote international co-operaMy delegation shares the gratification' that has been
tion bu every available means, and sincerely wishinl1"
expressed at the admission of sixteen new Members
J
~
to the United Nations.
to find a way out of the impasse, the Soviet Government today submitted a new proposal in the Security
110. I wish now to· e."Cplain my delegation's vote on
Council for the admission of sixteen States to the
the draft resolution.
'
United Nations.
111. . It is a matter of .great regret to the delegation
119. The Soviet delegation notes with satisfaction
L;at this proposal was supported by the GVerwhelmof Thailand that Japan was not included among the
sixteen countries which the Security Cotmcil recoming majority of delegations, both in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly. There can be
mended for admission to the United Nations. My
delegation earnestly hopes that:, tomorrow, the Security
no doubt that today's decision to admit sixteen States
Council will recommt:nd Japan for admission, beto the United Nations not only meets the just demands
of these States; it will also play Its part in improvcause we are convinced t.~at Japan's membership of
the United Nations will benefit not only Japan but
ing relations between States and strengthening peace
the United Nations itself.
" a n d friendship among the peoples.
112. My delegation, however, is very Happy that the
120. The decision to admit sixteen States to the
Security Coundl's recommendation included twelve
United Nations is fresh proof that, if the interested
countries with which Thailand has friendly relations,
parties show a desire for co-operation and mutual
namely, Jordan, Ireland,Portugal, Italy; i\ustria, Finunderstanding, a satisfactory solution can be found
land, Ceylon, Nepal, Libya, Cambodia, Laos and Spain.
even .for difficult international problems.
We whole-heartedlywelcome these countri~s.We are
121. We hope that, as a result of joint efforts,
certain that the membership of Ceylon, Cambodia and . ~teps will be taken to ensure the admission of the
Laus in the United Nations will greatly contribute
Mongolian People's Republic and of Japan to the
to the promotion of international peace and of security
United Nations at the next session of the General
in South-East Asia.
Assembly.
113. The delegation of Thailand is. in favour of
122. On behalf of the Soviet Union I warmly conthe widest possible membership of the United Nations.
gratulate the new Members of our Organization and
Fo!' the same reason that it was in ·favour of· the
wish them successful work in the family of the United
Nations for the causes of peace and progress. The
admission of all eighteen applicant coun~ries about
which no problem of unification arose, it has tonight
Soviet delegation is confident that the participation
of the newMembers in the work of the United Nations
supported the admission, of all sixteen countries recommended by the Security Council.. My delegation
will contribute to the development of co-operation
between States and the strengthening of universal
was one of the sponsors of the draft resolution submitted to the General Assembly at this meeting, and,
peace.
of course, voted in favou!()f that dra£t.
123. In conclusion, I must pay a special tribute to
114:. May the United Nations grow and prosper now
il.l{t. Maza, the President of the General Assembly,
thatit has become, in effect, a truly worldwide organt( .v;'i". Hammarskjold, the Secretary-General, to Sir
ization.
.
LeslieMunro, the President of the Security Council,
. 1.1$•..Mr. KUZN.ETSOV:(Union ofSoviet Socialist
to Mr. Belatmde, Chairman of the Committee of
Good Offices, to Mr. Martin, Chairman of the CanRepublics) . (trQ1t$lated from Russian): The Securi~y
adian delegation, to Mr. Menon, Chairman. of the
Council .and the Gener~l Assembly have today taken
Indian delegation,and to Mr. Trujillo,' Chairman of
the veryimpor..ant decision to a~it s~teen new
the Ecuadorian delegation, for their efforts in arriv¥embers to the United Nations.;The solution of this
ing at a satisfactory solution of the problem of the
problem will do much to broad~n international·.. coadmission of new Members.
i::r:~~~it:oa~~:r:en
Ynit~~d Nations ,and to 124. 'Mr. OLIVIERI (Argentina) (translated from
.
. . . ,,', ,
", . .
.
:
Spanish): We are so deeply moved by today's act,
116.1'he consideration '0£ the qu~stion at the prese~t
which is of such fundamental importance for the
session showed tlm.f the ~vcrwhelming majority of
United Nations, that words fail u's. The long awaited
breakhlg of the deadlock with regard to the admission
Member S~es was agreed al1d •anxious that a .positive
solution to this long-stan9iIlg p~Qblem, should beJound
of new Members on this memorable day fills us with
during .thepre~ent sessi9n.. This general trend \vas
deep ~appiness.
teflected in. the fact that fifty-two. delegat~ons sup125. All I now want to say to Spain, Italy, Portugal,
ptirtedthe "draft, resolution [A/30791 recommending
Jordan, Ireland, Austria, Albania, Hungary, Romania,
theiu:Iny~sion ofeigh~~en countries whi.ch had applied
Bulgaria; Finland, Ceylon, .Nepal, Libya, Cambodia and
'fot meIi:I1~ership..·
., '
Laos on behalf of the Argentine people is, welcome
117.TheSoviet Union, true to its policy. of strict
to the Organization! We are fully convinced that they
co.mpliance with the provisions of· the Charter, has
will make a valuable contribution to the cause of
consistently advocated the admission of these eighteen
peace, security and friendly relations, which is the
States to the United Nations. It ·therefore supported
cause of all the peoples n:presented here today, frathe admission of the eighteen States bbthin.the Genternally united in the same, spirit.

tit;

c

126. At the
countries whi
soon join us
127. Mr. R
desire to add
expression of
our of the n
128. It has
conclusion of
of many yea
ceeded, it is b
of the Gener
efforts of our
jold, and beca
of Peru, Mr.
of New Zeal
fishly in orde
ished by the
129. This is
the whole int
the realizatio
represented a
our Organiza
countries in
problems of
faithful expre
130. The Ph
makes special
tries of Ceyl
Jordan that,
bers in this w
the request fo
an friends,
was finally f 1
Ceylon, led b
John Kotelaw
and we are ha
seat and centr

131. And no
former mothe
this world Or
us into conta
opened for
culture. Spain
its impondera
satisfaction in
of gentility an
have enriched
It IS with a
that I exten
ass' '~it for
ment in our VI
well-being an .
132. My Go
of the Unitel
our Charter,
others show
responsibilitie
Nations, they
ization on a b
133. It is w
press the sati
nations have
Organization.
them my whol
tal:ings of the
and foster'

:ver,
Ltive

t in

not
lEan
tited

era!ling
ernlrhy
the

:tion
elmtrity
I be
:ates
mds
roveace

the
:sted
ltual
lUnd

arts,
the
the
leral

conand
lited
The
ltion
:lons
ltion
ersal

e to
lbly,
Sir
lndl,
: of
Canthe
1 of
rrivthe

Crom

act,
the
aited
;sion
with

ugal,
ania,
, and
:ome
they
e of
the
fra-

i

555th meeting - 14 December 1955

126. At the same time, we sincerely hope that those
countries which are still waiting for admission will
soon join us in our great undertaking.
127. Mr. RO'MULO (Philippines): The Philippines
desire to add its word of welcome to the universal
expression of approbation given here tonight in honour of the new Members of the United Nations.
128. It has been difficult to arrive at a successful
conclusion of this question which has been the subject
of many years of negotiation, but, if we have succeeded, it is because we were ably led by the President
of the General Assembly, and because of the untiring
efforts of our able Secretary-General, Mr. Hammarskjold, and because of dedicated men like Mr. Belaunde
of Peru, Mr. Martin of Canada, Sir Leslie Munro
of New Zealand, and others who worked so unselfishly in order that this dream of long standing, cherished by the world, might be fulfilled tonight.
129. This is an event of outstanding importance for
the whole international community, because it marks
the realization of a wish, shared by all peoples here
represented and by others still outside the orbit of
our Organization, for the entry into our midst of an
countries in the world, the better to approach the
problems of our time with unanimity and a more
faithful expression of world opinion.
130. The Philippines will be forgiven, I hope, if it
makes special mention of the Asian and African countries of Ceylon, Nepal, Libya., Cambodia, Laos and
Jordan that, beginning tonight, are our fellow Membel'S in this world Organization. We are gratified that
the request for the admission of our Asian and African friends, underscored in the Bandung Declaration,
was finally fulfilled by our historic act this evening.
Ceylon, led by that great leader and statt'-::man, Sir
John Kotelawala, played a leading role at Bandu'J.g,
and we are happy to welcome that country, which is a
seat and centre of Asian culture, into our fold.
131. And now I am bound to pay my tribute to my
former mother country, Spain, upon its admission into
this world Organization. It was Spain that first brought
us into contact with the West. It was Spo.in that
opened for my people the path to new horizons of
culture. Spain has left in my country the heritage of
its imponderable moral values, and it is with genuine
satisfaction in my heart that I must point to the traces
of gentility and nobility with which the Spanish people
have enriched the history and the culture of my land.
It IS with a deep sense of friendship and gratitude
that I extend a welcome to that great nation and
ass' .~ it for the unstinted collaboration of my Government in our work here in the· United Nations for the
well-being and progress of our fellow-men.
132. My Government believes in the universality
of the United Nations as a cardinal principle of
our Charter, and it is our firm conviction that, as
others show a desire and a willingness to share the
responsibilities that go with membership of the United
Nations, they should all have a place in our Organization on a basis of sovereign equality.
133. It is with such convictions that I hereby express the satisfaction of my Government that these
nations have been admitted to membership of our
Organization. In the name of my people I pledge to
them my whole-hearted co-operation in all such undertalings of the United N:).tions as will strengthen peace
and foster' mutual understanding among nations. I·

443

express the sincere wish that they will do their best to
uphold the good name of the United Nations as the
true symbol of mankind's legitimate aspiration to
permanent pe\lce.
134. Mr. DE LA COLINA (Mexico) (translated
from Spanish~\: When I explained my delegation's
vote in the Ad Hoc Political Committee [32nd meeting] on the item relating to the admission of new
Members, I said that not all the countries which were
implicitly included in operative paragraph 2 of the
dr f
l' b f
[AlAe 80lL <-jR 1]
a t reso ution e ore us
. . - ev. warranted our support to an equal degree, and not all
of them, in our view, were equally qualified to belong
to the world Organization. Nevertheless, in view of
the historic importance of the act which seemed imminent, and taking into account the generous concessions made by various countries, Mexico, I said, could
not do otherwise than support the draft resolution.
Those concessions were not prompted, as had been
alleged, by a reprehensible desire to temporize; they
were the outcome of a prudent and praiseworthy
effort to break the deadlock which had paralysed our
Orgmization and stunted its growth.
135. This reaffirmation of the principle of universality in my earlier statement is in no way inconsistent,
in our view, with our abstention in the case of Spain.
We share the view of other delegations that it is not
inconsistent to have voted in favour of the proposal
as a whole and to have abstained later, during the voting on each of the applicants individually.
136. My delegation abstained in the case of the.
country which is dearest to Mexico among those which
applied for admission to the United Nations, the one
to which we are most closely linked by language, tradition and culture, for the sole reason that we consider
that the declaration of 25 June 1945, interpreting
Article 4 of the Charter, has not yet been abrogated,
and that General Assembly resolutions 39 (I) and
114 (H) still stand.
137. We are sure that the noble Spanish people 'A-ill
understand the reason for our abstention.
138. In conclusion, may I pay a warm tribute to
Mr. Belau.nde, the representative of Peru and Chairman of the Committee of Good Offices; to the representative of El Salvador, who so ably conducted the
debates in the Ad Hoc Political Committee relating
to this question in 1954; to Mr. Martin, the representative of Canada, who worked indefatigably to produce the joint draft resolution approved by fifty-two
members of t1:le Assembly; to Sir Leslie Munro, the
representative of New Zealand, this month's President of the Security Council; and to the President
of the Gene!?l Assembly and the Secretary-General,
who have both shovm extraordinary tact, patience and
ability in wisely reconciling the wishes and efforts
of the great majority of delegations in order to open
our Organization to all the countries of the world.
My delegation sincerely hopes that this desire will
soon be fully realized.
139. Mr. QUIROGA GALDO (Bolivia) (translated
from Spanish): The Bolivian delegation co-sponsored
the joint draft resolution which was approved this
evening because it has always considered, as a matter
of principle, that it IS absolutely necessary to enlarge
the range of action of the United Nations until uni..:
versality is achieved.
.
140. My country has always maintained that the Purposes and· Principles of the Charter can bec?me really

444

General Assembly -

Tenth Session -

effective only when our Organization comprises every
country in the world, each with its own, clearly identifiable features, when those artificial creations of
history which we call States patently display the characteristics of statehood, combining with those basic
elements of statehood-territory, population and government-the dynamic and clear will to achieve
the highest social purposes and the ability to carry
out faithfully the duties imposed by international life.
.
. .
141. My ~elegation, whIch to.day Joyfully w~lcomes
the admISSIon of those founta-m-heads of l.atin culture-Spain, Italy and Portugal-hopes that the his-

Plenary Meetings

United Nati

toric step taken this evening by the Security Council
and approved by the overwhelming majority of the
General Assembly will be a happy precedent for open~
ing the doors of this Organization to the countries
which are not yet Members. Among these countries a
special mention should be made of Japan and Germany, powerful representatives of the cultures of
East and West. We hope that the countries which arc
still outside the Organization will be admitted to it
as soon as possible, so that world peace and the wellbeing of mankind may be assured.

I

GENEE

ASSEM

TENTH SES
Official Reco

The meeting rose at 11.45 p.m.

Agenda item 21:
Admission of n
(concluded)

•

Agenda item 35:
The Togoland t
the Trust Ter
ministration
Reports .of tI
Committee

Presw.

Admission of Jl
1. The PRES
Before I call u
explain their vo
admission of ne
brief but warm
of the new Mer
Hall today. M~
Assembly will, i
! welcoming and
I representatives (
~ ceremony for w
'. be made.
~ 2. At this met
:1
tions of vote. A
J not know, for OJ
~ meeting, and as
~ position, I shal
Paraguay.
3. Mr. MO~
(translated fron
S present at last
~I not informed 0
suddenly. I wan
President for t
4. For these r
interest in the m
bly and the Pre
as follows: in
Ireland, Portug
Nepal, Libya, '(
the spiritual mo
tries which is al
so generously e
5. I should a
regard to AlbaIl
to be recorded.
6. Moreover, I
d~legation is to
tnes for which i

I

Printed in Canada

Q-77001-March 1956-1.950
