General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTE,NTS

1647 (XVI). Enlargement of the International Law Commission: amendments
to articles 2 and 9 of the Statute of the Commission (6 November 1961)
(item 77) ...... , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • .
1685 (XVI). International conference of plenipotentiaries on ~onsular relations
(18 December 1961) (item 69).......................................
1686 (XVI). Future work in the field of the codification and progressive development of international law (18 December 1961) (item 70).................
1687 (XVI). Question of special missions (18 December 1961) (item 71)......

1647 (XVI). Enlargement of the International
Law CommiHion: amendments to articles 2
and 9 of the Statute of the Commission

Pag,

61
61
62
62

its thirteenth session,1 which contains draft articles and
commentaries on consular relations,

Recalling that, according to paragraph 27 of that
report, the International Law Commission decided to
recommend that the General Assembly should convene
an international conference of plenipotentiaries to study
the Commission's draft on consular relations and conclude one or more conventions on the subject,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1103 (XI) of 18 December
1956, by which the membership of the International
Law Commission was established at twenty-one
members,
Noting that the membership of the United Nations
has increased substantially since the adoption of that
resolution,
1. Decides to amend as follows article 2, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Law Commission:
"The Commission shall consist of twenty-five members who shall be persons of recognized competence
in international law";
2. Decides, as a consequence, to amend as follows
article 9, paragraph 1, of the said Statute:
"The twenty-five candidates who obtain the greatest number of votes and not less than a majority of
the votes of the Members present and voting shall be
elected";
3. Decides, by way of exception and in consequence
of the enlargement of the Commission, to request the
Secretariat to include in the list of candidates in the
election to be held at the current session, in addition
to the nominations already received, such names as shall
have been communicated to it in writing before 15
November 1961.
1047th plenary meeting,
6 November 1961.

Ex-pressing its firm belief that the successful codification and progressive development of the rules governing consular relations would contribute to the development of friendly relations among nations, irrespective
of their differing constitutional and social systems,
Noting with satisfaction that the draft articles on
consular relations prepared by the International Law
Commission constitute a good basis for the preparation
of a convention on that subject,
Desiring to provide an opportunity for completing
the preparatory work by further expressions and exchanges of views concerning the draft articles at the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its work on consular relations;
2. Requests Member States to submit to the Secretary-General written comments concerning the draft
articles by 1 July 1962, in order that they may be
circulated to Governments prior to the beginning of the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly;
3. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries be convened to consider the question of
consular relations and to embody the results of its work
in an international convention and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to convoke the
conference at Vienna at the beginning of March 1963;
5. Invites States Members of the United Nations,
States members of the specialized agencies and States
parties to the Statute cf the International Court of
Justice to participate in the conference and to include
among their representatives experts competent in the
field to be considered;

1685 (XVI). International conference of plenipotentiaries on consular relations

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission covering the work of
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 9 (A/4843).

61

62

General Assembly-Sixteenth Senion

6. Invites the specialized agencies and the interested
inter-governmental organizations to send observers to
the conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
conference documentation and recommendations concerning its methods of work and procedures;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the necessary staff and facilities which will be required
for the conference ;
9. Refers to the conference chapter II of the report
of the International Law Commission covering the work
of its thirteenth session, together with the records of
::he relevant debates in the General Assembly, as the
basis for its consideration of the question of consular
relations;
10. Expresses the hope that the conference will be
fully attended;

11. Decides to include the item entitled "Consular
relations" in the provisional agenda of its seventeenth
s~ssion to all~w further expr~ssi,ns and exchanges of
views concernmg the draft articles on consular relations.

1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.
1686 (XVI). Future work in the field of the codification and progressive development of
international law

The General Assembly·,
Recalling its resolution 1505 (XV) of 12 December
1960,
Considering that the conditions prevailing in the
world today give increased importance to the role of
international law in relations among nations,
Emphasizing the important role of codification and
progressive development of international law with a
view to making international law a more effective means
of ~urthering the purposes and principles set forth in
Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful of its responsibilities under Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of th~ Charter to encourage the progressive
development of mternational law and its codification ,
Having surveyed the present state of international
~w with ~articular r~gard_ to the preparation of a new
hst of topics for cod1ficat10n and progressive development of international law,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the valuable work it has already

accomplished in the codification and progressive development of international law;
2. Takes note of chapter III of the report of the
International Law Commission covering the work of
its thirteenth session ;1
3. Recommends the International Law Commission:
(a) To continue its work in the field of the law of
treaties and of State responsibility and to include on
its priority list the topic of succession of States and
Governments ;
( b) To consider at its fourteenth session its future
programme of work, on the basis of sub-paragraph (a)
above and in the light of the discussion in the Sixth
Committee at the fifteenth and sixteenth sessions of the
General Assembly and of the observations of Member
States submitted pursuant to resolution 1505 (XV),
and to report to the Assembly at its seventeenth session
on the conclusions it has reached ;
4. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
seventeenth session the question entitled "Consideration
of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations".

1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.
1687 (XVI). Question of special missions

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1504 (XV) of 12 December
1960, whereby it referred to the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities the
draft articles on special missions contained in chapter
III of the report of the International Law Commission
covering the work of its twelfth session,2
Noting the resolution on special missions adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities at its 4th plenary meeting, held
on 10 April 1%1, recommending that the subject be
referred again to the International Law Commission,3
Requests the International Law Commission, as soon
as it considers it advisable, to study further the subject
of special missions and to report thereon to the General
Assembly.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.
• Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/4425).
• Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 71, document
A/4773, para. 1.
