S/PV.7610

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7610th meeting

Tuesday, 26 January 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nin Novoa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Ms. Zerkal
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-01806 (E)
*1601806*

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the Ministers and
other representatives present at today’s meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Libya, Lebanon, Maldives, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Rodolfo Reyes
Rodríguez, Vice-Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
2/67

26/01/2016

The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Council on the
situation in the Middle East.
(spoke in English)
Sadly, 2016 has begun much like 2015
ended — with unacceptable levels of violence and
a polarized public discourse across the spectrum in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. Stabbings,
vehicle attacks and shootings by Palestinians targeting
Israeli civilians — all of which I condemn — and
clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces
have continued to claim lives. But security measures
alone will not stop the violence. They cannot address
the profound sense of alienation and despair driving
some Palestinians, especially young people. The full
force of the law must be brought to bear on all those
committing crimes, with a system of justice applied
equally to Israelis and Palestinians alike.
Palestinian frustration is growing under the weight
of a half century of occupation and the paralysis of the
peace process. Some have taken me to task for pointing
out this indisputable truth. Yet, as oppressed peoples
have demonstrated throughout the ages, it is human
nature to react to occupation, which often serves as a
potent incubator of hatred and extremism. So-called
facts on the ground in the occupied West Bank are
steadily chipping away the viability of a Palestinian
State and the ability of Palestinian people to live in
dignity.
In an effort to overcome the political impasse,
Quartet Envoys met with Israeli and Palestinian
officials on 17 December 2015. They reiterated the
urgent need for significant steps, in line with previous
agreements, to strengthen Palestinian institutions and
security and economic prospects, while addressing
Israel’s security concerns. Changing Israeli policies is
central to advancing this goal, particularly in Israelicontrolled Area C, which comprises 61 per cent of
West Bank territory and is home to some 300,000
Palestinians. Approvals of master plans for Palestinian
sectors of Area C would allow for much-needed growth
in these areas and prevent demolitions.
Progress towards peace requires a freeze of
Israel’s settlement enterprise. Continued settlement
activities are an affront to the Palestinian people and
to the international community. They rightly raise
fundamental questions about Israel’s commitment to a
two-State solution. I am deeply troubled by reports today

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that the Israeli Government has approved plans for over
150 new homes in illegal settlements in the occupied
West Bank. This is combined with its announcement
last week declaring 370 acres in the West Bank, south of
Jericho, as so-called State land. These provocative acts
are bound to increase the growth of settler populations,
further heighten tensions and undermine any prospects
for a political road ahead. I urge the Israeli Government
not to use a recent decision of the Israeli High Court
affirming a large tract of land south of Bethlehem as
State land to advance settlement activities.
The demolitions of Palestinian homes in Area C of
the occupied West Bank continue, as do the decadeslong difficulties of Palestinians to obtain building
permits. The Bedouin community in particular is
paying a heavy price. I reiterate the United Nations
call for an immediate end to Israeli plans to forcibly
transfer Bedouin communities currently living within
the occupied Palestinian territory in the Jerusalem area.
At the same time, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza remains perilous. Eighteen months after the
end of hostilities, conditions have not significantly
improved. I condemn the continuing rocket fire into
Israel from militant groups in Gaza. Chronic security
and governance challenges and funding shortages
have slowed the pace of reconstruction. Much work
remains to be done. Meanwhile, the people of Gaza
face dire unemployment and water and electricity
needs. Meeting these concerns must be a top priority.
However, none of this can be accomplished without the
critical support of donors, the fulfilment of pledges
from the Cairo Conference and the full return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza. I continue to strongly
believe that conditions in Gaza pose a severe threat to
long-term peace and security in the region.
Palestinians must also demonstrate commitment to
addressing the divisions among Palestinians themselves.
I strongly urge the Palestinian factions to advance
genuine Palestinian unity on the basis of democracy
and the Palestine Liberation Organization principles.
Reconciliation is critical in order to reunite the West
Bank and Gaza under a single legitimate Palestinian
authority. Healing Palestinian divisions is also critical
so that Palestinians can instead focus their energies
on establishing a stable State as part of a negotiated
two-State solution. Genuine unity will also improve
the Palestinian Government’s ability to meet pressing
economic problems that are adding to the frustration
and anger driving Palestinian violence.

S/PV.7610

The international community also has a
responsibility, not least by responding generously to
the recent emergency appeal by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for over $400 million to support vulnerable
Palestinians. And as we continue to uphold the right
of Palestinians to self-determination, let us be equally
firm that incitement has no place, and that questioning
the right of Israel to exist cannot be tolerated.
In an already tense regional environment, it
is imperative to promote and consolidate stability
wherever possible. In Lebanon, I urge all political
leaders to work with Prime Minister Tammam Salam
and to intensify efforts to resolve the presidential crisis.
The Syria donors conference on 4 February in London
will be an important opportunity to mobilize support.
This must include meeting the huge humanitarian,
infrastructure and stabilization needs of neighbouring
countries in light of the refugee crisis. We are all aware
of the strains on Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.
I welcome the resumption of calm along the Blue
Line and in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
area of operations following the serious incidents
of 20 December and 4 January. All parties have a
responsibility to uphold the cessation of hostilities and
to ensure full respect for resolution 1701 (2006).
On the Golan, it remains critical that parties to
the Disengagement Agreement maintain liaison with
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
They must refrain from actions that could escalate the
situation across the ceasefire line.
Some may say that the current volatility across
the region makes it too risky to seek peace. I say that
the greater peril lies in not seeking a solution to the
Palestinian question. Some say that the two sides are
entrenched in their respective positions. I say that
we must not succumb to passivity, resignation or
hopelessness that a comprehensive resolution of the
conflict is not achievable. A lasting agreement will
require difficult compromises by both the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders — yes — but what are the
alternatives? The continuing deadly wave of terror
attacks and killings? The possible financial collapse
of the Palestinian Government? Ever-greater isolation
of the Israeli Government? A further deterioration of
humanitarian conditions in Gaza and the agonizing
build-up to another terrible war? A hollowing of the
moral foundation of both Israeli and Palestinian
societies alike? A creeping moral blindness that

16-018063/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ignores the suffering — indeed the humanity — of
one’s neighbour? More unilateral acts by each side,
intentionally designed to pre-empt negotiations and
provoke the other side?
The parties must act — and act now — to prevent
the two-State solution from slipping away forever.
Upholding and implementing that vision — two States
living side-by-side in peace and security — offers the
only means by which Israel can retain both its Jewish
majority and its democratic status.
As the wider Middle East continues to be gripped
by a relentless wave of extremist terror, Israelis and
Palestinians have an opportunity to restore hope to
a region torn apart by intolerance and cruelty. I urge
them to accept this historic challenge in the mutual
interest of peace.
The support of regional partners in that pursuit is
essential. The Arab Peace Initiative provides a valuable
basis for broader support.
Finally, the whole international community must be
ever-more committed to actively helping Palestinians
and Israelis to rebuild trust and achieve an enduring
peace before it is too late.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate the
friendly country of Uruguay on its election to the
Security Council and I thank you, Minister Rodolfo
Nin Novoa, for convening this important debate under
Uruguay’s presidency. I also thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his important
briefing to the Council on the current situation.
I would like to apologize on behalf of Foreign
Minister Riad Malki, who had planned to attend this
meeting but who, because of the recent storm and its
impact of flights, is unable to be with us. I am honoured
to deliver this statement on his behalf.
I would like to extend our congratulations to the
other new non-permanent members — Egypt, Japan,
Senegal and Ukraine — and I wish them success in
fulfilling their responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. We also reiterate our deep appreciation
to Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria for their
skilled service and principled positions on so many

4/67

26/01/2016

critical issues during their respective tenures, including
the question of Palestine.
I express our appreciation to all of the ministers
joining us here today, which serves to underscore the
attention and concern they ascribe to the Palestine
issue and to the situation in the Middle East as a whole.
Among the ministers present is Foreign Minister
Mankeur Ndiaye of Senegal, whose country plays
an important role as Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People — a responsibility that Senegal has undertaken
for the past 40 years, for which we are most grateful.
We are gathered again here at the Security Council,
which for seven decades has been entrusted with the
responsibility of upholding international peace and
security, to address one of the longest-standing issues
on the United Nations agenda, namely, the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East. Every
day that passes with this institution failing to shoulder
its Charter duties means the death of more innocent
civilians, more destruction of property, lives and the
prospects for peace, and more hopelessness, representing
a continual and growing threat to international peace
and security.
While Palestine has figured prominently on the
agenda of the United Nations since the establishment
of the Organization, the plight of our people, tragically,
persists and peace continues to evade us. Neither
support nor solidarity for Palestine have been lacking.
What has been lacking is the political courage and
will to implement the countless resolutions of the
Security Council and of General Assembly in the face
of Israel’s total intransigence and disrespect for all of
its obligations, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The failure to hold Israel,
the occupying Power, accountable and to compel
its compliance with the law has caused immense
suffering for the Palestinian people, among them
millions of refugees, thereby exacerbating an already
deplorable security, humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation, compounding the crisis many times over
and undermining the foundation for a just and lasting
solution.
In the past seven years alone, we have repeatedly
come to address the Council and have travelled from
capital to capital, while also presenting and supporting
ideas, texts and initiatives and urging action. Since
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009), following the
Israeli war on the Gaza Strip from December 2008
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to January 2009, the Council has failed to take any
action to redress this injustice. And in this period, at
least 2,500 more Palestinians, among them hundreds
of children and women, have been killed in repeated
Israeli wars on Gaza and in military raids in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Tens of thousands of
civilians have been wounded and thousands have been
arrested, detained and abused by the occupying forces.
In addition, an inhumane blockade and vast destruction
have been continuously inflicted on Gaza. At the
same time, Israeli settlement construction in occupied
Palestine, especially in occupied East Jerusalem and
the Jordan Valley, has continued unabated, at the
expense of peace and the viability and contiguity
of our State. Moreover, Israeli settler terror against
Palestinian civilians has reached unprecedented levels
and has inflamed religious sensitivities, particularly
with regard to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.
The world has witnessed on live television the
perpetration of war crimes against the Palestinian
people. Yet no action has been taken. As we speak,
Palestinians, the majority of them youth, are being
killed daily in the streets, with many executed
extrajudicially, by occupying forces and settlers. Israel
is also continuing its policy of collective punishment,
including the demolition of homes, withholding the
bodies of martyrs, and widespread arrest-and-detention
raids. Its suffocating blockade on Gaza also continues
to obstruct desperately needed reconstruction, to
deprive our people of all the basics of a dignified life,
and to deepen despair. There is no justification for
such violence and oppression against the defenceless
Palestinian
civilian
population.
International
humanitarian law provisions, primarily the Fourth
Geneva Convention, prohibit such actions and obligate
the occupying Power to ensure, inter alia, the safety
and well-being of the civilians under its occupation, not
the other way around.
Claims that such violence and crimes are necessary
to ensure Israeli security are offensive and must be
rejected. All peoples are entitled to security, not only
the Israelis. I repeat: all peoples are entitled to security,
including the Palestinian people. It is not exclusive to
Israel and cannot be achieved by illegal and aggressive
actions that only fan the flames of violence and intensify
anger and tensions.
Those unlawful actions must be stopped. We cannot
allow the international community to turn a blind eye

S/PV.7610

to the horrors being endured by our people, nor can
we accept the continued refusal to end the impunity
and the immunity that has been granted to Israeli
officials, occupation forces and terrorist settlers, which
is making those repeated, widespread and systematic
crimes possible.
We cannot accept the reasoning of those who keep
demanding security for the occupying Power while
failing to demand security for the occupied people,
who are entitled to, and assured of, such security under
international law. The United Nations must act to ensure
protection for our people in line with international law
and its own resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions specifically calling for protection for
the Palestinian people. Precedents and the relevant
studies before the Council must be considered. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General and his Office of
Legal Affairs for advancing an important study to the
Security Council. As I said a few days ago, that study is
not to be added to the shelves. It has to be studied by the
members of the Security Council so as to arrive at the
appropriate conclusions in order to provide protection
for the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Israel must choose between occupation and peace.
It is clear from the policies of successive Israeli
Governments that the colonial agenda has trumped
the peace agenda in Israel. And it is equally clear that,
without international intervention, this situation cannot
be reversed.
The continuation and expansion of the settlement
regime are a destructive reality we witness every
day, even if the world does not always see or hear the
bulldozers. Just last week, Israel audaciously declared
370 acres south of Jericho as so-called State land. That
constitutes one of the largest illegal land expropriations
in years. Recently, Israeli plans to construct more than
65,000 new illegal settlement units throughout occupied
Palestine were also exposed. Those plans, which
include thousands of units in occupied East Jerusalem
and the surrounding areas, including the so-called E-1
area, would sever East Jerusalem from its Palestinian
environs. Moreover, hundreds more units are being
constructed in the so-called Givat Eitam illegal
settlement, referred to as E-2, south of Bethlehem, just
to name a few of the more glaring examples. Everything
the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing with
regard to settlements is correct and should be fully
supported and acted upon by the Security Council.

16-018065/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is an understatement to say that any settlement
unit built anywhere in our occupied land brings us
a step closer to the end of the two-State vision. The
international community must directly address that and
send an unequivocal message to Israel now, before it is
too late. It cannot ignore these facts or the fact that the
Israeli Foreign Ministry recently released a document
inconceivably claiming that settlements are “legal”
under international law. The illegality of the Israeli
settlement regime has been reaffirmed by the Security
Council in several resolutions, by the High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Conventions, by the International
Court of Justice, by the Human Rights Council, by
successive special rapporteurs and by international
fact-finding missions. Nearly every single State around
the world and all the members around this table, with
the exception of Israel, accept that position. No one can
deny that the forced transfer of Palestinian civilians
and the transfer of Israelis to the occupied territory
are grave breaches of international humanitarian
law and war crimes under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Israel’s arguments rely
on absurd interpretations of very clear legal texts and
on historical distortions and empty pretexts used for
decades to justify colonialism and apartheid, which are
two of the most condemned phenomena in history. Yet
Israel persists in spreading both, in word and deed.
The most striking aspect in the Israeli Foreign
Ministry’s document is not the absurd argument made
in defence of the indefensible, but rather the fact that
it reconfirms Israel’s total commitment to the colonial
settlement regime at the expense of the law and of peace.
The question therefore is not what we hope Israel will
do to end the settlement regime it continues to plan,
develop, expand, defend and commit vast resources
to, but rather what the international community will
do in fulfilment of its own obligations, as spelled out
by the principles of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations, the relevant conventions, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the construction of a wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273),
notably in relation to third-party responsibility. That
must be considered and acted on as a matter of priority
and urgency by the international community, especially
the Security Council.
The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including to self-determination and freedom, are
non-negotiable and cannot be subject to the occupying
6/67

26/01/2016

Power’s goodwill or lack thereof. No State can, under
the pretext of supporting dialogue among the parties,
evade its own responsibility to uphold international law.
This is a time for action and responsibility. Our region
and the world cannot afford the looming breakdown,
which would lead to more chaos and suffering. Those
who believe the occupation is sustainable, or that
we will surrender to it, are mistaken. We remain
relentless in pursuit of our independence and our rights.
We call on the Council to play its role and fulfil its
responsibilities: end the oppression, end the occupation
and help make peace and justice a reality for all the
peoples of the region. That is the Council’s duty. It
cannot be delegated, delayed or dismissed. Silence
and inaction are the accomplices of occupation and the
enemies of peace.
Today we must ask, have we all done everything in
our power and exhausted all means only to reach the
point of failure? Is there no way ahead? We continue to
believe another path is possible, that peace is possible
and that confrontation and war are not inevitable. We
have demonstrated a firm commitment to peace, but it
has no chance of leading to a lasting solution without
decisive international action in support of the twoState solution on the pre-1967 borders and of measures
that hold accountable those who are destroying it. In
that regard, we are all aware that the Israeli settlement
enterprise in all its manifestations is the most formidable
obstacle to the peace we seek. Therefore, it has to be
removed from the path of peace, if we seriously want to
open doors to a meaningful process that could lead to
the end of the occupation, to the independence of our
State and to saving the two-State solution.
While we appreciate the strong positions expressed
by all Security Council members and the international
community at large against Israeli settlement activities,
those positions must be translated into action. That action
must start here in the Security Council. It must involve
measures on the part of all States and must transcend the
rendering of assistance. Israel must be held accountable
for its actions. Recent international reports, including
some by non-governmental organizations, have raised
important ideas that could help identify a way forward.
International mechanisms are also necessary, including
the convening of an international conference aimed at
ending the occupation and achieving peace, and the
establishment of an international support group to
advance that goal. Only with proper monitoring and
accountability can we hope to turn the tide and have a

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

chance of reaching safe shores. The priority should be
lasting peace, not temporary calm.

and Hamas turning Gaza into a staging ground for
terror.

I came here today to appeal again for such action
on behalf of the Palestinian people, who are entitled to
and demand their freedom, and on behalf of all those
who seek and promote peace and justice. Those needing
pretexts not to act will always find one: they will try to
make us address consequences rather than causes, tell
us to wait until the next election, or to understand that
more pressing issues loom, until everything collapses.
In recent months, several States have taken initiatives
and have shown leadership and understanding with
regard to the urgency of action, and have been able to
prioritize our cause among the many other key issues
they are working jointly to resolve. The time has come
for a collective process for Palestinian-Israeli peace.
The time has come for the Security Council to reflect
the express will of its members and of the international
community that it is mandated to represent. Excuses,
mild positions and half measures will not suffice. The
international will is being tested. Failure is not an
option.

Hamas does not hide its intention to prepare for
the next round of violence, and continues to build up
its terror infrastructure — above ground and below.
Its officials boast of rocket factories operating day and
night. They are upgrading their arsenal with longerrange missiles. Hamas is also rebuilding its network
of terror tunnels. Those tunnels are an underground
expressway of terror, leading straight into the heart of
Israeli towns and cities.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Uruguay on its becoming a member
of the Security Council and for a successful month
as Security Council President. That is no easy task,
and you, Mr. President, have performed it well. As
we begin this new year with a new Security Council,
please allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
the new members. On behalf of the State of Israel, I
wish them much success. The challenges facing the
new Council are vast and complex. The international
community looks to the Council to deal with the new
and unprecedented threats to global order and stability.
The lives and the future of millions of people are at
stake in the current confrontation with the forces of
anarchy and instability.
Nowhere is that more true than in the region I come
from. Whether it is the crisis of failed States or the rise
of radical terror groups, the Middle East is ground zero
in the battle for the triumph of the civilized world. As
a small nation located in the heart of the Middle East,
Israel is on the front lines. When Israelis, my people,
look around them, they see the brutal civil war in Syria,
and they see the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in
the Golan Heights and on the border with Egypt. They
see Hizbullah strengthening its position to the north,

Israeli security forces only recently uncovered
Hamas terror cells that were planning to commit a
wave of shootings, kidnappings and suicide-bombings.
Even as Hamas plans attacks against Israeli citizens,
and despite the constant threat of rocket attacks, Israel
is taking steps to improve the well-being of the people
of Gaza. In the past year alone, we invested millions
of dollars to triple the capacity of the Gaza crossings,
allowing 1,000 trucks filled with building materials and
goods to enter the Gaza strip every day. However — and
we all know this — Hamas shamefully seizes supplies
intended to help the people of Gaza in order to build its
terror infrastructure. Let us all face reality: the greatest
opponent of the well-being of the people of Gaza is
Hamas.
While Israelis live under the shadow of the threat
from Hamas in the South, they also see the dark cloud of
Hizbullah in the north. That terror group is committed
to the destruction of Israel, and grows stronger and
more sophisticated every day. As we speak, Hizbullah
has over 100,000 rockets ready to be fired at Israeli
cities. Hizbullah has long-range missiles that can target
any place in Israel, and has obtained advanced strategic
weapons systems. Hizbullah’s actions demonstrate
their disregard for human life. Hizbullah has embedded
most of its military infrastructure in the villages of
south Lebanon, storing weapons in private homes and
stationing missiles next to kindergartens.
Take, for example, the small town of Muhaybib,
in South Lebanon, where Hizbullah has nine armsstorage sites, five rocket-launching sites, four infantry
positions, three underground tunnels, three anti-tank
positions and a command post in the centre of the
village. The town, of only 90 houses, has 25 military
sites. Take another village, the larger village of Shagra,
with a population of about 4,000 people, where the
Israeli Defense Forces has identified 400 military sites.
Hizbullah has transformed those villages into terror

16-018067/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

outposts. That is the true face of Hizbullah — a brutal
organization that deliberately targets Israeli civilians
and uses Lebanese civilians as human shields. That is
the definition of a double war crime.
Israel has repeatedly warned the Council about
the threat of Hizbullah, and called for action. Once
again, let me say it clearly: Hizbullah is preparing
for another round of fighting. It must be disarmed,
and the Government of Lebanon must fully abide by
its international commitments and fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006). Make no mistake, Israel has the
means to defend itself. We will take all the necessary
measures to protect our people.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is the link between
the threat of Hamas and the danger of Hizbullah.
Wherever terror exists, Iran looms. Iran is the primary
destabilizing factor in the Middle East. It funds
instability and chaos throughout the region. Iran also
has a proven track record of defying the Council’s
resolutions. When it comes to Iran, the challenge for
the Council at this critical time is to be vigilant and to
be brave — vigilant to monitor all of Iran’s actions and
brave to respond forcefully to each and every violation.
For Israel, there is no greater challenge than the
challenge of peace. The road to peace is long and
difficult, but Israel is committed to making every
effort. Every difficult journey begins with a single step.
Sitting down and talking is the first step to peace, but
the Palestinians refuse to come to the table. What does
Israel want? Simple: we want peace with security. That is
the only peace that will last. And the Palestinians? They
demand concessions without negotiations. They want
to be rewarded for their unilateral actions. Rewarding
the Palestinian Authority (PA) will only push the
Palestinians further from the negotiating table. Prime
Minister Netanyahu has called on President Abbas and
the Palestinian Authority to resume negotiations, but
they continue to refuse. Sadly, when the PA leadership
is not negotiating, it is inciting.
Recently, after another brutal attack against
Israelis, Jibril Rajoub, Deputy Secretary of the Fatah
Central Committee, declared,
“Whoever carried out individual acts of heroism,
we in the Fatah movement bless and encourage
them. We consider them heroes and a crown on the
head of every Palestinian.”
Who are those “heroes”? They are the Palestinian
who stabs a young woman walking down the street,
8/67

26/01/2016

and who runs over an old man with a car. Instead of
working to improve the lives of the Palestinians, the PA
encourages terror by providing stipends for terrorists
and their families; the more horrific the attack, the
higher the reward. Payments can be as high as $3,500
per month — that in a place where the average salary
is just over $600. Numerous terrorists have admitted to
committing heinous acts of terror in order to qualify for
a lifetime stipend “awarded” only to those who spent at
least five years in an Israeli prison. For the Palestinians
terror pays. It is their leadership that rewards the taking
of innocent life with dollars and cents.
Even toys are used as tools to poison children’s
minds and encourage violence. Israel recently stopped
a shipment of thousands of dolls dressed as terrorists,
with stones in hand, destined for children in the West
Bank. The “educational” purpose of those terror dolls
is clear, that is, to serve as role models for young
Palestinians.
Such incitement is at the root of the wave of terror
Israel is facing. The challenge for the Council is to
ask the difficult questions. Why does the Palestinian
Authority refuse to condemn acts of terror against
Israelis? Why do they refuse to sit down to negotiate?
Most important, what do the Palestinians really want?
If the Council believes that the answer is peace, then
call on them to condemn acts of terror. Demand that
they stop incitement. Stop giving them incentives to
avoid a real dialogue. And insist that they return to the
negotiating table.
The greatest challenge facing the world today
is the plague of international terrorism and violent
extremism. From Paris to Jakarta and from the Sinai to
San Bernardino, the peace and security of the civilized
world is under threat. Every day, the cruel hand of
terrorism strikes somewhere in the world, killing more
innocents, destroying more families and undermining
more communities. As the Council assumes the
grave responsibility for maintaining global peace and
security, it must present a united front against terror. In
that spirit, the Council adopted resolution 2249 (2015)
in the aftermath of the terror attacks in Paris. The
resolution declares
“any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed” (resolution 2249 (2015),
third preambular paragraph).
I repeat, “whenever and by whomsoever committed”.

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

Yet the international community has made one
exception. There is one place in the world where that
absolute ban on terrorism can be ignored. Once again,
the State of Israel is singled out and treated differently
from all other nations in the world. During the past four
months, Israelis have been stabbed in their homes, shot
at in the streets and run over by terrorists using cars
as weapons. Over the course of this wave of violence,
30 people have been killed and hundreds have been
injured. During the same period, the Council has
adopted 12 resolutions against terrorism and condemned
terrorist attacks in France, the Sinai, Lebanon, Mali,
Tunisia, Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Nigeria, Burkina Faso,
Somalia and the Sudan. Not once were the lives of
Israelis murdered by terrorists recognized by the
Security Council — no condemnation, no expression
of solidarity, not even a statement of concern. The facts
do not lie. The Security Council has been hypocritical
when it comes to Israel. I would like to take a moment
to tell members about one of the many Israeli victims
whom the Council has not seen fit to even mention.

The pain is the same pain. The response must be the
same response. Terror is terror is terror. If we want to
succeed in these immense challenges, we must stop the
hypocrisy and the double standards. The Council must
condemn Palestinian incitement against Israelis. Such
words of incitement lead directly to bloodshed and the
death of innocent people. We must take a firm stand
against all acts of cruelty and terror, without asking
where those acts took place or who the victims are.

Dafna Meir was a 38-year-old Israeli woman
murdered by a Palestinian terrorist. Let me tell the
Council a little about the kind of person Dafna was. She
was a dedicated mother of six children, including two
brothers aged 4 and 6, whom she and her husband had
adopted. Dafna was a nurse in Soroka hospital in Beer
Sheva, where she treated Jewish and Arab patients. A
few days before the horrific attack, Dafna composed a
prayer asking God to give her strength to help people.
Let me read to the Council a few words.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and to acknowledge his statement. In particular, I
would like to highlight the broad participation of
countries in this debate, which points to the relevance
and timeliness of our exchange of views and ideas on
this subject. We are aware of the relevance of the issue
and of the responsibility with which we assume the
task of presiding over this open debate, just a few days
after having taken our seat on the Security Council, 50
years after our first participation as a Council member.
In that regard, we thought it both timely and relevant
to convene this open debate at the ministerial level,
following the example set in October (see S/PV.7540).

“May it be Your will to grant me the ability to give
medications to Your people and to the members of
other nations who are in the devoted care of Your
faithful messengers who continue their holy work
day and night.”
Last week, a terrorist attacked Dafna with a knife
at the entrance to her home. In order to protect her
children inside, Dafna heroically fought the terrorist
until he fled. Tragically, Dafna Meir died of the knife
wounds, in front of the children she fought to protect.
The Council’s decision to ignore the murder of Dafna
Meir and of the other Israeli victims of terror is no
simple oversight, it is the direct result of allowing
cynical political considerations by some to take priority
over the lives of people.
The challenge for the Council is to chart a new
course. No more business as usual when it comes
to terror against Israelis. The fear is the same fear.

This is a challenging and critical year for the
Council, for the region and for Israel. The terrorists
seek to undermine our values and to dictate how we live
our lives. Those extremists stand against everything we
believe in, but if we stand together, they will fail. For
the future of the region and the future of the free world,
we must join together to defeat the forces of evil and
intolerance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

Given their seriousness, these high-level
discussions on the issue also indicate a high level of
political commitment. The Middle East is facing a
number of complex challenges, which have resulted
in stagnation and the resurgence of various conflicts,
the emergence of new threats and the suffering of
thousands of innocent victims. Our country notes with
great concern the paralysis of the peace process in
the Middle East, the current situation in Syria and the
expansion of terrorism in the region.
With regard to the Middle East peace process, the
General Assembly, nearly seven decades ago, adopted
resolution 181 (II) A-B, whereby it resolved to create
two States. Uruguay firmly supported that resolution,

16-018069/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

convinced that it would allow the Israelis and the
Palestinians to live in peace and within secure borders.
In that regard, the then Permanent Representative of
Uruguay to the United Nations, Ambassador Enrique
Rodríguez Fabregat, said:
“Those of us who are voting for partition are not
voting against either of these two peoples. ... We
are voting for both of them, for their progress,
their civic development, their advancement in the
community of nations.” (A/PV.125, p. 1350)
This year will mark 25 years since the historic
Madrid Peace Conference, where a series of bilateral
and multilateral negotiations began, which led to the
Oslo Accords. Despite various efforts and initiatives
made since that time, peace between the parties still
seems distant. We find ourselves in a situation where it
does not appear possible that peace negotiations will be
resumed in the short term. There have been increasing
doubts even about the viability of a two-State solution.
Furthermore, we also face an alarming upsurge in
violence.
In that regard, Uruguay has maintained its firm
support for the two-State solution, two independent
States and the right of Israel and Palestine to live in
peace within secure and recognized borders in an
atmosphere of renewed cooperation — two States free
of any threats or acts that undermine peace, including
acts of terrorism, and with agreements with regard to
Jerusalem and other aspects, such as equitable access
to safe drinking water and respect for holy sites. In
that conviction, Uruguay recognized the State of
Israel early on, and much later, when we accepted
that the inconclusive process could not be prolonged,
we recognized the State of Palestine, as did that many
other Latin American States. Today, our country has
embassies in Israel and in Palestine. Both countries
have embassies in Uruguay.
We are aware that the solution to the conflict must
be found through bilateral talks. We also recognize that
the situation is currently characterized by paralysis,
which only dispels the possibility of achieving peace.
For that reason, we share the vision of numerous
countries that love peace, have a democratic tradition
and promote human rights. We believe that the
international community must increase its efforts to
support the process. We also encourage the parties to
return to the negotiating table to achieve a peaceful,
just, negotiated and lasting solution to the conflict in
accordance with international law, a solution that also
10/67

26/01/2016

provides for the interests and meets the needs of both
parties.
My country believes that by helping the parties to
return to the negotiating table to reach an agreement
is a moral obligation and a strategic imperative for
the Organization and the Council. Compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law,
in particular obligations with regard to the protection of
civilians, as well as the immediate cessation of violence
and illegal settlement activity, which has been mentioned
in a number of Security Council resolutions — all of
these constitute serious challenges to achieving a just
and lasting peace and appear to be fundamental, if we
are to overcome the current situation and re-establish a
climate of confidence that enables sustainable progress.
Furthermore, the parties have the obligation
and the responsibility to advance towards mutual
understanding and should refrain from adopting
unilateral decisions that interfere with dialogue. We also
reiterate the importance of international cooperation
in efforts to support the socioeconomic development
of the Palestinian people. The strengthening and
establishment of national institutions and basic
infrastructure are essential to efforts to ensure the
viability of the Palestinian State, which has travelled
far along the road towards being able to affirm its
status as a full State. Such full statehood should also be
capable of eliminating terrorism.
Uruguay maintains deep ties of friendship with the
State of Israel and has forged similar links with the State
of Palestine, which is why we express our willingness
to collaborate and support, to the extent we are able, in
the search for solutions that can finally and successfully
conclude this nearly 70-year process, which, despite
significant efforts, has yet to be concluded. Uruguay
will persist in its constructive and balanced approach
to facilitate the process. We will support actions that
call for a cessation of hostilities and the initiation of
peace talks.
We cannot discuss the Middle East issue without
mentioning the ongoing conflict in Syria. It has a
devastating impact, not only on the Syrian people, but
also on the entire region and around the world. Uruguay
is extremely concerned at the increasing severity of
the conflict, which is causing irreversible damage to
millions of people and has taken a heavy toll in terms of
fatalities, refugees and displaced persons. The civilian
population remains the main victims of the conflict
and the consequences of war. In that sense, Uruguay
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unequivocally condemns the systematic violations of
human rights committed by all actors in the conflict,
both the Government and the non-State entities. That
is why Uruguay strongly calls upon the parties to fulfil
their obligations under international human rights law
and international humanitarian law.
In that same conviction, we also condemn
the obstruction blocking rapid and safe access of
humanitarian aid to the affected territories, particularly
in the areas under siege. We strongly reject the use of
hunger as a weapon of war, which by any measure
constitutes a war crime.
It is unacceptable that people are still dying while
the international community has the resources to help
those who need it most by ensuring that they have food,
medicines and basic supplies. At the same time, the
international community’s efforts to reach a political
solution to the conflict are fundamental, a solution
based on a broad, inclusive and transparent national
dialogue that represents all sectors of society and can
enable Syrians to decide their own future. We welcomed
and supported the major decision the Council made in
December when, for the first time since the conflict
began five years ago, the members managed to put
aside their differences in order to agree on a road map
for Syria with the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015).
The country has been devastated by all the
actions of armed groups — among whom terrorists
are increasingly prominent — invading territories,
wielding banned weapons, recruiting and enslaving
children, using schools and hospitals for military
purposes and systematically violating the human
rights of the population, especially women and girls.
Extremist groups run joint training and recruitment
camps for coordinating atrocities that have nothing to
do with defending any religion or ideology. For such
groups, the concept of sovereignty has no meaning; it
knows no bounds or borders. Their threat is spreading
like a pandemic across areas where civilians are the
main victims. Thus, upon entering the twenty-first
century we have witnessed a regression to the most
disgusting forms of brutality.
These kinds of conflicts and violence call into
question the capacity of the international system and
the Security Council to fulfil their mandate, but we
must act to combat the criminal scourge of terrorism.
Through its efforts, the United Nations has succeeded
in avoiding a new world war, but not the fragmentation
and multiplication of these sorts of conflicts, whose

S/PV.7610

transnational nature compels us to seek new strategies.
Iraq and Afghanistan represent two other examples of
humanitarian hells where failed interventions have left
a vacuum that radical extremism has filled. It is crucial
that we prevent this from happening in Syria.
We are also alarmed by what is going on in Yemen,
North Africa, Somalia and northern Nigeria, in all of
which there are close connections between terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram. In that
regard, we emphasize how urgent it is that we confront
the terrorist scourge effectively, within the framework
of international law and coordinated through the United
Nations. We also call for greater efforts to combat the
financing of terrorist groups, through a comprehensive
and large-scale approach based on political and
socioeconomic strategies that can promote social
inclusion, political participation and equality aimed at
enabling us to deal with the underlying causes of this
problem.
It is essential that we continue to do as much as
possible to reach a broad political consensus on these
continuing conflicts. We believe in diplomacy and
the type of inclusive political solution that is vital to
ensuring that there is trust between the parties to a
conflict and that a peace can be a lasting one. We are
encouraged by some positive recent examples, such as
the P5+1 agreement with Iran, resolution 2254 (2015)
and the inclusive talks in Vienna. Among others, they
give us hope that there are better days to come for the
peoples of this region, who want exactly the same thing
as all the rest of us — to live in peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): Since I
am speaking in the Security Council for the first time
since the General Assembly entrusted Senegal with
non-permanent membership of the Council, I would
like to reiterate our sincere thanks to the Member States
of our Organization for this display of confidence in us,
which we greatly appreciate. This is the third time that
Senegal has held a seat in the Council. I would like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm the commitment of
Senegal and its President, Mr. Macky Sall, to the ideals
of global peace, security and justice.

16-0180611/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to begin by welcoming Uruguay’s
laudable initiative in holding a ministerial-level open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
Palestine. Today’s meeting is once again being held
amid escalating violence on the ground involving many
civilian casualties, children among them, in the region,
including in the occupied Palestinian territories. In
Palestine in particular, we are seeing increasing acts
of violence, intimidation and provocation, not the
least of which are confiscations of Palestinian land,
demolitions of their houses and creeping colonization.
Such actions are likely to stir up hatred and extremism
in both Palestine and Israel and thereby encourage an
escalation of violence and insecurity between their
peoples.
Moreover, in the face of international condemnation
and the relevant United Nations decisions, the Palestinian
people in Gaza continue to endure an unacceptable
blockade that is depriving children, women, the
disabled and the elderly of rights as fundamental as
education and health. The same is true of the arbitrary
detention, frequently through administrative means,
of many Palestinians, including minors, as well as the
strategies designed to alter Jerusalem demographically,
geographically and culturally, which have only
exacerbated this decades-long conflict.
The meeting on Jerusalem held in Jakarta,
Indonesia, on 14 and 15 December 2015, at the initiative
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, together with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Indonesian
Government, has focused attention on the danger of
the forced Judaization of Jerusalem, the city that is a
symbol of the three monotheistic religions. This policy
runs the risk of turning a political crisis into a religious
conflict, with incalculable consequences for the entire
region.
This tragic situation should oppress our collective
consciousness and for more than one reason compel the
Security Council to act to meet its obligations to the
Palestinian people according to a specific timetable and
with the support of the expanded Quartet. The time has
come for our Organization, 70 years after its founding
and particularly with regard to its essential mandate
to deal with issues of peace and security, to shoulder
its responsibility for ensuring that its resolutions are
effectively implemented in order to culminate, as was
the case with the State of Israel, in the establishment of
a Palestinian State, within secure and internationally

12/67

26/01/2016

recognized borders, in accordance with the 1948 United
Nations partition plan. We must relaunch negotiations
between the Israelis and Palestinians, based on a
specific timetable, in order to arrive at a definitive
peace agreement. It would also be advisable for the
Israeli Government, which has affirmed its willingness
to work for a lasting two-State solution for Israel and
Palestine on numerous occasions, to take advantage of
the opportunities offered by the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is based on achieving a comprehensive peace,
beyond Palestine alone, with all Arab countries.
In the meantime, the Council should consider
taking precautionary measures to enforce the status
quo in Jerusalem’s holy sites as well as ensuring
international protection for the Palestinian people. In
that regard, Senegal supports the proposal, made by
France, to deploy international observers to help reduce
tensions in the region. Senegal calls on the Palestinian
political actors — namely, Fatah and Hamas — to join
the momentum of the Cairo agreement to quell their
internal differences and work towards the formation
of a Government of national unity, with a view to
facilitating the relaunching of the political process with
the State of Israel.
I would like to take this opportunity to recall the
urgency involved in rebuilding Gaza. I therefore launch
an appeal that the pledges — totalling $4 billion — made
at the 2014 Cairo conference on Palestine be honoured.
The same urgency applies to the international
community in continuing its efforts to provide the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East with the effective means
to allow it to pursue its critical work on behalf of the
millions of Palestinian refugees in the Middle East,
particularly in the areas of health and education.
Senegal encourages and supports the Palestinian
Government in its strategy aimed at joining international
organizations and conventions in order to achieve
lasting peace with Israel, based on international law
and according to a peaceful approach. The progress
made by the State of Palestine on the international
level, such as its recognition by 136 countries, the
presence of its flag at Headquarters since 30 September
and its accession, in 2015, to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court are to be welcomed. Our
belief is that a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
based on two States — Palestine with East Jerusalem as
its capital, existing alongside Israel — would promote
better management of the security and socioeconomic

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

challenges that are facing the Middle East, where
terrorism and violent extremism are on the verge of
becoming a global threat.
Before concluding, I would like mention the
observation made by the President of Senegal, Macky
Sall, in his speech of 29 November 2015 on the occasion
of the celebration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People:
“Violence, in all its forms, is neither acceptable
nor tolerable, and a state of war is certainly not the
normal human condition. A peaceful solution is the
only destiny that the Palestinian and Israeli peoples
deserve, in the same manner as other peoples who
have been able to end their differences through
dialogue.”
Based on that, Senegal, faithful to its principles and
policies, will continue to work so that dialogue and
consultation are favoured as a means to achieving the
two-State solution, particularly in the context of the
aforementioned Committee, which our country has had
the honour of chairing since its founding, 40 years ago.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, for presiding over
this meeting and for your wise leadership in your
delegation’s first presidency of the Security Council. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing to the
Council today and for his being here, which is testament
to the serious challenges facing the region — a reality
underscored by his appropriately bleak briefing. My
remarks today will focus on three parts of the region:
the Israeli-Palestinian issue, Syria and Lebanon.
On the Israeli-Palestinian issue, we remain very
concerned about the impact that terrorism and the
ongoing violence have on Israelis and Palestinians
and by the lack of progress made towards a two-State
solution. The United States strongly condemns terrorist
attacks perpetrated by Palestinians. Those include the
attack on 24-year-old Shlomit Kriegman, who was
stabbed yesterday outside a supermarket and died
earlier this morning. Another woman, 58 years of age,
was also stabbed and wounded in the attack. The victims
also include Dafna Meir, a mother of six children, who
was stabbed to death in her home on 17 January while
trying to defend her kids, as we heard earlier. Those
and other reprehensible and inexcusable attacks against
innocent civilians underscore the critical importance
of affirmative steps to stop incitement, restore calm,

S/PV.7610

reduce tensions and bring an end to the violence on
both sides.
We also condemn Israeli settler violence against
Palestinians and their property in the West Bank, such
as the appalling 2015 attack that killed three members
of the Al-Dawabsheh family in Duma — the father,
Saad, the mother, Reham, and their 18-month-old boy,
Ali Saad — and badly burned their 4-year-old son.
There is absolutely no justification for any of those acts
of terrorism. We all must condemn them consistently
and unequivocally.
The United States continues to stress the need
for fair judicial processes for all to bring to justice
all perpetrators of violence and acts of terrorism. The
recent indictments brought by the Israeli Government
against the terrorists who perpetrated the Duma attack
represent a positive step, but more must be done to
ensure that those responsible for such attacks are held
accountable. It is also incumbent upon the Palestinian
Authority to do all that it can to counter incitement to
violence and to continue to press for calm. In addition,
in dealings with civilians and peaceful protests on both
sides, it is critical that every possible effort be made
to show restraint, guard against the loss of life and
de-escalate tensions.
The United States strongly opposes settlement
activity, including some steps that Israel has taken
this month. We are deeply concerned about reports
of a declaration of more than 370 acres in the Jordan
Valley, in the West Bank, as State land. We are also
deeply concerned about recent steps that appear to
have effectively created a new settlement south of Gush
Etzion. Some 70 per cent of the West Bank’s Area C
has already been unilaterally designated as Israeli State
land or as being within the boundaries of Israeli regional
settlement councils. Steps aimed at advancing the Israeli
settlement project, including changing the designation
of land, issuing building tenders and constructing
new settlements, are fundamentally incompatible with
the two-State solution and raise legitimate questions
about Israel’s long-term intentions. That concern
notwithstanding, let me make crystal clear, as have
Secretary Kerry and other United States Government
officials on multiple occasions, that settlement activity
can never itself be an excuse for violence. The United
States is also following with concern the demolitions
and evictions that have been undertaken by Israeli
authorities in several locations throughout the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. On 21 January, 16 people, of

16-0180613/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

whom six were children, were displaced, when Israeli
authorities demolished four homes in Jabal Al-Baba,
a village that lies within the area known as E-1.
Those actions reflect an ongoing trend of demolition,
displacement and land confiscation that continues to
undermine prospects for a two-State solution.
Also alarming are the grave humanitarian conditions
in the Gaza Strip, where Gazans face extraordinary
challenges in their daily lives. This month, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) launched a $403 million
appeal to meet urgent humanitarian needs in the West
Bank and Gaza, such as emergency food and medical
aid. We all must do our part to make sure that those
needs are met. We urge all Member States concerned
about the conditions in which Palestinians live to join
the United States in contributing to UNRWA’s appeal
and assisting those in need.
As we have repeatedly made clear, we can continue
to look to both sides to demonstrate with actions and
policies a genuine commitment to a two-State solution.
To that end, Quartet envoys travelled to the region
last month to meet with the Israeli and Palestinian
leadership to explore ways to preserve a two-State
solutio. The envoys will meet again early next month in
Europe. We also encourage the parties to take steps to
address the issues underlying these challenges, such as
opening Gaza border crossing points, streamlining the
civilian workforce, addressing infrastructure needs and
promoting broader economic recovery.
Preventing the supply of illicit arms to Gaza is
crucial, as is supporting a process that results in the
Palestinian Authority’s effective control of Gaza.
We understand the enormous political challenges
involved in grappling with those tough issues on both
sides, particularly in a climate of increased security
threats, terrorism and distrust. But, as we have seen,
the passage of time will only make those tough issues
harder, not easier, to resolve. We encourage leaders
to take steps that will preserve the possibility of two
States and further prospects for peace.
On Syria, we continue to be horrified by the
immeasurable human suffering caused by the country’s
brutal conflict. We have spoken repeatedly here
and elsewhere about the atrocities and inhumane
conditions — all of them man-made — that the Syrian
people have been forced to endure, and yet the situation
just keeps getting worse.

14/67

26/01/2016

According to the Secretary-General’s most recent
report, an estimated 13.5 million people are now in
need of humanitarian assistance in Syria, 1.3 million
people more than in 2014. Six million of those in need
are children, nearly 1 million more than a year ago.
Those numbers raise the question: with all that we, as
the Council, know about the dire situation of the Syrian
people, and with all the resolutions we have adopted in
this Chamber to address this humanitarian catastrophe,
how can it be that the numbers continue to rise?
The conditions are particularly abysmal in besieged
areas, where, according to the United Nations, nearly
400,000 people are waging a daily struggle to merely
survive. The Secretary-General’s report describes
United Nations access to these areas as “pitiful”. Less
than 1 per cent of civilians in besieged areas received
food aid per month in 2015, and only 3 per cent
received health assistance. We have all seen the ghastly
consequences of these sieges in the reports on the 40,000
people trapped in Madaya. An anaesthesia technician
who works in Madaya’s medical clinic, which had to
be moved to a basement after the above-ground facility
was bombed, told a reporter that he has started to give
the most malnourished children syrupy medicines
so that they could have some sugar. Maleka Jabir, an
85-year-old woman in the city, told a reporter, “I don’t
go anywhere. I just crumple up and stay in bed”, as she
was so stricken by hunger and health problems. Parents
told aid workers that they were giving their children
sleeping pills so that they would be spared being kept
awake by hunger pains.
If any here have not seen the haunting photos of those
children, you must force yourself to look at them and
see the anguish being inflicted on the most vulnerable
among us. We have a collective responsibility to hear
their pleas. Yet, while the suffering in besieged areas
has been vehemently condemned around the world, the
parties to the conflict continue to block humanitarian
aid from reaching those in need. And here I stress
particularly the Syrian regime. According to the
Secretary-General’s report, of the 15 besieged areas,
two of them are besieged by armed opposition groups,
one by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
and 12 of the 15 by the Al-Assad regime, which sits here
at the United Nations as a Member State. Out of a total
of 113 inter-agency convoy requests sent by the United
Nations, tha Member State approved and completed
only 13. That is 13 approved and completed out of 113.
That means that 100 dire requests last year were not

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

completed. And for 80 of the requests, the Al-Assad
regime, again a United Nations Member State, did not
even bother to respond to the United Nations within
three months. This is not an isolated practice applied
in one place for a limited period of time. It is part of
a deliberate, systematic strategy aimed at killing and
displacing civilians.

group has also, reportedly, executed and abducted
hundreds of civilians. The Secretary-General’s report
described one video released by ISIL in December,
which showed six civilians being executed after being
accused of collaborating with the Syrian regime. The
United Nations reported that the executioners appeared
to be children under the age of 15.

It is true that a handful of convoys carrying food
and medical assistance were able to reach Madaya over
the last few weeks, and we commend the brave staff
of the United Nations and international humanitarian
groups and local actors who have pressed relentlessly
for the delivery of lifesaving aid. However, it would be a
grave mistake to think that starving people in besieged
areas will now survive. Much more aid is needed.
Fewer than two dozen people in serious need of medical
treatment who, according to the United Nations, will
die if they do not get out — only a subset of the 400
identified — have been evacuated from Madaya. And,
specialized medical and nutrition teams have been
denied re-entry, having paid brief visits before.

All of that suffering and barbarity underscores the
urgency of working towards a political solution. To
that end, we welcome Staffan de Mistura’s invitation
with regard to the talks to begin this coming Friday
in Geneva. The initiation of United Nations-facilitated
Syrian negotiations to reach a political transition in
accordance with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) is a critical step towards ending the conflict in
Syria. We are encouraged that the high negotiations
committee assembled a broad representation of the
Syrian opposition and has demonstrated a genuine
commitment to participating in the political process.

The 4 February conference in London, where
the United States delegation will be led by Secretary
of State John Kerry, provides an opportunity for the
international community to fill the growing gaps in the
United Nations funding of humanitarian appeals for
Syria. We urge all Member States to put forward robust
pledges aligned with the rising needs of the Syrian
people. However, the mobilization of funds has to be
accompanied by a much more aggressive mobilization
of political pressure on those who are cruelly blocking
aid from reaching desperate civilians and families.
We also must not forget that starving people to
death is far from the only form of suffering the parties
are inflicting on civilians. The Syrian regime continues
to drop barrel bombs on civilian areas, reportedly
killing at least 12 children in December and maiming
many more. The Syrian regime also continues to carry
out air strikes, such as the one that hit a crowded
market in Jisreen on 4 December, killing approximately
26 civilians.
The regime does not act alone, as we know. It has the
help of powerful supporters, including Russia. Credible
monitoring organizations have documented the effects
of Russian air strikes in Syria, which continue to target
opposition groups and have killed many hundreds of
people, the vast majority of them in non-ISIL controlled
areas and with no connection to ISIL whatsoever. In
Deir ez-Zor, not only has ISIL besieged the city, the

Finally, let me turn very briefly to Lebanon. The
Council has stressed repeatedly that the Lebanese
people deserve and, indeed, require a fully functioning
Government to safeguard Lebanon from the threat of
ISIL and other terrorist groups, as well as to address the
country’s significant economic challenges, including
those accruing by virtue of their hosting more than
1 million Syrian refugees, giving Lebanon the highest
per capita refugee concentration in the entire world. As
Lebanese discussions over the presidency continue, we
support adherence to the constitutional process to elect
a president, rather than any one candidate. It is critical
that Lebanon’s leaders respect the Government’s
policy of disassociation from regional conflicts, first
enshrined in the June 2012 Baabda Declaration. As
the Council has emphasized for years, Lebanon should
focus on strengthening its institutions, resolving
difficult internal disputes and building up the rule of
law. It should not become involved in Syria’s civil war.
Mr. Augusto (Angola): At the outset, I wish to thank
His Excellency Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa for presiding
over this important and timely debate. We commend
the delegation of Uruguay for its excellent work in
presiding over the Security Council. We also seize this
opportunity to welcome the five new members of the
Council, with whom we look forward to constructive
cooperation. We commend Secretary General Ban
Ki-moon for his relentless efforts to foster dialogue
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts affecting the
Middle East at this critical juncture.

16-0180615/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In 2011, with the so-called Arab Spring, the world
witnessed the events occurring in some countries of
North Africa and the Middle East, and the prospects of a
new era of peace, democracy and economic development.
Unfortunately, the outcome of those events did not
deliver greater freedom and democracy; instead, they
brought about the collapse of State authority, new and
extreme forms of authoritarianism and the breakdown
of national borders. The collapse of State authority
further aggravated sectarian divisions, with people, in
times of insecurity and uncertainty, leaning towards
their ethnic and religious affiliations. That is the case
with Syria, which has become a fractured State, no
longer corresponding to its recognized borders, its
territory divided into areas controlled by the legitimate
Government, on one hand, and by non-State armed
groups and the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and the Al-Nusra Front, among
others, on the other, thus poised for an uncertain future.
The only window of opportunity lies in a decisive and
sincere push by regional and world Powers to crush
terrorism and embrace all Syrians in the search for a
political settlement to the conflict.
The same applies to Iraq, a State broken apart, as
demonstrated by the current state of affairs. Baghdad
has little or no influence on the Kurdish region or in
the Sunni-majority Anbar or Ninawa provinces. The
disintegration of State structures in Libya and Yemen
is also a troubling reality, exacerbated by extremely
dire humanitarian conditions and the prospect of
territorial breakdown if a determined and concerted
effort on the part of the major Powers does not rescue
these countries from the deadly threat of terrorism.
Unfortunately, faced with such bleak scenarios, the
response of the international community to the growing
problems affecting the Middle East and North Africa
has not been directed towards tackling the root causes
of such conflicts and bridging the gaps among ethnic
communities and religious groups.
At present, the most pressing issue in the Middle
East is to defeat radical extremist groups in order to
facilitate the peaceful resolution of prevailing conflicts.
It is crucial to avoid the scenario in which the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham consolidates an extremist
rogue State in parts of Syria and Iraq, which would then
become a breeding ground for terrorists, spreading fear
and hatred. Political, diplomatic, military and economic
cooperation must be intensified in the search for peace
and stability in a region distressed by double standards

16/67

and inaction, and facing catastrophic
economic and humanitarian conditions.

26/01/2016

political,

On the basis of this viewpoint, we observe with
concern the fading prospects for peace between Israelis
and Palestinians — a situation that constitutes a chief
element of the current disorder in the Middle East and
an effective recruitment tool for radical extremists
in the region. We regret Israeli policies of settlement
expansion. As stated in unison by the international
community, Israeli settlement activities are a violation
of international law and in stark contradiction to the
public pronouncements of the Israeli Government on
the two-State solution to the conflict. In that regard,
we also appeal to Palestinians to persist in renouncing
violence, recognize the State of Israel and respect the
agreements concluded so far. We also remind Israel
that it cannot remain a secure Jewish and democratic
State while oppressing and illegally governing millions
of Palestinians against their will. In that regard, we
reiterate the relevant role the Security Council should
play on this issue by adopting a resolution, with
balanced and fair parameters, for a political solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on our belief
that the Security Council has the political and moral
obligation to do so, and as soon as possible.
Diplomacy has suffered successive defeats in
attempts to find peaceful solutions to crises and
conflicts in the Middle East. After the long-overdue
accords between Egypt and Israel in 1979 and Jordan
and Israel in 1994, one case of success was the recent
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear programme,
as an indication that any controversy, as complex and
difficult as it might be, can have negotiated outcomes if
the parties display the political will and commitment to
seeking political solutions to avoid recourse to military
means.
The adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action on the Iranian nuclear programme and its entry
into force last week might work as a game-changer
if the permanent members of the Security Council
reach out with determination to regional Powers and
countries in the Middle East — Iran, Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, Egypt, Syria, Iraq, the Gulf States, Jordan,
Israel and Palestine — to address and resolve proxy
wars and serious crisis situations affecting the region,
including the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Al-Qaida and the terrorist constellation,
the wars in Syria and Yemen, the Palestinian question,
the fracture between the Sunni- and Shiite-majority

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

countries in the Middle East, and above all for the
establishment of a new era of cooperation and respect
and for the social and economic development of the
region.

one is excluded. For that reason, we support pledges
of mediation and the tireless work done by the Middle
East Quartet. Yet we believe that this mediation tool
has to receive a new impetus.

Ms. Zerkal (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to thank the Uruguayan presidency for having
convened today’s open debate on an issue of the highest
importance for the Security Council and the United
Nations and that has probably remained on the Security
Council’s agenda longer than any other item.

Everybody seems to share a common vision
that there is no alternative to the peace process.
Unfortunately, we have all witnessed an impasse in peace
talks and, in recent months, a significant deterioration
of the situation. Especially worrying is the situation
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, where tensions
continue to rise. The lack of political dialogue creates
an extremely unpredictable and explosive situation.

A Middle East peace settlement has always been
high on Ukraine’s foreign policy agenda. Decades
ago, back in 1975 — in a different international
environment — my country became one of the
founding members of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
has followed this issue through all these years. Time
has passed, but still today there is no country in the
world that can distance itself from what is going on in a
strategically vital Middle East region.
The Middle East peace process is at the very core
of any effort aimed at restoring regional stability. We
consistently support the peace process and believe
that peace in the region can be achieved only if viable
mutual compromises are made at the negotiating table.
We know that the people of Israel want peace and we
understand Israel’s concerns, for it still lacks secure
borders. We believe that Israel must enjoy the same
right as its neighbours to live within internationally
recognized and secure borders, free from fear, terror
and violence. On the other hand, the Palestinian people,
like every other nation, aspire to a peaceful life, decent
work and prospects for a better future for their children.
They have another dream as well — they want to enjoy
freedom in their own country, with no restrictions on
their movement. The Palestinian people, like the Israeli
people, have the right to fulfil their dream of creating
their own viable democratic State. The Palestinians,
just like the Israelis, have the right to self-determination
and justice.
There can be no security without peace. Military
power can quell disorder, but it cannot create peace.
Lasting and permanent security for Israel can be
achieved only within the framework of a durable
peace with its Arab neighbours. A stable, peaceful and
democratic Palestinian State is in Israel’s long-term
security interests, and we believe that it is the only way
to guarantee lasting peace for Israelis and Palestinians
alike. Peace depends on everyone’s commitment; no

Ukraine calls on political leaders from all sides to
work together and take visible actions to de-escalate the
situation and restore direct dialogue. Ukraine reiterates
its position that an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement
lies within the framework of the unconditional
fulfilment by the parties of relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles including land for
peace, the road map, the agreements previously reached
by the parties, and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative.
There are numerous problems of much larger
scale that multiply the threats within and far beyond
the region: the flow of refugees, the terrorism threat
and the danger of proliferation of the weapons of mass
destruction, to name just a few. We should not lose
track of other conflicts that have inflamed the region
and could potentially have a devastating impact on
the Middle East peace process. The Syrian crisis is
probably the gravest regional challenge and one of the
biggest global challenges the world has faced since the
creation of the United Nations. This crisis has been
affecting all spheres of life in neighbouring Lebanon,
which has resulted in a drawn-out political crisis of
State institutions and permanent security turbulence
in the country. In Libya, we saw a promising start last
December with the signing of a political agreement;
we now look forward to its broad implementation. The
situation in Yemen continues to hold the attention of
the international community in the light of the failed
ceasefire and the lack of progress in finding a political
solution of the conflict. Ukraine remains committed
to preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Iraq, which faces critical security
challenges.
These conflicts create nothing but fertile ground
for the emergence and growth of violent extremism and
terrorism, which is a challenge to the entire civilized
world. A rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism

16-0180617/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

goes beyond the boundaries of every region. It benefits
from existing conflicts and continues to destabilize the
situation across the Middle East. In line with a viable
strategy to counter this threat, we must address the
underlying root causes that have led to this challenge
in the first place.
To prevent further spread of violent extremism we
need to work harder on the unprecedented humanitarian
crisis unfolding in that part of the world. The recent
refugee crisis in Europe is yet another reminder that we
cannot turn a blind eye to the catastrophic humanitarian
crises unfolding in Syria, Libya, Iraq and Yemen.
These persistent unresolved conflicts are proving to be
a major driver of violent extremism. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to promote viable and lasting
political solutions to conflict situations, including the
Palestinian issue. We do not want to risk igniting yet
another hot conflict that will fuel regional extremism
even more.
We are convinced that it is in everyone’s interest
that the outcome of these conflicts not mirror the fate
of the entire Middle East peace process, which has been
unfolding for decades. We cannot afford the terrible
burden of endless fires burning all over the region
threatening to set the whole world ablaze. I hope that
the tireless efforts of the wider international community
and of my own country as part of the Security Council
will bear fruit and that the vicious circle of violence
will finally be broken.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first of all like to welcome and thank you, Sir, for
presiding over today’s important debate. I welcome
the commitment of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal to participating in the debate and in making a
statement.
The Middle East region has become a theatre
in which military conflicts have become the norm,
with an increase in hotbeds of tension and the growth
in number of strongholds of non-State groups. The
question of Palestine is the only item that remains on
the agenda of the Security Council 70 years after being
first taken up in 1946. The international community
ignores the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
thereby fuelling terrorism and extremism, promoting
the recruitment of young people and destroying
their future. We are seeing these phenomena spread
throughout the Arab world and beyond, in the form of
the presence of foreign terrorist fighters.

18/67

26/01/2016

We recall once again the importance of not
allowing the international community’s attention, and
particularly the Security Council’s, to be distracted;
we must shoulder our responsibilities to the Palestinian
cause, the occupied Syrian Golan and other crises in the
region. Egypt calls on the international community and
the Security Council to concentrate on the agenda item
covering the Middle East and the Israeli occupation.
Twenty years have gone by since the agreement that
should have led, five years later, to the establishment of
a Palestinian State based on the 4 June 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Over the past
15 years, we have only seen an expansion of settlement
activities, the Judaization of the Palestinian capital,
violations of holy sites, the dislocation of Palestinian
territories and the creation of the wall of separation
on which the International Court of Justice has issued
the advisory opinion. Twenty years have gone by and,
instead of working to help the Palestinian people enjoy
their inalienable rights, some have decided to use the
issues of land and the Palestinian cause for other ends.
International calls to put an end to the occupation have
gone unheeded, as have efforts to improve the situation
of Palestinians living under occupation.
Some have even gone further, casting doubt on
the role, independence, neutrality and legitimacy of
this international Organization. They have benefited
from the destruction wrought by Israel as a pretext to
criticize resolutions of international legitimacy and the
role of the international Organization and its bodies,
as if United Nations resolutions that uphold rights
were the very ones impeding a peaceful solution of the
crisis and as if international legitimacy were supposed
to apologize for the occupying Power. This is an
unprecedented and messy situation and a disgrace to
the international community. The United Nations, with
all of its bodies, must remain the only guarantor of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people until they
recover the rights that they have been stripped of.
Egypt reaffirms that the parameters for the peaceful
settlement of the conflict are clear. The claims of the
Palestinian people to their unquestionable legitimacy
are also clear. Palestinians and Arab States accepted the
two-State solution and, in 2002, presented the historic
Arab Peace Initiative to address the situation. Having
historically rejected it, they accepted the normalization
of relations with Israel as long as a lasting solution would
be found. However, the Initiative has not been taken up.
We reiterate once again our commitment to the Arab

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace Initiative and its clear parameters, which are in
line with resolutions of international law and take into
account the right of Israel to exist in security.
We remain baffled about a core question that is
repeated often in the international community: what
does Israel really want, and on what moral and political
basis? Certain Powers stand with Israel, and there has
been no answer to this question. Egypt believes that the
two-State solution is not a slogan to shore up political
aims. It is, instead, a necessity to achieving peace and
coexistence among the peoples of the region. We cannot
systematically weaken the Palestinian peace partners or
refuse invitations to negotiations or expand settlements
or seize Palestinian lands. According to statistics, 70 per
cent of Area C, which is more than 60 per cent of the
Palestinian territory, has been annexed by Israel. Israeli
practices are not constructive. There are questions as
to the chances of success for the peace process and its
future, the equality of the rights of Palestinians and of
Israelis and the possibility that Israel could become an
apartheid country.
The Security Council must uphold its responsibilities
with regard to this situation. The Council has adopted
various politically expedient positions to justify
not being able to put an end to the occupation or its
expansion. This is unfortunate. Even if the Security
Council were to adopt real policies and continued to
follow the question, the situation on the ground will
not wait for political compromises. The expansion
of settlements and the dispersion of the Palestinian
people and the seizure of their land will continue to
impose a new state of peace. There is no accountability,
while expressions of condemnation and rejection have
gone unheeded. The solution for peace is becoming
increasingly remote, owing to an aggressive policy
without any humanity in the framework of our
commitment to a peaceful solution and the principle of
land for peace, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative.
Given the absence of solutions, the ongoing
suffering of the Palestinian people and the seizure
of land and attacks on holy sites for Muslims and
Christians, we reiterate that we will work with our
partners in the Security Council to safeguard the twoState solution and provide the Palestinian people with
international protection, particularly in light of the
study prepared by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I begin by joining
others in welcoming the briefing by the Secretary-

S/PV.7610

General and the presence and contributions of so many
ministers.
Since our previous open debate (see S/PV.7540),
the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories has sadly deteriorated. The violence that
we saw in October is fast becoming the new normal.
We absolutely and unreservedly condemn every act of
violence, whoever the perpetrator, whoever the victim,
as well as all incitement to violence. We see three clear
steps that the parties must take. First, they need to do
all they can to de-escalate tensions, not inflame them.
Secondly, they need to re-establish a mechanism to
deal with incitement, as they previously committed
to do. Those responsible for the violence need to be
held to account. Thirdly, to achieve genuine peace and
stability, the underlying causes of the conflict have to
be addressed so that those who currently feel despair
and fear can instead have a brighter future to hope for.
Over the short term that means taking practical steps
to improve conditions on the ground. The Palestinian
Authority must move forward with reconciliation and
retake control of Gaza. Israel must lift restrictions on
Gaza and transfer more of the West Bank to Palestinian
Authority control.
It is extremely disappointing that progress has
not materialized in recent months, despite the tireless
efforts of the Quartet. If specific and concrete steps are
not taken, the security situation will deteriorate further
and more lives will be lost needlessly. Furthermore,
the parties will be even further away from the genuine
peace process that Israelis and Palestinians deserve,
and the prospects for a two-State solution will be
further diminshed.
Continued settlement building, the demolitions
of Palestinian property and evictions also continue to
cause unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians.
Such acts harm the peace process. Recent months
have seen further settlement activity, including the
expansion of the Gush Etzion settlement agreed earlier
this month, and reports last week that 385 acres of land
south of Jericho had been declared Israeli State land.
We are concerned by these developments and call on
Israel to reverse its decisions.
The international community, including the
Security Council, needs to demonstrate that we have
not forgotten the people most affected by this conflict.
The United Kingdom remains committed to working
with the United States, the European Union, the Quartet

16-0180619/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the United Nations and key regional partners to
encourage steps that improve the lives of Palestinians
and ensure Israelis are safe and secure.
Let me now turn to Syria. The work of the
International Syria Support Group provides some
optimism for the prospects of a political settlement,
despite the slight delay to the start of talks, from
Monday to Friday this week. To maintain momentum,
confidence-building measures need to take place
alongside negotiations. As we all agreed in resolution
2254 (2015), we look forward to detailed proposals on
confidence-building measures from the office of the
Special Envoy as soon as possible. The international
community and the Council must then help the Syrian
parties deliver them. Syrians need to see improvements
to the situation on the ground, and they need to see
benefits in the negotiations starting in Geneva.
Yet the situation on the ground tells a different
story. Indiscriminate airstrikes continue, including
against targets that are not Daesh. There have been
repeated and well-evidenced reports that Russian and
Syrian regime bombing raids have resulted in extensive
civilian losses. Attacks against the opposition and
civilians will only undermine the political process.
How can opposition groups explain their participation
in negotiations to their supporters when they continue
to suffer daily bombing raids, when they continue to
see medical facilities destroyed and when their access
to food and humanitarian aid only decreases? These
barbaric actions must stop.
Given the level of barbarism, it is unsurprising that
Syria remains the world’s worst humanitarian crisis.
The horrific situation in Madaya reminds us all of the
urgent need for unimpeded and sutained humanitarian
access and for greater support for the United Nations
relief effort. The Syria conference in London on
4 February is the moment to show that support. As the
Secretary-General told us this morning, we hope it will
raise significant new funding from a wider range of
partners to meet the needs of all those affected within
Syria and the neighbouring countries. We welcome the
support from the Council and the broader international
community in this endeavour.
Let me conclude with a final observation. There
has not been this level of diplomatic activity over Syria
since the last round of talks in Geneva in 2014. It is in
all our interests to maintain the momentum and to build
on the optimism. It is the only way that we can ensure

20/67

26/01/2016

that 2016 is finally the year that we bring this terrible
crisis to its overdue conclusion.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalf of my delegation,
I warmly welcome You, Sir, to the Council and I thank
you for presiding over this meeting. We highly value
your presence and the high-level representations today
from Senegal, Ukraine and Angola. Your participation
in this open debate provides prominence to a topic that
has long been marginalized in the Council.
We are appreciative of the briefing by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and we acknowledge the clear
message of the Secretary-General on the unsustainable
situation in occupied Palestine.
Malaysia also associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Iran and
Kuwait on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
For the purpose of today’s meeting, I wish to focus
my statement on the plight of Palestinian children and
on the issue of illegal settlements.
Since the start of the latest wave of violence last
October, children have consisted of almost a quarter of
the total Palestinian casualties. According to UNICEF,
last month alone 9 Palestinian children were killed
and more than 205 were injured by Israeli forces and
settlers in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. By
comparison, UNICEF reported no Israeli child fatalities
or injuries during the same period. The intention to
cause maximum casualties was evident as Palestinian
civilians, including children, were deliberately shot
with live ammunition or rubber-coated bullets by
Israeli forces. In some cases, they were denied medical
treatment and left to suffer agonizing deaths.
The indiscriminate and disproportionate approach
of the occupying Power towards Palestinian civilians
was captured in a horrifying video last October. In the
video, an Israeli military vehicle entered the Palestinian
Aida refugee camps and an Israeli soldier threatened
over a loud speaker:
“As long as you throw stones, go home or we
will gas you. We will gas you until you die. The
children, the youth, the old people — you will all
die. We will not leave any of you alive.”
Arbitrary arrests and detentions of Palestinian
children also continued. Since last September, close to
400 Palestinian children have been arrested or detained
by Israeli forces. Many of these children have been
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violently seized from their homes at night, beaten,
blindfolded, strip-searched, interrogated without legal
counsel, held incommunicado from their parents and
placed in solitary confinement. Even schools have
not been spared from attack. Last November, over
70 Palestinian school children suffered from tear gas
inhalation as Israeli forces fired tear gas canisters and
sprayed skunk water at a school in Hebron. The illegal
practice of brutally executed collective punishment
also persisted as Israeli forces demolished the homes of
Palestinians, rendering Palestinian families, including
children, homeless and in destitution.
Meanwhile, in the Gaza Strip, health-care professionals
from the Gaza Community Mental Health Program
reported a sharp increase in the number of children
with post-traumatic stress disorder, except that in
Gaza there is no such thing as “post”. Traumatic stress
disorder has sadly become a daily reality. Even after
the disproportionate Israeli aggression in Gaza of July
2014, Palestinians continued to suffer under repressive
Israeli occupation and inhumane blockade. Children
in Gaza who were once top students and cheerful
suffered psychological trauma and became aggressive
and withdrawn, had persistent nightmares and were
terrified of loud noises.
Bearing in mind all the illegal Israeli practices
against children, in violation of international law, we
must search our conscience and ask ourselves: What
kind of future have we shaped for the Palestinian
children, who have grown up knowing only injustice,
oppression, anger and violence throughout their lives?
Clearly, the lack of accountability for Israel, including on
the issue of the protection of children, has emboldened
it to commit further violations with impunity. With
our continuing inaction, we run the risk of setting off
a ticking time-bomb, with grave repercussions for the
region and the world.
Last year was yet another lost opportunity for
the Council to make progress on the Palestinian
question. Despite promising initiatives by some
Council members, in the end we were back at square
one, dashing the dreams and hopes of those who have
suffered far too long and confirming that their miseries
had once again been ignored. We were told to wait, and
while we complied and waited Israel, with its insatiable
appetite for land-grabbing, seized even more lands from
the Palestinians, snubbing the two-State solution. Just
last week, the Israeli Government declared 370 acres of
land in occupied West Bank to be State land, effectively

S/PV.7610

confiscating more Palestinian land and robbing the
Palestinians of their future.
This month alone, the Israeli authorities continued
to demolish housing structures belonging to Palestinian
Bedouins in occupied East Jerusalem, rendering
homeless over 40 Palestinians, half of them children.
The forced displacement was part of the Israeli plan to
build illegal settlements in the E-l corridor for thousands
of Israeli settlers. There is no doubt that these actions
are illegal and contrary to international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Furthermore, the
illegal settlements constitute the single-most damaging
factor that endangers the two-State solution.
The Council must stop turning a blind eye to
these violations and start holding Israel accountable,
based on international standards of human rights and
international law. We can no longer accept excuses that
any action against Israel, even if to uphold international
law and human rights standard, is either anti-Semitic
or will jeopardize the possibility of peace talks.
Instead, we must expose these excuses for what they
are — farcical pretexts to perpetuate the illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestine.
In the short term, pending a final and comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question, we need to
seriously consider the option for international protection
for the Palestinian people, including children. Such
protection, which has numerous precedents at the United
Nations and could constitute a confidence-building
measure, would go a long way towards ending impunity
and ensuring stability and security in occupied Palestine
and the region. The international community should
also pursue all legal, diplomatic and economic channels
to step up its pressure on the Israeli Government and
make it too costly for Israel to continue with its illegal
settlement policy.
In the long run, we still aspire to a two-State
solution — to the States of Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security based on the pre-1967
borders. However, the prospect for peaceful coexistence
is diminishing by the day, especially due to Israel’s
settlement policy and our inaction. If we continue to
do nothing, this will feed into the agenda of those who
seek to destroy the prospects for the two-State solution,
and the two-State solution will eventually become a
delusion. The consequences will be grim, not only for
the region but for all humankind. We must not look on
helplessly as that happens.

16-0180621/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir, for
personally presiding over this very important debate of
the Security Council. We acknowledge your presence,
Mr. President, and we thank the Secretary General for
his briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
My country’s statement will focus on the issue of
Palestine, for we believe it crucial to resolve that matter
in order to ensure peace and stability in the Middle
East.
As the Security Council once again takes up the
Palestinian question, we take note of and condemn the
ongoing acts of aggression by the occupying Power
against the inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian
territories. Unfortunately, everything seems to
indicate that the calls of the Security Council to end
the illegal occupation and the violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law by the Israeli
Government, as well as to bring the parties back to the
negotiating table, are not going to be translated into
concrete actions to reverse this complex situation. The
lack of political will in the Security Council to resolve
the Palestinian question is clear.
The occupying Power is openly and without fear
of consequences ignoring the continued calls of the
international community to end its illegal actions.
It is taking advantage of the inaction of the Security
Council and its reluctance to take up its responsibility
to identify Israel as a State that has committed war
crimes and occupied territories of the State of Palestine,
in violation of the resolutions of the Security Council
and of the General Assembly.
Against that backdrop, the suffering of the
Palestinian people is only increasing. Since October
2015, more than 160 Palestinians, including 29 children
and 7 women, have been killed by the occupation
forces and Israeli settlers living illegally on Palestinian
land. Overall in 2015, regretably, there were more than
15,000 Palestinians injured in various incidents and
attacks provoked by Israel.
At the same time, the number of the Palestinian men
and women who are humiliated, attacked, persecuted
and unjustly arrested by way of administrative
detentions continues to increase. They are attacked by
Israel’s police and military forces, whose repressive
22/67

26/01/2016

attitude is a manifestation of the prolonged military
occupation and the policy to colonize the territory.
We join the demand that Israel immediately release
imprisoned Palestinian children.
Venezuela condemns violence wherever it comes
from and in all its manifestations. Similarly, we condemn
attacks against Israeli civilians, who have been victims
of stabbings and other forms of violence. Since 2015,
that number totals approximately 18 people, according
to information from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
The world contiues to be shocked by the devastating
effects of the military operation Protective Shield, an
act of aggression against the civilian population that
killed more than 550 children and left behind thousands
of other children handicapped and still hospitalized.
Many have seen their futures cut short, as well as any
immediate hope of being able to resume their lives
in order to build a promising tomorrow. Even today,
humanitarian organizations continue to report cases
of children in Gaza with severe psychological trauma,
despite the attention and care they receive in treatment
centres. My country vigorously rejects the blockade
of Gaza, which since 2007 has kept the population in
a sort of ghetto that impacts the lives of millions of
Palestinians, in clear violation of international law.
We demand the end of that illegal policy against the
civialian population in Gaza.
Nothing seems to deter the systematic colonial
actions of the occupying Power, with its construction
of illegal settlements and destruction of Palestinian
property. The illegal land confiscation, the punitive
invasion and demolition of homes and the expulsion
of Palestinians from their land are part of the list of
grievances against the Palestinian people, particularly
displaced persons and refugees. Such is the case
with Israel’s recent annexation of 370 acres of land
near Jericho, in the West Bank, which were declared
State-owned — act that has been condemned by the
Secretary-General and on which the Council has not
acted.
Faced with that situation, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela joins its voice to that of so many around
the world demanding that the Security Council
play a proactive role on this issue, in line with the
responsibilities conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Such a role should make it possible
to address the Palestinian issue with determination and
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a sense of justice. It is therefore a matter of Israel once
and for all ceasing its acts of aggression, ending the
occupation and sitting down to negotiate in good faith
with the Palestinians for an inclusive and definitive
politial solution to end the conflict in the framework
of the two-State solution, including accepting the
right of the Palestinians to live under internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the Charter and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of
the Security Council.
Similarly, an equal footing for the parties is a
crucial prerequisite for any fair negotiations. To that
end, it is imperative that the State of Palestine be
incorporated as a fully fledged Member of the United
Nations. A decision in that regard would be a step in
the right direction towards achieving a firm and lasting
peace in the region.
Moreover, we must address as soon as possible the
repeated calls of the Palestinian National Authority
that the population of the occupied territories be placed
under international protection in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention and resolution 904 (1994),
thus ensuring the integrity of the men and women of
Palestine in the face of the continuous and systematic
aggression of the occupying Power.
Let us act without double standards to judge
severely the Israeli policy of systematic violations of
human rights of the Palestinian people as well as of
international humanitarian law, in the same way that the
Council is ready to quickly condemn and punish other
countries. Let us be consistent with our ongoing calls
from the Council for accountability. The illegal actions
of the occupying Power against the Palestinian people
paint a picture of war crimes that must be put before
international criminal justice in order to determine
responsibility.
The stalemate in the negotiations undermines
the prospects for peace and creates frustration and
hopelessness among the Palestinian population, which
can be exploited by extremist groups to fuel hatred and
promote their terrorist agendas. With each failure in
the peace talks, the patience of Palestinian men and
women is eroded — after having endured more than
50 years of an illegal and brutal occupation that has
denied them their human rights and their right to selfdetermination — in addition to eroding the expectations
of Palestinians in the international community and
multilateral organizations for addressing their just
cause.

S/PV.7610

Let us not disappoint that trust. Let us not wait for
the Palestinian people to rise up indignantly in a new
intifada. Let us not wait for its youth to be ensnared
by the violent extremism that plagues the region. There
will be no peace or stability in the Middle East until
the Palestinian question is resolved peaceably. Israel
must respect international law, halt its violence and
end its occupation of Palestine. We must act now. The
Council must assume its responsibility, and certain of
its members must show more political will, in order to
resolve this question. We ought to contribute effectively
to making the existence of the State of Palestine a
reality — a free and sovereign nation in a zone of peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to reiterate the message of France with
regard to the situation in the Middle East: we must
not — cannot — give up. Simply put, the situation is
untenable, as evidenced by the ongoing violence in
Israel, Jerusalem and the Palestinian territories. Since
the beginning of the outbreak of violence, there have
been at least 153 Palestinians killed, mostly perpetrators
of attacks, and 25 Israelis killed. That very aggravated
situation cannot last, and we reiterate our condemnation
of all attacks.
It is our responsibility to take action. France remains
convinced that the lack of political prospects is the root
cause of the recent events, as it plays into violence,
radicalization and extremism. The increase in security
measures implemented by Israel and the continued
punitive demolitions and settlement activities, illegal
under international law, fuel tensions and mutual
resentment. In that regard, the recent announcements
of new settlements in the West Bank and Jerusalem are
extremely worrisome and raise serious doubts about
Israel’s commitment to reaching a two-State solution.
The scope of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
goes beyond just the territory that extends from the
Mediterranean to the Jordan Valley. The Palestinian
issue continues to fuel regional tensions. No one in this
Chamber wants Daesh to seize the Palestinian cause and
distort it, in its own interests, as a compelling argument
for recruitment. It is possible that Daesh could, in due
course, settle in Gaza and the West Bank. We must do
everything possible to make sure that does not happen.
The need for ambitious and collective mobilization
by the international community grows increasingly
urgent as the days go by. The temptation for some to
defer the matter, to manage the conflict and to wait
for favourable circumstances before talking seriously

16-0180623/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/01/2016

about peace is, in our view, not viable, because making
the conflict take a back seat among our priorities and
treating it like a frozen conflict could lead to a new
outbreak. That is why the collective commitment of
the Council members, the European Union and the
countries in the region is essential. That requires
creating a specific and credible political horizon for a
shared goal, namely, the two-State solution, which we
must safeguard.

group that emerged at the Riyadh conference brings
together for the first time a broad spectrum of non-jihadi
political and military leaders who have committed to
a shared goal of a united, free and democratic Syria
that respects the rights of all citizens. It is up to that
group to be the interlocutor with the regime during the
negotiations. The negotiation process could, however,
also lead to consultations with various stakeholders,
namely, those from civil society.

In order to take steps in that direction, France
remains convinced of the need for a change in approach
along the lines of collective, enhanced and renewed
support. The work undertaken during the meeting
of the Quartet, which was expanded to include Arab
countries and international partners during the General
Assembly, must continue. That is a key element.
The Security Council also has a role to play — a
responsibilty to assume — and must fully commit itself
to bringing about a solution that is acceptable to both
parties. France will remain fully mobilized on this
issue, as it is thoroughly convinced that the stability of
that fractured and shell-shocked region requires a fair
and lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

Thirdly, there is a need for the discussions to focus
on the political transition, in accordance with the terms
agreed in the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
It is not a matter of creating a pseudo-Government of
national unity, rather it is one of agreeing on creating
a transitional governmental body with full executive
powers to afford Syria prospects for reconciliation.
Only a political solution will end the suffering and
ongoing exodus of civilians and reduce the terrorist
threat we face. I assure you, Mr. President, of France’s
resolute commitment in that regard.

There is also urgency with regard to Syria: it is
urgent to break the cycle of violence and establish a
political transition. We lend our full support to the
process launched in Vienna and endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 2254 (2015), of 18 December 2015.
It important that the inter-Syrian negotiations, which
are key to achieving peace, can begin. We understand
that Mr. Staffan de Mistura is doing everything possible
for them to begin on 29 January. To ensure the success
of those negotiations, three elements are necessary.
First, there must be a swift and significant
improvement in the humanitarian situation. There can
be no credible political process without immediate
improvements in the situation on the ground for
Syrians. The open meeting (see S/PV.7360) of the
Security Council early last year exposed the persistent
and abject practice of using sieges as a weapon of war. I
reiterate our solemn call for the immediate and effective
lifting of all sieges, as well as for lasting humanitarian
access to all those in need, without any restrictions, and
for the stopping of attacks against civilians. The Syrian
regime and its supporters must respect international
humanitarian law. It is not a bargaining chip, but rather
an absolute obligation.
Secondly, the designation by the opposition of its
own representatives must be respected. The opposition
24/67

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank Foreign
Minister Nin Novoa for his presence here and commend
Uruguay for convening today’s ministerial-level
meeting. I thank also the Secretary-General for his
briefing, which made for sobering listening.
New Zealand has been an elected member of the
Council for just over a year. During that time, the
conflicts of the Middle East have taken up much of
the Council’s attention — sadly, to too little practical
effect. The fighting and killing in Syria continue, with
people dying of starvation and as a result of bombs and
bullets. The conflict in Yemen persists with horrific
consequences for the Yemeni people, despite the selfevident truth that neither side can win by military
means. Peace in Libya remains elusive.
And the Israeli-Palestinian peace process remains
dormant, while disaffected people on both sides resort
to violence, threatening a renewed outbreak of serious
fighting, and the parties themselves engage in mutual
recrimination, sharing only their manifest failures to
show leadership and engage. That bleak situation is the
responsibility of the Middle East itself, of those who
involve themselves in the region and of the Council.
The conclusion of the Iran nuclear deal gives hope.
It shows what can be achieved when States commit
themselves to diplomacy, determined to find a solution.
The confirmation by the International Atomic Energy
Agency that Iran has lived up to its undertakings and

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

the resulting lifting of sanctions are highly encouraging
next steps. We exhort Iran to continue on the path of
engagement with the international community and to
avoid acts that call into question its commitment to the
agreement. It is not just Iran and the P5+1 that want that
agreement to succeed, all member States have a stake in
its faithful implementation.

the levels of violence and mistrust and the entrenched
positions, resuming negotiations seems improbable in
the near future. Neither side seems willing or able to
demonstrate the political vision necessary to broker
peace. The vacuum is being filled with extremist voices,
who will find an increasingly receptive audience the
longer the stalemate continues.

We continue to hope that that example will be
followed in Syria. The establishment of the International
Syria Support Group and the adoption of resolution
2254 (2015) were promising signs after almost five
years of war. But we need those involved — in Syria, in
the region and beyond — to make the difficult political
decisions necessary to come to a political solution. The
bargaining must take place at the negotiating table, not
beforehand nor on the battlefield.

Israeli, Palestinian and influential world leaders
must stand up and reverse that trend. The parties are
not so far apart that no scope exists for a decisive role
for the Council. That is why New Zealand has been
consistent in its call for the Council to play its part.
It must assume a role in reaffirming the fundamental
importance of the two-State solution and in creating
the necessary conditions for a resumption of talks. We
know some disagree. For some, the Security Council
and the United Nations system are too partisan to play
a role. For others, any gesture of involvement is seen as
rewarding intransigence.

We welcome the news from Special Representative
De Mistura that invitations to the talks are being issued
today and that the talks themselves are now scheduled to
start on Friday. While we were concerned at the delayed
start, we support Mr. De Mistura’s determination
to ensure that the talks start on the best possible and
properly inclusive basis. We urge all parties to bring
the necessary political will to find a solution to the
conflict and salvage what is left of Syria. The Syrian
people need leadership, relief from the fighting and
starvation, and some reason to believe that a way out of
their current nightmare exists.
Amid the devastating and persistent conflicts in the
Middle East, the Council has done too little to address
the situation in Israel and the occupied territories. For
seven years, we have been largely silent — and, worse
still, inactive — on the Middle East peace process. In
the year that New Zealand has been a member of the
Security Council, settlement activity has increased, as
has violence affecting hundreds of ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians. Shockingly, street-level violence has now
become the new normal.
Neither side has shown the necessary willingness
to make the concessions essential for peace. Both have
increased their unhelpful rhetoric and the blaming of
each other. And moves such as Israel’s intention to
declare 385 acres of land in the West Bank as State land
is deeply unhelpful and further hobbles the prospects
for peace.
The two-State solution is the only credible model
we have for bringing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
to an end. But its viability is slipping away. Given

Let us change that perception by taking reasonable,
meaningful action to encourage the parties to return
to talks. Sadly, there was no agreement in 2014 on
Jordan’s draft resolution S/2014/916 (see S/PV.7354).
In 2015, both France and New Zealand put forward
proposals for Council action. Those proposals were
met with mixed responses from Council members, and
from the parties themselves. Some wanted more, some
wanted less, some wanted nothing at all.
Agreement will inevitably require compromise. It
may well be that, after seven years of inaction, a Council
contribution will have to begin with a single step. We
have suggested what such a step might look like. We
remain ready to take our proposed draft resolution
forward. But we are also ready to support any other
reasonable initiative aimed at generating momentum
towards peace talks, and in that regard we have listened
carefully to the statement just made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt. For the Council to do nothing
is not an option. We hope that 2016 will be remembered
as the year when we, as a Council, found the requisite
political will and determination to affirm the two-State
solution and set out a path towards a resumption of the
Middle East peace process.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In recent years, we have seen an increase in
the potential for conflict in the vast expanses of the
Middle East and North Africa — from Libya to Iraq.
Against that backdrop, an unprecedented increase
in the terrorist threat has also occurred. But in that

16-0180625/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

context we must not underestimate the explosive nature
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has lasted
far too long. The common opinion that that conflict
is something to which one has grown accustomed
and that it will resolve itself is an untenable fallacy.
Efforts must be made to extricate the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict from its current sluggish
state. Otherwise, the degradation of the situation will
continue. The recent spike in violence in the Palestinian
territories and in Israel is the most recent illustration of
that trend.
Progress towards a political settlement means that
settlement activity needs to stop. We are worried about
the plans of the Israeli authorities to confiscate another
150 hectares of land south of Jericho. The policy of
fait accompli conducted by the Israeli authorities
undermines, in a very literal sense, the two-State
solution. We are convinced that the main strategic goal
should be to revive the negotiating track. Currently,
substantive measures must be taken together, based on
Israeli and Palestinian agreements that strengthen the
Palestinian political and economic institutions, taking
into account, of course, the legitimate concerns of
Israel in the area of security.
In the current difficult situation, the Quartet, which
speaks on behalf of the international community, is
seeking a solution and a way out of the current dangerous
impasse. As a result of the ministerial meetings of the
Quartet on 30 September 2015 on the margins of the
General Assembly at its seventieth session in New York
City, as well as of similar meetings held on 23 October
last year in Vienna, statements were adopted that
focused on the need to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions on the settlement of the Middle East
conflict. We believe that the recent visit of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process to Israel and Palestine was useful. Meetings
took place with the chief negotiators of the parties, as
well as with the leadership of the Foreign Ministries
and security agencies.
We think that the Security Council should play
an important role in efforts to settle the Middle East
conflict. So as to avoid yet another acute crisis with
regard to the Gaza Strip, two tasks need to be tackled:
extending the control of the central Palestinian
authorities in the Gaza Strip and ensuring stability
around that territory. The solutions to those tasks
should be sought exclusively within the framework of
ensuring inter-Palestinian unity based on the Palestine

26/67

26/01/2016

Liberation Organization. We are working on an ongoing
basis on the issue with the regional parties.
We expect that inter-Syrian talks will begin in
the very near future. The launching of the Vienna
process, which was endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 2254 (2015), and the emergence of a
number of factors conducive to a political settlement
in Syria have created a unique prospect for progress
in settling that conflict. We must seize that window of
opportunity. We are surprised that even today some
Security Council members continue to muddy the water
by putting forward their unilateral interpretations of
resolution 2254 (2015). That is irresponsible, and such
habits should be cast aside.
In order to assist the Syrian Government, the Russian
Federation continues to provide military assistance to
that Government in the fight against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups.
For the first time, ISIL forces have lost their footholds.
Russia is also helping in the humanitarian sphere by
providing humanitarian assistance, including in Deir
ez-Zor, where ISIL fighters have besieged over 100,000
civilians. We have heard various ideas regarding
Russia’s activities in Syria. We firmly reject them.
It is especially strange when they are disseminated
by countries that are part of the Western coalition,
which, unlike the Russian Air and Space Forces, is
acting in an extremely untransparent manner and not
very effectively at all. But our American and English
colleagues always refuse to give information about the
numerous civilian victims of the coalition’s air strikes
in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan.
There is an urgent need to restore national unity
in Libya, where there is increasing evidence of the
presence of terrorist units there. ISIL is attempting to
create corridors between conflict-ridden countries in
the Middle East and the North African Mediterranean.
We urge the Libyan parties to respond responsibly to
the efforts of the United Nations to approach the issue
of forming a Government of national unity and to unite
in combating terrorism.
We cannot call the situation in Yemen anything
other than tragic. Fierce clashes in the country are
continuing. Civilians are being killed, and the civilian
infrastructure is being destroyed. We call on all the
parties to the conflict to cease hostilities immediately
and to resolve all existing problems through negotiations.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Yemen, Mr. Ahmed Ismail, to
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

bring that situation to a political track and begin an
inter-Yemeni dialogue for a sustainable settlement. For
our part, we shall provide requisite support to those
efforts.
An effective response to the difficult challenges in
the Middle East and North Africa can only be found
collectively. There is a well-known proposal from the
Russian Federation for broad cooperation to push back
against terrorism and ensure a political settlements of
existing crises, which remains on the table.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Uruguay’s initiative to organize this
ministerial-level open debate on the question of the
Middle East and welcomes Foreign Minister Nin Novoa
to preside over this meeting. I thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and commend his active
engagement in promoting the Middle East peace process.
China carefully listened to the statements delivered
by the observer of Palestine and the representative of
Israel.
At present, the Middle East remains beset by
conflict and war. The history of the Middle East has
shown time and again that there can be no winner in the
conflict and that peace is the ultimate and irresistible
historical trend. Chinese President Xi Jinping recently
visited the Middle East, where he reaffirmed China’s
Middle East policy and called for focused efforts
towards peace and development. He stressed the need
to resolve differences through dialogue and for the
people of the region to choose a development path that
takes their particular conditions into account. He put
forward a Chinese solution based on a holistic approach
that addresses both the symptoms and the root causes of
the conflict. His solution enjoys the broad appreciation
of the countries of the region. China stands ready, to
continue to work with the international community to
achieve peace, stability and development in the Middle
East.
The question of Palestine lies at the root of
everything affecting peace in the Middle East.
Currently, peace talks between Palestine and Israel
remain deeply deadlocked. Conflict is intensifying
and the security situation is deteriorating. It is the
joint responsibility of the international community
to safeguard the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people. Achieving a comprehensive and just
solution to the question of Palestine would serve the
interests of all parties concerned. China hopes that the

S/PV.7610

international community will address the issue through
attending to the following priorities.
First, the international community should urge
Palestine and Israel to take immediate action to establish
a ceasefire, end the violence and ease tensions. As the
party with the upper hand, Israel should take the lead
in that regard. At the same time, the legitimate security
concerns of the countries of the region should be given
due attention.
Secondly, the international community should
take more robust measures and reactivate the political
peace process so as to bring both parties back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. At the same time,
it is necessary to uphold justice and redress historical
injustices as soon as possible. Thirdly, the international
community should further consolidate consensus and
establish a new mechanism for peace in the Middle
East. It should support the efforts of the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in that connection. The United Nations should urge
Member States to effectively implement the relevant
General Assembly resolutions on the question of
Palestine and Israel. The Security Council should
actively respond to the legitimate demands put forward
by Palestine and the Arab States and seriously consider
the question of providing international protection to the
Palestinian people.
Fourthly, the international community should
continue to promote the economic and reconstruction
process, enhance its economic assistance to and
cooperation with Palestine and alleviate its humanitarian
situation so as to bring hope to the Palestinian people.
China is a firm supporter of peace between Palestine
and Israel. In his recent speech at the headquarters
of the League of Arab States, President Xi Jinping
reiterated China’s firm support for the restoration of
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.
China supports the establishment of a Palestinian State
with full sovereignty, based on the pre-1967 borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and understands its
legitimate demands to join the international community
as a State. In order to improve the livelihood of the
Palestinian people, China has decided to provide gratis
assistance in the amount of ¥50 million. China is ready,
together with the international community, to play its
part in pushing forward the Middle East peace process.
With regard to the question of Syria, China
commends the mediation efforts carried out by Special

16-0180627/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Envoy Staffan de Mistura and supports the leading
role the United Nations plays in mediating a political
solution on the question of Syria. The search for a
political solution is now presented with an important
window of opportunity, and China hopes that the new
round of peace talks in Geneva can be held shortly. The
international community should continue to support
the efforts of the United Nations to encourage both
parties to the negotiations to take the future and greater
good of their country into consideration, proceed based
on the fundamental interests of the Syrian people,
demonstrate sincerity, seek common ground and resolve
their differences so as to ensure that the peace process
stays the course and achieves positive results. We hope
that the international community will work jointly to
maintain the current positive momentum towards a
political solution.
Cooperation in international counter-terrorism
requires the international community to strengthen
its consensus in this field. China calls on the relevant
military alliances on counter-terrorism to strengthen
communication and cooperation. Counter-terrorism
cannot be subject to double standards and terrorism
should not be linked to a specific ethnicity, religion or
civilization. We support the efforts of the international
community to further strengthen coordination in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
basic norms of international law, and to create synergy
in counter-terrorism efforts within the United Nations
framework.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): We
warmly welcome you, Sir, to the Security Council. We
are very pleased to be serving on the Council alongside
Uruguay.
(spoke in English)
In order to save time, I will state my salient points
and distribute my full text to the Council. Let me start
by looking at the overall situation in the Middle East.
One year ago, the Council strongly condemned the
heinous murder of two Japanese citizens in Syria by
terrorists. A year later, terrorism and acts of violence
continue to exploit the political vacuums and economic
difficulties in the region, with civilians bearing the
brunt of the cost. Further terrorist attacks in Africa,
Asia, Australia, Europe and North America serve as a
cruel reminder of the far-reaching repercussions of the
growing instability in the Middle East. From Syria to

28/67

26/01/2016

Yemen, the numerous crises in the Middle East urgently
require political solutions. We therefore welcome
the resumption of the Yemen peace talks and look
forward to the initiation of the intra-Syrian dialogue
on 29 January.
We note with concern, however, the rise in regional
tensions. Provocative rhetoric and the drawing of fault
lines do not contribute to political solutions. Dialogue
must be maintained at all times; it is the essence and
power of diplomacy. The Security Council must
continue to urge dialogue and take measures to reduce
tensions in that volatile region.
The rise of extremist ideology and the mass
movement of refugees are occurring where economic
prospects are truncated, civilians indiscriminately
attacked and families uprooted. Let us not forget these
underlying factors, which fuel instability in Syria
and other countries of the region. Under the concept
of human security, Japan seeks to help empower
individuals and strengthen communities from the
ground up. Japan is currently disbursing $2.5 billion
in non-military assistance to the region, from assisting
Gaza reconstruction and providing education
opportunities for Syrian children to offering vocational
training in refugee camps. Furthermore, last week the
Japanese Diet approved an additional $350 million in
non-military assistance to Syria and its neighbouring
countries.
Nowhere are a resumption of political dialogue
and improvements on the ground more overdue than in
Palestine. Positive steps on the ground are lacking. In
that regard, we reiterate our call for a freeze on settlement
activities, which are violations of international law
and which severely undermine the viability of a twoState solution. While welcoming the increased efforts
on Israel’s part to address settler violence, we call on
Israel to refrain from collective punishment measures,
including the demolition of homes. We also call on
Palestine to maintain its security cooperation with
Israel, which is vital for stability, and to strengthen
efforts to achieve national reconciliation.
It is the parties themselves who must reach
agreement. However, we must recognize that the
Council has hardly provided tangible support. The
current impasse must not prevent us from moving ahead
where progress is possible. Japan firmly believes that
a sustainable Palestinian economy is indispensable to
the viability of a two-State solution. With that in mind,
the Japanese Diet recently approved an additional
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

$78 million in assistance, on top of the $1.6 billion we
have already disbursed for Palestine’s development.
One outstanding example is the Jericho AgroIndustrial Park, which saw its first investment lead to
the beginning of operations last autumn. In what was
formerly a desert there now stands a modem industrial
park capable of creating 700 jobs for Palestinians. It is
the result of cooperation between Japan, Israel, Jordan
and Palestine and attests to the dividends to be gained
through peaceful cooperation. We hope the success of
the project will attract further investment.
Assistance efforts must have a goal in sight.
Postponement is not an option. Japan stands ready to
play a constructive role, both inside and outside the
Council, in working for the long-overdue attainment of
a two-State solution.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you presiding over
a second Security Council meeting after yesterday’s,
Mr. President, and one that is no less important.
Spain has now been on the Security Council for one
year, during which the region has unfortunately been
facing some enormously serious conflicts. In some
of those conflicts, such as the civil war in Syria, the
Council has managed to make some progress towards a
solution, in this case through its adoption of resolution
2254 (2015). In others, particularly the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, no progress has been made. And
not just no progress; what we are seeing is actually a
gradual loss of confidence in the viability of a two-State
solution, considered by the international community to
be the only one capable of ensuring sustainable and
lasting peace.
I would like to emphasize that violence and
acts of terror, wherever they occur and in whatever
circumstances, deserve to be condemned as firmly as
possible. The parties must refrain from any kind of
incitement to violence and, if a response is required,
it must be a proportionate one. In any case, security
measures alone are not enough to bring an end to the
violence. We need to create a political vision and a
negotiating framework that can give hope back to the
Palestinian people while ensuring Israel’s security.
That is the international community’s responsibility,
and Spain believes that the Security Council can and
must play a central role in that regard, as many other
speakers have also said.

S/PV.7610

The international community in general, and the
Council in particular, has various possibilities for action,
and two in particular, the first being a declaration on the
part of the Council. It has been more than seven years
since the Council adopted a resolution on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which is too long. Of course, it
is not a matter of merely adopting a resolution for its
own sake. On the contrary, the Council must reflect on
the issue and find a way to adopt a text that provides
added value. Secondly, Spain believes it is also worth
exploring the possibility of holding an international
conference that would restore the spirit of the 1991
Madrid Peace Conference, through which we could try
to revitalize the peace process based on what we think
are two key elements, the Arab Peace Initiative and a
regional approach to a new security framework in the
Middle East.
Today, making progress towards implementing
a two-State solution requires that we preserve its
viability. The construction of settlements — especially
settlements that have an effect on the final status of
Jerusalem — in the occupied territories, which is
illegal under international law, is one of the main
threats to that viability. Ending the demolition of
houses, people’s forced displacement, confiscations of
land and adopting transformative measures in Area C
would be unequivocal signs of Israel’s commitment to
a two-State solution. Besides that, the disunity in the
Palestinian camp and the weakening of its institutions
are also structural threats to the possibility of building
a Palestinian State. The international community must
work to advance the reconciliation process between the
various Palestinian factions and promote the holding
of democratic elections in which all Palestinians can
take part. The still unaccomplished reconstruction of
the Gaza Strip and the continuing risk of a dangerous
escalation of the violence highlights how important it
is that the Palestinian Authority resume its governing
functions in the Strip and ensure that it is part of a
future Palestinian State. The launching of attacks on
Israel from Gaza must end.
I will now touch briefly on the situation in Syria.
The burden is now on us to build on the opportunity
to bring an end to the conflict there, moving forward
simultaneously on the three parallel tracks established by
resolution 2254 (2015). First, regarding an intra-Syrian
dialogue, we call on the Government and the opposition
to show full commitment to the round of talks that
will begin in Geneva this Friday, paving the way for

16-0180629/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a process of political transition. Secondly, with regard
to confidence-building measures, freeing prisoners and
ending aerial attacks are now more necessary than ever
if the negotiations are to seem credible. Thirdly, we
must not lose sight of the goal of achieving a nationwide
ceasefire to be monitored by the United Nations. We
are close to the fifth anniversary of the war in Syria and
we need to be able to create prospects for hope for its
people. Based on resolution 2254 (2015), Spain believes
that the United Nations should play a central role in this
process, and we have every confidence in the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de
Mistura, the mediator who must establish the timetable
and parameters for each stage of the negotiations, with
the Council’s support.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, almost
everything has already been said. I will limit myself to
calling on all the parties to ensure uninterrupted and
unconditional access to the besieged areas of Syria.
Tomorrow, at the request of New Zealand, Spain and
Egypt, the World Food Programme and the Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Syria Crisis of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
will brief the Council in what will undoubtedly be a
very important meeting. Our priority right now is
preventing any future repeats of the situations in
Madaya and Kefraya.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to inform
all concerned that we will be continuing the open
debate through the lunch hour, as we have a very large
number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands currently holds the Presidency of
the European Union. Today, I will make a number of
comments in my national capacity. A statement on
behalf of the European Union (EU) will be delivered
later.
I am extremely worried about the different crises in
the Middle East. It sometimes seems that our common
responsibility to protect and our obligations for the
protection of civilians have been all but forgotten.
International humanitarian law in countries is
threatened every day like Yemen and Syria. Hundreds
of thousands of people have been killed. Millions have
had to flee their homes. Entire populations are afraid
of what tomorrow may bring. The Security Council has

30/67

26/01/2016

an enormous responsibility to help put an end to the
violence. We owe it to the people. Peace cannot wait. It
is long overdue.
The civil war in Syria is about to enter its sixth year.
The numbers are staggering. Half the population has
been displaced, and more than one out of one hundred
Syrians has died, with the overwhelming majority
killed by their own Government. Many people, who are
internally displaced, flee to neighbouring countries.
We all have a responsibility to ensure that people in
Syria are able to live their lives free from violence, free
from poverty and free from fear in their own homes,
villages and countries. The Netherlands urges all
parties involved to step up efforts to fully implement
resolution 2254 (2015), which incorporates two
elements: a political process with a calendar oriented
towards transition and the fight against Daesh. Both
elements are necessary and can strengthen each other.
We need to beat terrorism, boost freedom and
prioritize the humanitarian needs of all Syrians. One
must be accompanied by the other, and that is how the
Dutch Government sees it. That is why we have to act
intelligently against Daesh, whose ideology and actions
against innocent men, women and children — Muslims,
Christians and Yazidi — are abhorrent. The
international coalition against Daesh consists of more
than 60 countries. We are making progress on the
battlefield, especially in Iraq, and in undercutting
their financial resources and vicious narrative. But
prevention is also key worldwide. We must do more to
find solutions to the ongoing conflicts in the region by
tackling the political and socioeconomic crises and root
causes on which Daesh and other terrorist groups feed.
Thankfully, meaningful steps have been taken in
recent months with regard to the political process as
well. We have seen the establishment of the International
Syria Support Group. We have also seen the opposition,
to a large degree, joining ranks in Riyadh. Resolution
2254 (2015) provides a framework for transition in
Syria — a necessary precondition for peace — and
on 29 January talks will start that should ultimately
lead to sustainable peace. I think that we should all
do our utmost to convince the parties to engage fully
and unequivocally, and we need to stand ready to help
where we can. In that light, the Netherlands specifically
supports a group of Syrian women who will play an
advisory role in the talks. It is important for all of us
to put our money where our mouth is in implementing
Security Council resolutions, including resolution

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

1325 (2000). In addition, we have been supporting the
political process with training and capacity-building
for the opposition groups involved in the talks and in
supporting diplomacy.
We have deep respect for United Nations Special
Envoy De Mistura and other partners who are working
hard towards that end. I myself have worked as Special
Representative, and I have often had the opportunity
to brief the Council on other situations, including in
Mali among other places. I can tell the Council how
important it is for the Special Envoy to be not only
encouraged but also supported by everybody. We
have been substantially supporting De Mistura’s
team. We also commend Secretary Kerry and Foreign
Minister Lavrov, whose efforts have shown that great
differences can be overcome and Security Council
members can effectively collaborate towards the same
goal. Diplomacy can still work.
Because peace cannot wait, more needs to be done.
We also need to step up our humanitarian efforts,
assistance and sense of urgency to help the people
inside Syria and those who are fleeing, making sure
that they will be safe from the violence and deprivations
that they suffer and have a home to go back to where
they can live in peace and security. Countries such as
Lebanon — represented here today — Jordan, Turkey
and Iraq that host the majority of refugees deserve
much more assistance. In that regard, we welcome the
conference the United Kingdom, Germany, Norway,
Kuwait and the United Nations will host in London on
4 February, where the Netherlands will pledge more
humanitarian aid and structural support for Syrians in
Syria and abroad.
The number one priority of the Council should
be to find a lasting solution for Syria. It is not easy,
but peace cannot wait. I call upon the Council to set
aside its differences and pave the way for a solution
that addresses the need for justice and accountability,
because there can be no peace without justice.
We also urgently need peace between Israel and its
neighbours. This has been a matter close to my heart ever
since I worked in Gaza for three months in 1999. That
was a time of cautious optimism. It was time when there
was a ground-breaking ceremony for a Gaza harbour.
Nothing has come of that and many other initiatives,
and we all know why. The situation cannot go on like
this. It has now been 23 years since the Oslo accords
were signed, and despite the commendable efforts to
negotiate a lasting peace agreement, peace remains

S/PV.7610

elusive. Conditions on the ground have worsened. After
decades of negotiations, a final status agreement seems
further away than ever. Many have lost all hope. The
latest escalation of violence illustrates just how volatile
the situation is. For Israelis and Palestinians, peace
cannot wait.
We cannot afford to look away as the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate. Innocent lives
have been lost on both sides. I urge both sides to show
maximum restraint. All responses must be proportionate
and comply with international law. Violence against
innocent civilians can never be justified. Let me
reiterate our long-standing engagement in favour of a
two-State solution, with an independent, democratic
and viable State of Palestine and the State of Israel
living side by side in peace and security and mutual
recognition, based on the borders of 1967. Preserving
the viability of the two-State solution is crucial. For that
to happen, I believe a new and transformative approach
is needed, with three sets of actions.
First, we must create a more favourable climate for
negotiations. That can be done by stopping violence,
building confidence, including continued security
cooperation, strengthening the Palestinian economy
and improving conditions in Gaza. Both sides must
refrain from steps and inflammatory rhetoric that
undermine confidence and trigger further escalation.
In that regard, it is critically important that Israel halts
all settlement expansion. As the European Union has
pointed out time and again, settlements are illegal
under international law and a severe threat to the twoState solution. I deplore the planned authorization by
the Israeli Government to confiscate 370 acres in the
West Bank, south of Jericho.
Secondly, while commending the progress made in
Palestinian State-building, I believe that it should be
enhanced. The Palestinian Authority plays a vital role
in keeping the prospect of the two-State solution alive.
But it must be capable, accountable and responsive,
and it must respond to extremist propaganda. Good
governance, effective service delivery and pluralistic
and inclusive Government, with space for dissenting
views, will strengthen the legitimacy of Palestinian
leadership. And it would be good if the Palestinian
Authority could return to Gaza.
The third element builds on developments in the
region. A new format for negotiations is needed, with
substantial roles for Arab partners and the European
Union, alongside the United States, based on the

16-0180631/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2002 Arab Peace Initiative. I fully support efforts to
create a new dynamic and welcome the work of Egypt,
Morocco, Jordan and the League of Arab States in
the context of the Arab Quartet. I favour a Security
Council consensus as a basis for renewed final status
negotiations, in which parameters for a peace accord
could be incorporated. The Netherlands stands ready to
assist where it can. It is close to both parties.
We have to find a compromise, and we are working
on that together with our EU. In line with the European
Union Council conclusions on Syria, we will work
with all the relevant stakeholders towards a renewed
multilateral approach to the peace process. We also
fully support the European Union’s reiterated offer
to both parties of a package of European political,
economic and security support, and of a special,
privileged partnership with the European Union, which
offers substantial benefits to both parties, in the event
of a final peace agreement.
In the past, the Council has shown that it could and
would unite against threats to international peace and
stability. In the face of today’s threats, the Council can
prove to the world that it does not shy away from its
collective responsibility, but rather that it will work
together to advance the Middle East peace process and
resolve the conflict in Syria once and for all. We, the
world, and the people we represent need the leadership
of the Council, because we cannot let peace wait.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
meeting.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to start by congratulating the delegations
of Uruguay, Egypt, Japan, Senegal and Ukraine for the
beginning of their tenure as elected members of the
Security Council. I would also like to commend your
leadership, Sir, during your presidency of the Council,
as well as the five outgoing delegations — Chad, Chile,
Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria — for the excellent job
done. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.
At the end of 2015, while the world celebrated
milestones that resulted in the culmination of certain
efforts of international political will, from Sendai to
New York and from Addis Ababa to Paris, the Middle

32/67

26/01/2016

East continued to struggle with yet another sombre
and traumatizing year haunted by Israeli occupation,
terrorism, conflicts, violence and violations of human
rights. Indeed, the absence of collective political will
is turning the land of faith and hope into the land of
hatred and sorrow.
The year 2015 came to an end in my country
with 1,168 Israeli violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty
by land, air and sea. These are facts. No unfounded
accusations or attempts to blame Lebanese parties will
change them. Hard facts remain hard facts. A simple
calculation proves that Israel commits an average of
3.2 violations against my country per day. All those
violations have been communicated to the Council and
circulated as official documents of the United Nations.
They illustrate the systematic disregard by Israel of
our collective will to advance the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
On 28 January 2015, the escalation along the Blue
Line resulted in the killing of a Spanish soldier by
Israel, and on 4 January 2016 Israel bombarded six
Lebanese villages for one hour. These are just a few
examples of unilateral actions taken by Israel, which
undermine the work of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the Lebanese Armed
Forces, threaten their security and jeopardize efforts
to maintain stability in the region. It is alarming that
Israel not only refuses to abide by its obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006), but that it continues to take
unilateral and provocative actions in a show of blatant
disrespect for the tripartite mechanism established by
UNIFIL.
Despite the complex political situation in my
country, my Government has reaffirmed time and
again its unwavering support for the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. It also renewed
its determination to continue combating terrorism and
to address the social, economic and security impacts of
the continuing flux of refugees from Syria. We clearly
stated that the exodus of despair of the Syrian refugees
should summon in all of us our shared values of
humanity and the will to put on track a serious political
process to end this protracted conflict. In that regard,
Lebanon acknowledges the adoption of resolution 2254
(2015) and looks forward to the upcoming Syria donors
conference in London next month. That meeting should
be an opportunity to reinvigorate international efforts
to share responsibilities with regard to the refugees and

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to alleviate their suffering and the burden on their host
communities.
What can be said about the situation in the occupied
territories of the State of Palestine in 2015? The Israeli
reign of terror continues unabated. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded the
highest number of casualties in October, with 51 killed
and 7,027 injured Palestinians. Israeli authorities have
been detaining more than 8,000 children since 2000,
and prosecuting more than 700 children per year. That
means that at least two generations of Palestinian
youth do not know anything other than administrative
detention and Israeli might. They deserve better choices.
How many Palestinian generations must suffer from
illegal Israeli practices — which in many cases result
in extrajudicial execution — for the Security Council
to act? For how long will this organ remain silent while
the so-called self-proclaimed “only democracy” in the
Middle East continues the demolition of houses, the
seizure of Palestinian land — the latest being 370 acres
in the West Bank — the intensification of settlement
activities and the isolation measures that segregate
people in East Jerusalem, denying them the exercise of
their fundamental and inalienable rights? All of that is
part of a clear and undeniable endeavour to render the
two-State solution an unattainable objective.
The unravelling of this tragedy in the occupied
State of Palestine requires immediate action by the
international community to provide international
protection to the Palestinian people. This tragedy should
arouse within the Council the political will to establish
a new, credible and comprehensive framework for
negotiations, which should be conducted within a defined
time frame and based on the well-known parameters set
by the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
all Security Council resolutions, General Assembly
resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III), the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Let us make 2016 the year of achievements and
of the fulfilment of hopes and aspirations. Let us
demonstrate to the peoples of the Middle East that they
are neither forgotten nor left alone.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of Foreign Minister Mauro Vieira,
I thank Minister Rodolfo Nin Novoa of Uruguay for
having organized this important debate.

S/PV.7610

(spoke in English)
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, and I wish to acknowledge the interventions
by the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.
Earlier this month, the Security Council held
an open debate (see S/PV.7606) on the protection of
civilians — an issue that is, and must remain, central
to this organ and to its discussions on the Middle East
in particular. We all have been appalled by the abuses
and deliberate attacks against civilians and civilian
facilities in Gaza, Syria, Yemen and elsewhere. Such
disregard for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law is unacceptable and
deserves our strongest condemnation. It is our duty
to look after vulnerable populations in conflict zones
and protect them, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
It is equally important, however, to care about those
who have had to flee their home countries to survive war
and persecution. We cannot turn our backs on them and
allow racism and xenophobia to dictate policy choices
and political narratives. As pointed out by former
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
António Guterres, it remains a matter of great concern
that refugees confront hostility in places where they
had thought they would be safe and, worse still, they
are made scapegoats for a number of existing problems,
from criminality to economic hardship. The United
Nations has a prominent responsibility in fostering
tolerance and countering the spread of xenophobic
and sectarian platforms. It is not only the credibility
of the affected countries that is at stake, but the very
credibility of the whole international community.
The year 2015 was an especially challenging one for
the Middle East. The conflicts in Syria, Libya and Yemen
deteriorated significantly, with serious implications for
the region and beyond. While some progress has been
achieved in Iraq, the security situation and the threat
posed by Daesh and other terrorist groups continue to
be of extreme concern.
For Israelis and Palestinians, 2015 was another
year marked by heightened fear, increased violence
and civilian casualties. Without any credible political
horizon, the occupation of Palestine remained
unchanged, while tensions and illegal action, such as
the expansion of Israeli settlement activities, continued.
Simply put, the occupation must come to an end.

16-0180633/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In spite of these unacceptable circumstances, the
Security Council once again has not lived up to its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
The request for international protection by President
Mahmoud Abbas remains unanswered and a draft
resolution aimed at the resumption of negotiations
was sidelined. We reiterate our call on the Security
Council to act swiftly and establish parameters to
promptly reach a two-State solution. Brazil remains
convinced that effective prospects for peace require the
establishment of a Palestinian State that is sovereign,
economically viable and territorially contiguous, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders based on the 1967
lines. Brazil welcomed the hoisting of the Palestinian
flag at the United Nations during the opening of the
seventieth session of the General Assembly as a
necessary reminder that the two-State solution is long
overdue.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2254 (2015) on Syria. After years of a brutal conflict
that has claimed more than 250,000 lives, caused
extensive destruction and wreaked havoc in the region,
no effort should be spared to move forward a Syrian-led
political process based on full respect for human rights
and the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. Brazil encourages the parties to fully
implement the road map set forth by resolution 2254
(2015), including by engaging in formal negotiations in
good faith and establishing a nationwide ceasefire. We
reaffirm our unwavering support for the work carried
out by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, as well as to
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
headed by Mr. Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro.
Regardless of the establishment of a ceasefire,
all attacks against the civilian population must cease,
including the use of barrel bombs. Unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance is non-negotiable. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has firmly stated,
the deliberate starvation of the civilian population
is a war crime. We applaud the work carried out by
United Nations agencies to help millions of people
in need and the generosity of countries in the region,
including Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan and Egypt, which
have been receiving the bulk of Syrian refugees. Brazil
has contributed to these efforts by issuing close to
9,000 entry visas on a humanitarian basis for Syrian
residents affected by the crisis and by providing food
and medicine to the refugees and displaced people in
the region.
34/67

26/01/2016

The Brazilian Government expresses its deep
consternation at the terrorist attacks in the Syrian
city of Deir ez-Zour. Brazil condemns in the strongest
terms any act of terrorism, religious intolerance and
indiscriminate use of violence practised under any
pretext against civilian populations.
In Yemen, the escalation of hostilities has further
aggravated an already dire humanitarian situation.
Widespread air strikes and the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, as well as attacks on health-care
facilities, schools and other essential infrastructure,
have taken a heavy toll on civilians. We deeply regret
that attempts to establish a durable ceasefire have failed
once again. After one year of military intervention,
no concrete progress has been achieved in moving a
political process forward, while thousands of civilians
have died and 80 per cent of the population is in need of
humanitarian assistance.
Brazil calls on all parties to the conflict to
immediately cease hostilities and comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We reaffirm our firm
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed to bring the parties to the negotiating
table and engage them in seeking a diplomatic solution
without any further delay.
Finally, reinstating national unity in Libya remains
a challenge, notwithstanding the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement facilitated by the United
Nations. Brazil urges the parties to fully implement the
Agreement and work together towards the establishment
of a functional Government of national accord. This
is a unique opportunity not to be missed to advance
towards national reconciliation and the reconstruction
of Libya.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Uruguayan presidency for having convened today’s
open debate on the Middle East and the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, which will compel Member
States to act with a sense of extreme urgency and
responsibility. If not addressed speedily, the current
situation and developments could destabilize regional
and global security. In that regard, I would like to draw
the Council’s attention to the following points.
First, the devastating situation in Syria, which
has spread beyond the region, is of great concern
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the rest of the world. Kazakhstan will continue to
support measures taken by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, the United Nations system,
the League of Arab States and the International Syria
Support Group. We call on the Syrian Government and
opposition to speedily determine the political future
of the country through dialogue, reconciliation and
direct negotiations, which we hope will start later this
week, to implement resolution 2254 (2015), as well as
recommendations within the framework of the Geneva
process. We think that it is necessary to address the
grave humanitarian crisis, including the use of hunger
as a weapon of war, in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
mass exodus of its citizens. We also need to facilitate
the work of the Joint Mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations.
Secondly, prevailing tensions in the Middle East
are also concentrated primarily on the Palestinian
issue. Kazakhstan is convinced that the conflict will
ease only if the legitimate right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people is recognized. My delegation
therefore supports the creation of an independent
State of Palestine, peacefully coexisting with Israel
within the 1967 borders. We also promote Palestine’s
accession to full-fledged membership of the United
Nations and welcome the raising of the Palestinian
flag on United Nations grounds. We see the two-State
solution as the only viable option for lasting peace and
call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate
political commitment and goodwill to reach a historic
peace agreement.
Thirdly, Kazakhstan is conscious of the tensions
between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. We call on the leadership of those two
brotherly countries, together with others in the region,
to take the necessary measures to prevent a further
escalation of sectarian tensions and thus speedily
resume diplomatic relations.
Fourthly, with regard to Iran’s nuclear programme,
Kazakhstan has always supported the process of
international negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran,
and held two rounds of talks in 2013, in Almaty, that
contributed to those negotiations. Kazakhstan is also
actively participating in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, inter alia, by supplying
Iran with natural uranium as a part of the overall
agreement.

S/PV.7610

Fifthly, given the situation of violent extremism,
my delegation would like to present the proposal that
President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan made at the
General Assembly in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.13).
It was his idea to establish a United Nations-led counterterrorism coalition network with a unified mechanism
to defeat this scourge and bring perpetrators and their
supporters to justice. Such an entity will bring together
and strengthen existing United Nations structures.
Kazakhstan also proposes that the current United
Nations mechanisms, including the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, should be made
legally binding for relevant Security Council resolutions.
We suggest the speedy adoption of a comprehensive
document on international terrorism, which has been
a challenge for us during the last 20 years. We call on
all delegations to support this bold and forward-looking
approach and to effectively implement the SecretaryGeneral’s plans of action to prevent violent extremism.
In that regard, my country has also proposed organizing
a high-level debate in May under the patronage of the
President of the General Assembly entitled, “Religions
against terrorism” or “Religions for peace”, with the aim
of showing the strength of religious unity against the
destructive nature of terrorism and violent extremism.
In addition, we are all aware that the activities
of terrorist groups undermine the foundation of the
existing world order far beyond the conflict zones in
the Middle East. We are concerned about its spread to
the Central Asian region, which Kazakhstan represents,
and beyond, including, first of all, Afghanistan. In that
context, we believe that it is necessary to tap into and
mobilize the potential of regional structures like the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in
Asia and others, including the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States, the African
Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, to maintain security and stability in this vast
area.
The ever-increasing violence has caused the
number of civilian victims to escalate, mainly women
and children. It has also caused the forced migration
of people from the Middle East and North Africa to
Europe at an unprecedented scale. This uncontrollable
exodus is of great concern not only to the European
Union but also to all of us, the United Nations and the
international community. Therefore, we reiterate our

16-0180635/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

robust commitment to ensuring peace in the Middle
East based on freedom and justice for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank the President for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing.
In view of the time constraints, I would like to
make a short statement; the full version thereof is being
circulated.
Our position on the Middle East peace process has
been consistent and clear. India supports a negotiated
solution resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the
Quartet road map and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Our continued commitment to the Palestinian cause
and earnestness towards developing stronger bilateral
relations are demonstrated in our successive high-level
visits to Palestine in the recent past. The President
of India visited Palestine on the first-ever State visit
from India, in October 2015. The Indian External
Affairs Minister visited Palestine this month and held
discussions with the Palestinian leadership, including
with President Abbas.
Our approach to Palestine has crystallized into
a policy with three core dimensions, namely, first,
solidarity with the Palestinian people; secondly,
support for the Palestinian cause; and, thirdly, support
for Palestine’s nation-building and capacity-building
efforts. India’s empathy for the Palestinian cause and
our friendship with the Palestinian people remain
undiluted. This is an integral part of our foreign policy.
As part of our support for the nation-building
efforts of Palestine, we have been consistently
expanding technical and financial assistance to it.
In addition, India annually contributes $1 million
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and has pledged
and contributed $4 million in response to the National
Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza.
India remains firmly convinced that dialogue is the
only viable option to effectively address the Palestinian
36/67

26/01/2016

issue. We remain hopeful and urge both sides to resume
the peace process soon, for a comprehensive, just and
lasting resolution of the issue.
In Yemen, we have been urging all the parties
concerned to amicably resolve their differences and
find a consensus-based solution. We express our deep
concern about the activities of proscribed outfits and
radicalized and extremist groups in the West Asia and
Gulf region, especially in northern parts of Iraq and
Syria, which are having a critical impact on peace and
stability in the region. We believe that the consolidation
of political processes and solutions while building
durable State institutions will be the effective way to
address such extremism and radicalism in the region.
Turning to Syria, we would like to express our
continued concern at the ongoing violence in the country
and the loss of human life. India has consistently called
for a comprehensive political resolution of the conflict
that brings all the parties to the negotiating table. It has
to be a Syrian-led process and must take into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. We
maintain that there can be no military solution to the
conflict.
We are encouraged by resolution 2254 (2015),
adopted on 18 December 2015, which lays out a road
map for a political solution of the Syrian conflict. We
remain hopeful that United Nations mediation efforts
will yield results.
The humanitarian situation in Syria and the
neighbouring countries has to be addressed effectively.
We have contributed $4 million as humanitarian
assistance for Syrian refugees and intend to participate
and contribute in the forthcoming meeting on Syria
scheduled to be held in London in February.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: European Union (EU) Foreign
Ministers adopted conclusions on the Middle East
peace process one week ago, on 18 January. I refer to
those conclusions as the latest statement of EU policy
on this issue.
The EU is deeply concerned that the continuing
cycle of violence has led to a serious loss of human life
in Israel and the Palestinian territory in recent months.
We firmly condemn the terror attacks and violence
from all sides and in all circumstances. The EU urges

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all parties to refrain from any action that would worsen
the situation by way of incitement or provocation.
We commend both sides for upholding security
coordination. We welcome progress on the Duma
investigation and call for Israel to hold all perpetrators
of settler violence to account. The EU also calls on both
sides to jointly and resolutely fight incitement and hate
speech.
Only the re-establishment of a political horizon
and the resumption of dialogue can stop the violence.
Security measures alone cannot stop the cycle of
violence. The underlying causes of the conflict need
to be addressed. The EU reaffirms its support for the
Quartet calls for the taking of significant transformative
steps in order to restore confidence and rebuild trust.
We urge both sides to implement such measures at the
earliest possible juncture. A fundamental change of
policy by Israel with regard to the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Area C, will significantly
increase economic opportunities, empower Palestinian
institutions and enhance stability and security for both
Israelis and Palestinians.
The EU is united in its commitment to achieving
a two-State solution based on parameters set out in the
Council conclusions of July 2014. We strongly oppose
all actions that undermine the viability of the two-State
solution and urge both sides to demonstrate a genuine
commitment to such a solution in order to rebuild trust
and create a path back to meaningful negotiations.
Securing a just and lasting peace, ending all claims,
will require an increased common international effort.
The EU will work actively with all relevant stakeholders
towards a renewed multilateral approach to the peace
process. The establishment of an International Support
Group and a further international conference are both
possible ways to contribute to that end. The EU recalls
its willingness to engage further with regional partners
on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative.
Compliance with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law by States
and non-State actors, including accountability, is a
cornerstone of peace and security in the region. We call
for the protection of children, highlight the importance
for the work of civil society to go unhindered, both in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, and follow
recent developments in this regard with concern.
Settlements are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make

S/PV.7610

a two-State solution impossible. The EU reiterates
its strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and
actions taken in that context. We urge Israel to end
all settlement activity and to dismantle the outposts
erected since March 2001. Settlement activity in East
Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the possibility of
Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both States.
The EU and its member States are committed
to ensuring the continued, full and effective
implementation of existing EU legislation and bilateral
arrangements applicable to settlement products. The
EU expresses its commitment to ensuring that, in line
with international law, all agreements between the State
of Israel and the EU must unequivocally and explicitly
indicate their inapplicability to the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967. This does not constitute a boycott of
Israel, which the EU strongly opposes.
The EU urges all Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process. The EU
will continue its support for Palestinian aspirations
to statehood. The positive results of the past must not
be lost, and Palestinian institutions must continue to
grow stronger, more transparent, more accountable and
more democratic. The EU calls upon the Government
to work towards genuine and democratic elections for
all Palestinians.
The EU calls on all parties to take swift steps
to produce a fundamental change to the political,
security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip,
including the end of the closure and a full opening of
the crossing points, while addressing Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. Recent rocket fire by militant
groups is unacceptable and underlines again the
danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit to
non-violence and peace. We urge the Palestinian sides
to make the reconstruction of Gaza an overarching
national priority. The Palestinian Authority must fully
resume its governmental functions in Gaza.
We welcome the steps that Israel has taken to
ease some restrictions on Gaza. However the lifting of
restrictions on the movement of people, services and
goods — particularly those designated as dual-use
items — is needed to allow reconstruction efforts
and basic service delivery. We call on all parties to
guarantee unimpeded humanitarian access to Gaza.
The EU remains ready to engage with the parties and
relevant stakeholders towards resolving the situation.

16-0180637/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/01/2016

The EU reiterates its offer to both parties of a
package of European political, economic and security
support and of a special privileged partnership with the
EU in the event of a final peace agreement. The future
development of relations between the EU and both the
Israeli and Palestinian partners will also depend on
their engagement towards a lasting peace based on a
two-State solution.

the first round of talks, and commends the opposition’s
continued commitment to negotiating. The EU calls
on all the Syrian parties to adopt a constructive and
flexible attitude with a view to the timely start of an
inclusive and credible political process, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), and to fully commit to the
political talks in order to come to an agreement on the
political transition in Syria.

The war continues to rage in Syria, with disastrous
consequences for the Syrian population. People
suffering and dying in Madaya, Deir ez-Zour, Fu’ah,
Kafraya and elsewhere show us the cynicism of using
starvation as means of warfare. Unconditional access
to Madaya and all other besieged areas is an absolute
prerequisite for alleviating the humanitarian suffering.
The bombings and targeting of civilian areas and
structures like hospitals and schools are unacceptable.
The EU calls on all parties to cease all attacks and
bombings of civilian targets, take all appropriate steps
to protect civilians — including members of ethnic,
religious and confessional communities — put an end
to sieges of civilian areas, fully respect international
humanitarian law and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, also recalling that the primary
responsibility to protect its population lies with the
Syrian regime.

The EU fully supports United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura. The EU and its
member States will provide support to the intra-Syrian
talks and the entire Syrian-led transition process in
terms of mediation, expertise and consensus-building.
We will maintain close contact with the Envoy’s team
to define ways in which we can support a ceasefire
and, once a ceasefire is in place, how we can step up
our aid to the Syrian people. This also includes local
governance needs, rehabilitation and the reconstruction
of the country. The EU will continue to encourage
the meaningful participation of women in the United
Nations-facilitated political process for Syria.

It is urgent to halt the conflict in Syria. In this
context, the EU fully supports the work done by the
International Syria Support Group, in which it is an
active participant, and urges all parties to continue
their efforts in view of a credible and inclusive
transition process. Some progress has been made in
the fight against Daesh in Iraq. However, the terrorist
group cannot be fully defeated if the civil war in
Syria continues. Daesh bases its own survival and its
propaganda on sectarian strife and chaos in Syria and
in Iraq. The EU calls for the immediate implementation
of concrete confidence-building measures in support of
the upcoming intra-Syrian political talks, the release of
political prisoners and an end to attacks on civilians,
aerial bombardments and sieges of civilian areas.
The European Union supports the goal of resolution
2254 (2015) to bring together the broadest possible
spectrum of the opposition, chosen by Syrians, who
will decide their negotiation representatives and define
their negotiation positions so as to enable the political
process to begin. The EU commends, in this regard, the
work that is being done by Saudi Arabia and other States
to reach out to the Syrian opposition in preparation for

38/67

As Council members know, the EU is the biggest
donor to the Syrian crisis. We have already committed
to providing substantial support to Turkey and are
putting together comprehensive support packages for
Jordan and Lebanon. In addition, we need to step up
humanitarian and stabilisation aid inside Syria.
The implementation day of the agreement on
the Iranian nuclear programme demonstrates that
diplomacy and multilateralism deliver effective results
for peace and security. It shows that cooperation can
prevail over confrontation. The EU is committed to
continuing its active engagement in the International
Syria Support Group and in the Global Coalition to
counter ISIL/Daesh.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
welcomes this timely debate on the Middle East. We
thank the Secretary-General for his incisive briefing to
the Council.
The Middle East, the cradle of civilization, is today
the centre of conflict, terrorism and massive human
suffering. The causes are both current and historical.
During a half-century of occupation, Palestine has been
repeatedly promised statehood, but as we know these
promises never materialized, which set the stage for its
prolonged agony and tragedy. The political injustices
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and human suffering of the Palestinian people have
progressively intensified.
The fires that have been ignited across the region in
recent years in Iraq, Syria, Yemen and beyond cannot
eclipse the Palestine question or render a solution for its
enduring tragedy less urgent or essential. The plight of
the Palestinian people is one of the core causes of the
rise and spread of popular anger and alienation across
the Arab and Muslim world. Extremist ideologies and
violent groups in the Middle East will be difficult to
defeat until the essence of their narrative — the injustices
against Muslim people, especially the Palestinians — is
justly and effectively addressed.
Recent events have reinforced the conclusion that
there will be no peace or stability in the holy land unless
Israel accommodates an independent, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders,
with Al-Quds as its capital. Unfortunately, Israel
has adopted a totally inflexible policy, including the
continued taking of more and more Palestinian land
for illegal settlements. That is increasingly rendering a
two-State solution more and more difficult to achieve.
We share the Secretary-General’s profound concern at
the reports of Israel’s authorization of the largest land
grab in over a year. The Security Council must mobilize
the political will to ensure the implementation of its
own binding resolutions requiring Israel’s withdrawal
from occupied Palestinian and Arab territories and the
fulfilment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to a sovereign and secure
Palestinian State. Israeli leaders should realize that
a continued conflict in the occupied territories with
the Palestinians will eventually erode the very nature
of their State, and the war within will not remain
unconnected with the wars raging just across Israel’s
imposed frontiers.
The wider wars across the region, while rooted in
divisions that span centuries, have been ignited by more
recent foreign interventions in Iraq and elsewhere. The
foundations of the old order in the region have been
eroded, giving way to disorder, spread by State and
non-State actors, such as Daesh, or Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS). ISIS has emerged as a rogue threat
to the entire region and the world. It must be confronted,
and it must be defeated. In order to succeed in that,
the States of the region must, with the international
community’s assistance, reach the political decisions
needed to end the civil war and suffering in Syria and
build a path to peace that is responsive to the aspiration

S/PV.7610

of its people and achieve an inclusive structure for
governance. There is a need to accommodate the rights
and interests of all religious and ethnic groups and halt
the fighting in Yemen and rebuild that impoverished
and broken country.
As is evident, that will be no easy endeavour.
Success requires, first and foremost, an end to the
regional hostility and rivalry that is polarizing the
Middle East. The new and revived tensions are toxic,
not only for the countries already engulfed in the
conflict. It could encompass other regional States,
home to diverse denominations of Islam and other
religions. My country, Pakistan, is making its own
modest contribution to promoting harmony in the
region, as illustrated by the recent mediatory mission
undertaken by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to Riyadh
and Teheran. Pakistan supports the United Nations
processes for Syria and Yemen. We are encouraged
that all the major regional and global Powers remain
committed to supporting those processes. We believe
that the delay in reconvening the Syria talks does not
imply their collapse. We also hope that the United
Nations-sponsored reconciliation will be realized in
Yemen.
Pakistan believes that a stable order should emerge
from the present chaos in West Asia and the Levant. To
that end, a consistent dialogue is essential between all
the regional States for the support of the major Powers.
Such a dialogue can be promoted under the auspices of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. It can help to
promote fair and durable solutions to the conflicts and
disputes in the region, and build consensus on collective
counter-terrorism actions based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the divinely ordained
unity of the world’s Muslims, the ummah.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uruguay, and thanking the presidency of Uruguay for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

16-0180639/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I will focus my statement on the question of
Palestine and the conflict in Syria, with emphasis on
developments in 2015 in those areas and the actions that
must be taken to achieve workable solutions.
The year 2015 was another depressing one for
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Intimidations, violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and violence perpetrated
against them by the Israeli forces and settlers occurred
on almost a daily basis. The spiralling violence has
only deepened the enmity between the Palestinian
and Israeli communities. Provocative actions continue
to occur and further complicate the prospect for
restarting the peace process. Furthermore, violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory has had inevitable
repercussions on the stability of the Middle East.
The dangerous situation on the ground is also being
exploited by extremists to justify their cause. Despite
those alarming developments, the Security Council has
not been able to respond decisively.
Indonesia is consistent in its strong condemnation
of the Israeli occupation of Palestine. In our view, the
occupation is nothing but a betrayal of the principles
of justice and the self-determination of people, which
are the very principles on which this Organization was
founded and which it was intended to defend. Moreover,
the longer the occupation is in place, the more violence
the world is likely to see. Let me reiterate, therefore,
Indonesia’s unwavering position on the question of
Palestine. The Israeli occupation must end without
further delay. The Security Council must uphold its
Charter responsibility and work in earnest and with
stronger determination to achieve a just, lasting, and
comprehensive settlement based on the various relevant
United Nations resolutions.
It is high time to give peace a chance and to stop
actions that will further jeopardize the efforts to restart
the peace process. Pending the attainment of a final
solution, Israel must comply with its international
obligations as the occupying Power. The most important
among them are the protection of the Palestinian people
and stopping the violence and violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms that are being perpetrated
against them.
In December 2015, my Government hosted the
International Conference on the Question of Jerusalem.
At the Conference, participants reaffirmed, among
other things, their opposition to Israel’s illegal actions
and the imperative to strengthen people-to-people
40/67

26/01/2016

relations among Palestinians and Israelis. That is
because the spirit of coexistence is a critical foundation
in any meaningful peace process.
Let me now turn to the catastrophe in Syria, which
has lasted for almost five years. The consequences of
the conflict in Syria are extremely horrendous, with
ramifications that go beyond the national boundaries
of Syria and the region of Middle East. Again, I would
like to emphasize Indonesia’s call to end violence and
to allow the immediate and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all victims. Indonesia is also
mindful that Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
or Daesh, continues to take advantage of the conflict in
Syria. In that regard, we are of the view that combatting
ISIL should serve as a unifying drive for all parties in
the pursuit of peace in Syria.
Indonesia remains convinced that the conflict
in Syria can only be settled through an inclusive
political process involving all Syrians. We welcome the
convening of meetings in Vienna last month and the
plan to hold peace talks in Geneva this week. We hope
that all parties can set aside their differences and take
advantage of this rare opportunity to find a political
solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories
and its severe consequences have negatively affected
the security and stability of the region. The situation is
extremely dangerous, given the deliberate international
failure to compel Israel to put an end to its occupation
of Arab occupied territories and to its severe violations
of international instruments.
In spite of hundreds of United Nations resolutions
calling on Israel to end its occupation of all occupied
Arab territories within the borders of 4 June 1967,
Israel, regrettably, has not responded or ended its
occupation. On the contrary, the situation has further
deteriorated due to Israel’s ongoing occupation and its
hostile and repressive practices against the Palestinian
people, as well as its settlement activities in violation of
international humanitarian law, international law and
human rights law. Those crimes constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
It has become clear that the impunity extended by
certain members of the Security Council to Israel has
encouraged it to continue its practices, aggressions and
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violations. The situation is extremely alarming and
threatens to explode and further undermine the fragile
attempts to achieve peace in the region. Nevertheless,
there are still those in the Council who deny the
Palestinians even their most basic rights, including the
right to establish their own State in their homeland. Some
even insist on not addressing the current developments
in Palestine in their real context and instead attempt
to view the situation in terms of reciprocal violence
that should be stopped. In so doing, they ignore the
crux of the conflict, which is the occupation and its
consequences, including settlement activity, forced
displacement and other Israeli practices. The Security
Council must put an end to the Israeli violations in
order to protect the Palestinian people, in accordance
with its duties under the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition to the barbaric Israeli policy that I
have just mentioned, Israel has occupied the Syrian
Golan since 1967 and imposed a bitter reality on the
Syrian citizens suffering under occupation, which,
in accordance with international law, should be
immediately ceased. The United Nations must assume
its responsibility to address that reality as seriously
as it deserves to be dealt with and to work for the
implementation of its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981). Israel should be obliged to
put an end to its systematic and severe violations
of human rights, settlement policy, confiscation of
land, intimidation, suppression and oppression, racial
discrimination and social isolation, as well as the
plundering of the natural resources of the Golan, such
as water, oil and natural gas, in addition to its policy of
indiscriminate arrest of Syrian citizens.
In that regard, Syria reiterates its urgent call on the
Secretary-General and the Security Council to make
the necessary humanitarian efforts to require Israel
to immediately release all Syrian prisoners without
conditions. Foremost among those prisoners is the
Mandela of Syria, the freedom fighter Sedqi Al-Maqet,
who — despite having already spent 27 years in Israeli
prisons — was re-arrested by occupation forces last
February for no crime other than working to show
the links between the Israeli occupation forces and
the armed terrorist groups and the Israeli occupation
forces’ unlimited support for those groups in the
disengagement zone in the Syrian Golan. Like Sedqi
Al-Maqet, Bashira Mahmoud is a prisoner accused of
no crime other than being Syrian and rejecting Israeli
citizenship, like all the other sons of the occupied
Syrian Golan.

S/PV.7610

During the current crisis in Syria, Israel has
opened a new chapter in its book of violations
through its unbridled support for terrorists in the
disengagement zone in the Syrian Golan by providing
them with firepower and by treating the injured in
Israeli hospitals. Israel thereby violates the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of
1974 and exposes the safety and lives of the personnel
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
to danger.
In conclusion, I condemn in the strongest terms
any attempt to defend Israel, cover up its crimes or
introduce new issues before the Security Council that
are unrelated to the situation in the Middle East and
the crux of that issue, which is putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories
and granting Palestine its inalienable right to selfdetermination and the establishment of its own State on
its homeland. Every time Israel commits an aggression
against the Palestinian people, certain delegations make
misleading and incendiary statements about Syria with
a view to distracting attention from the crimes of Israel
and to diminishing the international pressure on it. For
that reason and although there is a great deal that Syria
could refute, I will not respond to the empty claims
made by the delegations of States that support, harbour
and arm terrorists, spread extremism and sabotage in
Syria and do their utmost to undermine the attempts to
reach a peaceful settlement to the crisis in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See commends the presidency of Uruguay for
bringing the topic of the Middle East to the attention
of the international community through this Security
Council open debate.
My delegation wishes to address first the stalled
peace process between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
With the lack of substantive negotiations taking place,
acts of violence continue to spiral, leading many
to doubt seriously the continued validity of the Oslo
accords.
The Holy See believes that the peace process
between the Israelis and Palestinians can move forward
only through direct negotiations between the parties,
with the strong support of the international community.
That will require courageous decisions by both parties
and demands fair mutual concessions. But there is no

16-0180641/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

alternative, if both Israel and Palestine are to enjoy
security, prosperity and peaceful coexistence side by
side with internationally recognized borders. Both
peoples have suffered too long from the misguided
view that force alone can resolve their differences. Only
sustained negotiations, entered into in good faith, will
resolve their differences and bring peace to the peoples
of Israel and Palestine.
Pope Francis, in his 11 January address to the
diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, spoke of
the failure to advance the peace process between the
Israelis and Palestinians. He expressed the hope that
the new year
“can heal the deep wounds dividing Israelis and
Palestinians, and enable the peaceful coexistence
of two peoples who — of this I am sure — in the
depth of their hearts ask only for peace”.
Acts of violence and inflammatory rhetoric must be set
aside in favour of the voices of dialogue to give both
peoples the peace to which their hearts aspire.
The Comprehensive Agreement signed between
the Holy See and the State of Palestine on 26 June
2015 entered into force on 2 January 2016. It basically
concerns the life and activity of the Church in Palestine.
In the complex reality of the Middle East, where
Christians have suffered persecution in some countries,
the Holy See hopes that the Agreement will serve as an
example of dialogue and cooperation, in particular for
other Arab and Muslim majority countries.
The nearly five-year conflict in Syria rages
on. It is more than just a conflict between Syrians;
foreign fighters from all over the globe continue to
commit unspeakable acts of horror against the civilian
population in Syria and in parts of Iraq. The influence
of those foreign elements on Syrian territory has led
to sectarian violence and persecutions of religious and
ethnic minorities, in particular the ancient Christian
communities of the region. Pope Francis, calling on the
international community, expressed his conviction that
only joint and agreed political action can impede the
spread of extremism and fundamentalism that spawn
terrorist acts, which reap countless victims not only in
Syria and Libya, but in other countries of the region.
My delegation will not repeat the litany of
horrendous acts of violence against the people of Syria
already outlined by various delegations. We would rather
reiterate our appeal to all those concerned to stop the
flow of arms into the region and intensify humanitarian
42/67

26/01/2016

action in order to give the desperate refugees and all the
displaced the wherewithal to remain in their country,
or as near as possible to their homeland, with adequate
food, medical supplies, water, electricity, access to
education for the young, and the elements necessary to
a stable and secure life in their own homeland.
We support resolution 2254 (2015), in which
the Security Council calls for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and for a political settlement to
the conflict in Syria. The Holy See looks forward to the
talks scheduled to begin in Geneva later this week. In
spite of the many strong differences still to be found
among the parties to the talks, the Holy See believes
that the negotiations represent the best chance the
international community has to bring stable and lasting
peace in to Syria and the region. The Holy See also looks
forward to the fourth humanitarian conference on Syria
scheduled for 4 February and hopes that it will ease the
suffering of the peoples of the region and contribute to
a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), and to convey the Movement’s
appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate at this critical juncture for
the Palestinian people and the Middle East. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
We regret that the Palestinian people have begun
yet another year under Israel’s belligerent occupation.
We are fast approaching the forty-ninth year of that
illegal and brutal occupation, which is causing so much
suffering for Palestinian civilians, further inflaming
tensions and provoking more anger and frustration, with
far-reaching and serious consequences for peace and
security in the Middle East and beyond. The dangerous
prevailing circumstances reaffirm that this issue must
remain a priority for the Security Council, in line with
its duties outlined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Action is urgently required to halt the deterioration,
protect the Palestinian civilian population and salvage
the prospects for peace.
Yet the Security Council continues to be paralysed
and, since the international community fails to hold
Israel accountable, the situation in the occupied State

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Palestine, including East Jerusalem, continues to
deteriorate at an alarming rate as a result of Israel’s
crimes and violations. NAM once again urges the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, to take a decisive and historic step towards
ending the occupation of the Palestinian land and
paving the ground for the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to independence and for a just and
peaceful settlement to the conflict. The status quo is
unsustainable and we cannot accept another year of
stagnation in the political process and the continued
suffering and hopelessness in the lives of an entire
people.
Reflecting on the current period, NAM deplores
the depraved killing and injuring of so many innocent
civilians, which have inflicted so much loss and grief on
Palestinian families, as well as the occupying Power’s
continued demolition of Palestinian homes and seizure
of land, depriving Palestinians of their property and
shelter. Such acts of collective punishment constitute
blatant breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Moreover, the humanitarian disaster deliberately
inflicted on the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip by
the occupying Power remains without redress. Since the
Israeli military aggression in the summer of 2014, nearly
100,000 Palestinians remain displaced and homeless as
the illegal Israeli blockade continues to obstruct the
reconstruction of thousands of damaged and destroyed
homes, and socioeconomic conditions continue to
deteriorate as Gaza continues to be suffocated by the
blockade and isolated from the rest of Palestine and the
entire world. The situation of young people in Gaza is
especially critical as they have no hope or opportunity,
with over 63 per cent youth unemployment, as reported
by the World Bank, with all of the attendant social,
economic and psychological consequences.
The Security Council must also act to address
Israel’s ongoing illegal colonization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in line
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Council’s own resolutions. How
can the Council remain silent as Israel deliberately and
systematically continues its settlement activities, wall
construction and confiscation and de facto annexation
of Palestinian land, including its most recent announced
intention to declare 370 acres in the West Bank as socalled State land, which has been globally condemned
as violating international law?

S/PV.7610

Those and other systematic violations — including
the demolition of homes, the forced displacement
of Palestinian civilians, the arrest and detention
of Palestinians, including children, and incessant
violence, terror and provocations by Israeli settlers
and extremists, including at sensitive religious sites,
particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque in occupied East
Jerusalem — have persisted unabated, worsening the
extremely fragile situation on the ground, and must be
addressed immediately and seriously to avert further
destabilization and salvage the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders. It is unacceptable that Israeli
impunity should persist without consequence. There
can be no justification for such criminality. The time is
past due to act in line with United Nations resolutions,
international law and our moral responsibilities towards
the question of Palestine.
The NAM position vis-à-vis the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, as reflected in its summit and ministerial
declarations over the decades, is crystal clear. It is high
time to end the abhorrent Israeli occupation and impunity
that have brought too much suffering, caused so many
crises and so much instability and anger throughout the
Middle East, and continues to undermine regional and
global peace and security. We call upon the Security
Council to act in accordance with its duties under the
Charter of the United Nations, its resolutions and the
applicable provisions of international law that provide
a solution to the conflict.
At a time when the Palestinian people are facing
rising Israeli aggression and rapidly declining hope in
the possibility of peace and justice, the Non-Aligned
Movement seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its
long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people,
recognizing their decades of resilience despite so much
suffering and injustice, and reiterates its support for
the realization of their legitimate national aspirations
and inalienable rights, including to self-determination
and freedom in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for a just
solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions against
its territory, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to
violate Lebanese air space, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international

16-0180643/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of Syrian crisis. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
Let me add a few words in response to the basest
of allegations by the representative of Israel against
my Government. Those allegations were made by the
representative of a regime that has been the major root
cause of instability in the region for more than six
decades. It is a regime that, through its onoing policy of
occupation and its criminal policies and practices in the
occupied territories, has always been a major root cause
that has driven people towards violent extremism. It is
also ironic that a regime that threatens its neighbours
and remains the only obstacle to the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East should
call on the Council to be brave and vigilant concerning
Iran’s nuclear programme. That is nothing other than
a new line of sabotage that Israel has undertaken
following the resounding defeat of its all-out attempts
to derail the talks between Iran and the P5+1 on a
nuclear deal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and for his tireless
efforts to bring about a resolution to the situation in the
Middle East, including on the question of Palestine.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
South Africa has been actively involved in the
Middle East in order to contribute to a lasting peace in
the region and attaches great importance to this open
debate. South Africa is nevertheless concerned that
nothing substantive has been achieved, to our collective
44/67

26/01/2016

shame, which is witnessing the ongoing suffering of
the Palestinian people. Yet, we would all agree that the
current status quo is undesirable.
As we have done in the past, today we will again
declare our commitment to the two-State solution and
reiterate that an essential part of achieving peace in the
entire Middle East is through the establishment of a
free and sovereign Palestinian State, coexisting side by
side in peace and security with the State of Israel, based
on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We will also agree that this can be achieved
only through genuine substantive negotiations among
all the affected parties.
However, our action, or rather lack of action, will
expose our words and commitments as hollow because
nothing has been done to encourage and move the
parties towards restarting the long-stalled negotiations
or to prepare the ground for the difficult way forward
on negotiating final status issues. It should concern us
all that while we are vacillating, the situation on the
ground grows worse by the day because of continued
acts of violence against Palestinians and Israelis alike,
including ongoing settlement activity and the high rate
of demolitions of Palestinian structures.
In that context, South Africa deplores the recent
announcement by the Government of Israel, declaring
370 acres in the West Bank, South of Jericho, to be socalled State land. Like the Secretary-General, we are
concerned that should that decision be implemented, it
would constitute the largest land appropriation by Israel
in the West Bank since August 2014. Such actions not
only undermine the viability of a two-State solution,
but also hinder the Palestinian Authority’s ability to
expand its economic activity, which in turn undermines
political stability and security in Palestine, which will
eventually impact the security of Israel.
The events in the occupied Palestinian territory
over the past months have heightened the urgent need
to find a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As
the Council may recall, numerous concerns have been
raised regarding illegal Israeli actions aimed at altering
the demographic composition and geographical reality
of establishing a contiguous State. The Palestinian
people continue to experience injustices, and cases
where settlers have burned an entire Palestinian family
alive are completely unacceptable and demand our
condemnation. Acts of violence are also not condonable
in whatever form and by whomever they are committed.
In that context, we appeal to all the parties involved
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to cease the violence and to take a peaceful path that
ensures that innocent lives are not lost. My delegation
considers the international protection of the Palestinian
people essential, as they are a people at the mercy of an
occupying Power.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the
announcement by the International Atomic Energy
Agency that Iran has complied with its side of the 2015
accord. We also express our support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, to convene intra-Syrian negotiations on the
29 January. It is our hope that the process will lead to
a new horizon for the country and bring an end to the
terrible conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Madam, for convening this year’s first quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East.
The situation in the Middle East has tremendous
impact beyond the region. Millions of refugees from
Syria, Yemen and Iraq are moving towards Europe
and other areas. Violent extremism is expanding
globally. The international community must make a
more concerted effort than ever to prevent conflicts in
the region. In that vein, we strongly support the plan
of action to prevent violent extremism, initiated by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as a useful global
framework to prevent that dangerous parasite from
taking root and destroying the region and beyond. We
also hope that the beginning of the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in Iran on
16 January will serve as a catalyst for a more peaceful
and prosperous Middle East, based on denuclearization.
This year, the vicious cycle of attacks and retaliation
between the Palestinians and Israelis has again
continued to be a serious concern for the international
community. Furthermore, there have been no signs of
any serious effort to work for peace among the opposing
parties. We once again urge the leaders of both Israel
and Palestine to keep in mind that hostilities and
violence not only mar the present, they also undermine
the future, by driving young people deeper into
desperation and hopelessness. We urge all the parties to
put an end to violence and return to the negotiating table
in order to work out a viable framework for achieving
a two-State solution. Confidence-building measures,
including ending the expansion of settlements in the

S/PV.7610

occupied territories, are urgently needed if we are to
create an environment more conducive to dialogue for
sustainable peace between the parties.
Turning to Syria, we welcome the announcement
of the start of an intra-Syrian dialogue on 29 January,
and appreciate the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
to get this moving with unwavering commitment
to resolution 2254 (2015). As the resolution makes
clear, the dialogue must be an inclusive and Syrianled political process. At the same time, all the parties
must prepare for a nationwide ceasefire so that it can
go into effect as soon as the political process begins.
We must never again allow religious and national
antagonisms and tensions in the region to paralyse
international efforts to end the Syrian conflict. The
already indescribable suffering of the Syrian people
worsens every minute. Unhindered and unconditional
humanitarian access must be ensured and international
humanitarian law observed by all parties. The Republic
of Korea will continue to join in the international efforts
to end the suffering. In that regard, we will announce
our 2016 humanitarian assistance plan for Syria and its
neighbours at the conference to be held in London on
4 February.
In Yemen, it is urgent that we convene another
round of peace talks as soon as possible. We urge the
key players in the region to refrain from any activities
that could fuel the conflict, and to cooperate with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, in working to bring
the warring parties back to the negotiating table.
The Middle East must remain an epicentre of
instability no longer. We must spare no effort this year to
open a new chapter of sustainable peace and collective
prosperity in the region’s history. The Republic of Korea
will continue to support the efforts of the international
community and the Security Council to create peace
and stability in the region and to play a constructive
role to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Uruguay’s presidency of the Security Council this
month, and to commend your initiative in convening
today’s important debate on the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. The ministerial level of the

16-0180645/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

meeting emphasizes your keen interest in the subject
and the urgency with which it should be treated. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the entire region, including
Palestine.
Today’s meeting comes at the end of yet another
year of failure, particularly with regard to the question
of Palestine, where the situation is worsening every day
at the expense of the Palestinians, who aspire to peace
and a better tomorrow in which their dreams — of
an independent State within the June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital — can come true.
Yet despite the 24 years that have passed since the
negotiations first began, there has been no peace
settlement between Palestine and Israel, leading to
despair among Palestinians. The Kingdom of Morocco,
under His Majesty Mohammed VI, attaches special
importance to Palestine, particularly Jerusalem, and
to the importance, as has been established through
international resolutions, of ending the Judaization
of the country and the acts of aggression against the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, as an integral part of the Palestinian
territories occupied in 1967. Such acts do not serve the
interests of peace and security in the region and can
only fuel the hatred that in turn breeds the terrorism
that affects us all.
The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People afforded His Majesty another
opportunity to affirm the importance and necessity of
ensuring that Palestinians can enjoy their inalienable
rights, including above all their right to a sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital; a viable
State, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security, as established in international resolutions.
His Majesty reiterated that the ongoing lack of
seriousness in addressing the urgent issue of Jerusalem
and its continuing Judaization would have terrible
consequences. The leaders of the Al-Quds Committee,
he said, continued to demand that Jerusalem be spared
all acts of aggression and attempts to alter its identity,
and would stand in unwavering solidarity with their
Palestinian brethren. The Palestinians, he went on,
must be allowed to live in dignity, free from violence
or acts of aggression against the Muslim holy sites in
Jerusalem, so that it can remain the symbol it has always
been of peace and coexistence between civilizations
and cultures. The situation in the occupied territories,
he said, required a swift response if the needs of the
Palestinian people were to be met, including supplying
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
46/67

26/01/2016

Palestine Refugees in the Near East with all the
resources it needs to enable it to continue providing
basic services to the Palestinians.
He also called for support for the efforts of the
Palestinian National Authority, and reiterated his
full support for the Authority under the leadership
of Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. In that regard, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Morocco paid a successful visit
to Palestine in November in order to set up a joint
committee for cooperation between our two States,
designed to address all mutually beneficial issues,
particularly in the services and health sectors.
A peace process is the only way to settle this
conflict; it will come not through war and the loss of
innocent lives but through negotiations conducted in
good faith, within clear parameters, with the goal of
achieving a solution with two States living side by side
in peace, security and cooperation. Morocco retains
the firm position that the issue rests on the provisions
of the Arab Peace Initiative and the principles of a
sustainable peace, achieved with the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State based on the June 1967
borders. It is therefore more incumbent than ever on the
international community to work to mobilize the peace
process within an established time frame, and Morocco
is ready and willing to participate in every initiative
aimed at achieving the goal of peace and security in
the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
the delegation of Uruguay and its Foreign Minister
for its successful stewardship and energetic spirit
with which the entire Uruguayan team is leading the
work of the Security Council. I wish to convey special
congratulations to my friend, Cristina.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as well as with the statement to be made by
the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
The year 2016 may be a new year, but the same
unjust, inhumane and unacceptable situation continues
for the Palestinian people, who continue to be the
victims of an occupation that triggered the massive
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian exodus of 1948. Today, there are over
5.5 million Palestinian refugees, representing the
greatest refugee crisis in the world, characterized by
enormous suffering, desperation and uncertainty.
Seventy years have passed since we committed to world
peace and signed the Charter of the United Nations.
However, unfortunately, today there are still Member
States that continue to tolerate and protect that illegal
and brutal occupation on the part of Israel. For nearly
70 years, this organ has allowed bombings, attacks,
invasions and the Israeli occupation. I ask the members
of the Council how much longer that will continue.
The Security Council has been unable to protect the
Palestinian population, thereby manifesting a complete
disdain for Palestinian suffering and a double standard
as compared to other situations with which we are all
familiar. It is shameful that, at this point, Palestine
continues to face a criminal economic blockade that
continues to suffocate its people and to condemn
them to live in subhuman and extreme conditions,
where there is no respect for their rights and where the
population is deprived of its basic needs, such as health
care, education and adequate housing with a roof over
their heads.
On its seventieth anniversary, the United Nations
adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), which is an effort to eradicate
miserly and poverty and to create decent conditions for
the common welfare of all peoples. We ask ourselves,
however: Will it be possible for the Palestinian people
to exercise the same right to development? What is
more, we continue to wonder whether they will be able
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals without
their being afforded the political space currently
occupied by Israel. What indicators will this people have
to gauge the fulfilment of those targets? The answer is
clear: the Palestinian economy is an economy shaped
by the occupation, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which
infiltrates all aspects of the Palestinian people’s lives,
including, inter alia, the illegal occupation of their
land and natural resources, the denial of their right to
free movement and the return of their refugees, the
detainment of their citizens and the daily destruction of
their infrastructure.
We regret to have to meet again in this debate.
Instead of celebrating the seventieth anniversary of
our Organization with a free Palestine as a full-fledged
State Member seated alongside us, the year 2015 left us
with thousands of dead, wounded and displaced persons

S/PV.7610

and destroyed homes. The prevailing situation in East
Jerusalem is more precarious with every passing day.
The Security Council must demand that Israel
completely end its occupation of Palestine and all
Arab territories, lift the criminal blockade of Gaza and
release all political prisoners and detainees, with whom
we are in full solidarity. Our Government calls for the
United Nations to fulfil its historical responsibilities by
urgently adopting a resolution that includes a definitive
time frame for the creation of the State of Palestine,
respecting the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital and living side-by-side with Israel, thereby
laying the foundation for a just and lasting peace in the
region, which is the only solution to the conflict in the
Middle East.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need for dialogue
and negotiation, as opposed to the imposition of war,
foreign intervention and regime change in all of the
conflicts in the Middle East, including the situation
in all of the occupied Arab territories, such as Syria
and others, while taking into account the legitimate
interests of all States and peoples of the region without
foreign interference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the comprehensive
briefing provided by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and acknowledges the presence in this debate of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, Mr. Rodolfo
Nin Novoa, and that of other Ministers and Deputy
Ministers who are here with us at this very important
debate.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The dangerous escalation of violence between
Israelis and Palestinians we are currently witnessing
and the tragic loss of human life are truly unacceptable.
Recent events, such as the two attacks on women in
Jerusalem and in the West Bank, must not happen
again. We call on the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice.
Those incidents only highlight the urgent need to
work together in order to reduce the spiral of violence
and attacks against the civilian population. We view
accountability for those who commit crimes on both
sides as important. We welcome the fact that the Israeli

16-0180647/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

police and Shin Bet have confirmed the arrest of
several young Jewish radicals who had been accused
of burning alive a Palestinian family while asleep in
their home in the northern part of the West Bank. We
call on the parties to promote peace and refrain from
making statements that could incite additional violence
and reprisals.
As we have reiterated on previous occasions, the
building of settlements is illegal, constitutes a violation
of international law and must not continue. We are
concerned about Israeli plans to expand settlements.
We believe that such an act clearly stands in the way
of achieving a two-State solution, with those two
States living peacefully side-by-side. It is important
to underscore the fact that, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, Israel is responsible
for meeting the needs of the Palestinians living under
occupation and must facilitate humanitarian assistance,
not obstruct it.
In that regard, we are concerned about the Israeli
initiative that could restrict the activities of human rights
organizations. Such is the case with the transparency
law, which would require non-governmental
organizations that receive over half of their funds from
foreign Governments to expressly declare such funding.
As we have said on previous occasions before the
Council, the walls, the checkpoints, the violent responses
by the security forces, the demolition of houses, the
restrictions on non-governmental organizations, violent
attacks on individuals or groups and rocket fire will not
promote a solution to this conflict.
Turning to the current situation in Syria, we have
noted that negotiations are to begin between the Syrian
Government and opposition groups. In that regard, we
call on all parties to engage in constructive, good faith
negotiations in order to bring an end to this conflict,
which has had devastating consequences for the Syrian
population. Furthermore, we remain concerned about
the tensions engendered by the situation between Iran
and Saudi Arabia. We must not forget that, should those
tensions continue, the entire region would find itself
involved in even more conflicts.
In conclusion, Guatemala invites the parties to
pursue the dialogue in order to seek stability in the
region and respect for human rights and, in particular,
to reduce the level of violence inflicted against civilians
in the Middle East.

48/67

26/01/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am
very pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
I thank you, Madam, for your invitation to
participate in this debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
This meeting is of particular importance as it
takes place as the crimes and executions carried out
by Israel, the occupying Power, and extremist settlers
continue apace. The perpatrators know no political,
legal or moral limits. There have been over 160
Palestinian victims since October, a third of whom
have been women and children. Over 700 people have
been injured by live ammunition or rubber bullets, and
thousands of Palestinians have been detained under
very harsh conditions. These actions constitute human
rights violations and violations of international law and
international instruments.
The OIC reaffirms that these facts cannot be
considered without taking into account the actions
of Israel, the occupying Power. In Jerusalem, Israel
carries out actions of a racist nature that seek to modify
the geography and demography of the city and to
obliterate the Arab characteristics of the city, as well as
its religious and historic features. They also constitute
an attempt to isolate the city from its Palestinian
environment. There have been repeated attacks against
holy Christian and Muslim sites. We reiterate that these
actions are a blatant violation of international law and
international legitimacy that will only stoke extremist
violence and hatred and spark a religious conflict that
will threaten international peace and security.
These substantial violations of international
law, which have exceeded all limits, require a new
response from the international community. Israel
cannot continue to act as if it were above the law. It
cannot continue to commit such crimes without fear
of response or penalty. In that context, we urge the
Council to assume its responsibilities for protecting the
Palestinian people and to force Israel to put an end to its
attacks, cease hostilities, halt the building of settlements
and the Judaization of Jerusalem, end its attacks on
Muslim and Christian holy sites, and to stop the daily
and bloody attacks against the Palestinian people. This
is an absolute priority if we are to safeguard the twoState vision.

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Resolving the current crisis will require political
will on the part of the Council in the form of a resolution
calling for an end to the Israeli occupation within a
set time frame, in line with international benchmarks
and pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, so that security and stability may reign in the
region, so that we may reach a just and lasting peace,
and in order to allow the Palestinian people to exercise
their inalienable rights to self-determination and the
establishment of a Palestinian State based on the 1967
borders.
The international community must not let the
progress of the past 20 years go up in smoke due to the
arrogance and intransigence of Israel. We reiterate the
importance of convening an international conference
with the participation of all active and influential
stakeholders with a view to reviving the peace process
and bestowing a framework to efforts aimed at ending
the Israeli occupation and making the two-State
solution a reality.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our support for the Palestinian people and
their struggle for their fundamental national rights,
including the rights to return, self-determination
and a sovereign, independent State in the occupied
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Let us not forget also the right
of Palestinian refugees to an equitable solution in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the delegation of Uruguay for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
with a focus on Palestine.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of
the State of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
The ongoing violence and conflicts in different
parts of the Middle East continue to touch a raw nerve
within the international community. The protracted
conflicts have already exacted an insufferable toll,
with many women and children among the civilian
casualties. The massive displacement of peoples across
and within borders have resulted in a dire humanitarian

S/PV.7610

situation, further compounded by the denial of access to
some badly affected populations. The mostly fratricidal
and sectarian conflicts have added to the strength of
terrorists and violent extremists, who have thrived
both on the region’s resources and on the peoples’
sense of despair and lack of entitlement. The situation
in the Middle East is thus untenable and deserves the
Council’s unmitigated attention.
The Palestinian question remains at the heart of
the turmoil in the Middle East. It underpins a number
of political, moral and ideological rifts that we see
being played out on the broader canvas of our current
geopolitical realities. It is no doubt convenient for
various groups with a vested interest to allow these rifts
and divisions to widen further, in total disregard for the
will and conscience of peoples around the world. We
must reject such parochial, self-defeating schemes and
continue to remain on the right side of history on the
Palestinian question.
In line with our constitutional commitment, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh maintain
unwavering support for the just and legitimate struggle
of the Palestinian people to regain their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
We believe that the continued Israeli occupation,
expansion of settlements and indiscriminate attacks
against civilians constitute systematic violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
principles. We continue to urge all key actors to remain
engaged in the pursuit of a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map.
In that spirit, we support OIC proposals to work
towards a Council resolution to revive political efforts
aimed at achieving the desired two-State solution and
convening an international conference to address the
multidimensional aspects of the Palestinian question
in a focused, structured and holistic manner. Our
collective solidarity with the Palestinian people must
be translated into sustained, result-oriented and
meaningful actions.
Within the United Nations, we commit to continuing
our efforts to enhance the voice and visibility of the
United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, as we do
through other relevant international platforms. The

16-0180649/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people of Bangladesh stand ready to extend a hand of
support to the brotherly Palestinian people at any hour
of need.
The toxic and corrosive messages used by many
terrorists and violent extremist groups around the world
often use the Palestinian question in order to create
justification and legitimacy for their own misguided
agendas. It is of course our shared responsibility to
expose the sheer hypocrisy and hollowness of their
arguments and defeat them through a combination of
strategies rooted in human rights principles. However,
such principles may still fall short of reaching
our ultimate objectives, if we fail to seriously and
unequivocally factor in the need to mobilize our
combined political efforts, including through the
Council, to find a peaceful solution to the Middle East
crisis and thus deny our opponents one of their core
rallying agendas. In Bangladesh, under the watchful
guidance of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s zerotolerance approach, we remain vigilant so that violent
extremists cannot just employ any cause, no matter how
legitimate it may be, for their distorted ideologies and
actions.
The international community has recently
demonstrated, including through the adoption of
resolution 2254 (2015), that it is indeed possible to put
aside differences and find creative, forward-looking
solutions in search of peace, although beset with uphill
political and diplomatic challenges. Drawing inspiration
from some of the recent achievements, we feel
encouraged by the firm high-level commitments that
we have heard in the Council Chamber throughout the
day and harbour renewed hopes for an early resumption
of the Middle East peace process despite all odds. We
should look towards the continued determination and
engagement of the members of the Council to make
good on such commitments.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also join
other speakers in commending the President for having
convened today’s timely and important debate.
Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

50/67

26/01/2016

Sri Lanka reaffirms its steadfast support to the
Palestinian cause. This debate reminds us once again
of the urgency of finding a just solution to the question
of Palestine and addressing the plight of the Palestinian
people. Especially at this time of unprecedented unrest
in the Middle East, when our focus is on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh and the exigent
refugee crisis in Syria, the world must not forget the
dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially Gaza, where
conditions are indefensible. We stress the urgency of
leadership to end the marginalization and oppression of
Palestinians in their own land.
Sri Lanka supports the work of United Nations
agencies in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, which keep the majority of the people in Gaza
supplied with the bare necessities, including education.
We reiterate the need for continued funding by the donor
community to enable UNRWA to function effectively.
As Chair of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, Sri Lanka is particularly concerned about
the escalating violence and the number of casualties
that include infants. The root cause for the escalating
violence is the continuing policy of settlement
expansion and the climate of impunity relating to the
activities of the settlers.
Israel’s settlement activities violate international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions,
and exacerbate the incidents of violence in the region.
The international community has repeatedly called for
a freeze on settlement activity. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council,
the Economic and Social Council, as well as the
International Court of Justice, have all unequivocally
condemned the settlement activity as illegal. Ending
such practices, which contribute to human suffering
and continuing friction in the occupied territories, are
essential steps that must be taken in order to improve
the situation on the ground.
Due to the blockade placed on Gaza, approximately
80 per cent of families there are now dependent on
humanitarian aid from the United Nations for their
survival. Unemployment levels remain at around

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

40 per cent and movement restrictions in and out of
Gaza continue to be a major problem for the economy
and welfare of the people of Palestine. Restrictions on
imports and exports are stifling economic growth. They
need to be lifted within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), as it would contribute considerably to the
economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being of
its people.
My delegation calls for a just and lasting solution
to the question of Palestine and an end to the suffering
of the Palestinian people. The blockade of the Gaza
Strip is yet another obstacle to peace. More than one
year after widespread destruction in Gaza, thousands
of families continue to live in their damaged homes,
even during the winter months. As of August 2015, only
one third of the $4 billion pledged had been disbursed,
and up to 100,000 Palestinians remained displaced and
living in untenable conditions. Civilians are struggling
for access to electricity, water and health care.
Both parties to the conflict must create the
necessary environment to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures
in support of efforts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations. Israel must protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories and desist from
actions that are contrary to the established rules of
international law and practice. We are also mindful of
the security needs of Israel. The indiscriminate attacks
against Israeli civilians will lead to a counterproductive
cycle of violence. We encourage both parties to exercise
the utmost restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians
and for the greater goal of peace.
It is important to remain engaged in a just and
durable solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment
of a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
The viability of the two-State solution will depend on
the political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people. We are confident that Palestinian
internal reconciliation efforts will continue. The
progress made by the Palestinian Authority, despite
severe political and economic constraints, is
commendable.
Sri Lanka fully supports the work of United Nations
agencies serving Palestinians, but it is important to
realize that continued indiscriminate attacks against
civilians will only enhance feelings of desperation

S/PV.7610

and insecurity. The question of Palestine remains a
serious threat to international peace and security.
Therefore, a comprehensive and just settlement of the
Palestinian question is a priority for the international
community. Despite decades of disappointment, we are
encouraged that the people of Palestine have resolutely
sustained their spirit and the strength of purpose to
gain their legitimate rights and have prevailed over
the considerable challenges facing them. We hope that
the Palestinian people will work together to preserve
national unity, which is imperative for the creation of a
fully sovereign, independent Palestine.
Finally, we also welcome resolution 2254 (2015),
which endorses the road map for a peace process
in Syria and sets a timetable for talks. Its effective
implementation will be vital for the overall situation in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to congratulate the Republic
of Uruguay on its accession to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. I am
grateful for the invitation to participate in today’s
open debate on an issue of such importance for the
international community — the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
We are pleased that Uruguay has once again been
elected as non-permanent member of the Council, after
a long-standing absence of 50 years. As we are familiar
with the quality of Uruguayan diplomacy and the
contributions it has made to the United Nations through
eminent persons who played a part in developing
international policy, and international public law in
particular, we are convinced that, during its two-year
mandate, your country, Sir, will make a considerable
contribution to the work of the Council.
The year 2016 marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the holding of the Madrid Peace Conference, and
next year will mark a half-century since the adoption of
landmark resolution 242 (1967).
Argentina is deeply concerned about the
proliferation of conflicts in the Middle East. Those
conflicts, tensions and violence have triggered a
humanitarian crisis of unprecedented scale, with
hundreds of thousands dead and wounded, internally
displaced persons and refugees. We strongly support all
efforts aimed, not without difficulty, at consolidating

16-0180651/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen, and we support
the active role played by the United Nations in all these
processes as guarantor of the each country’s efforts to
find its own path to peace and security.
As a country that actively participates in
international humanitarian assistance through the
White Helmets initiative, Argentina is committed
to support peace and development in the region not
only politically and diplomatically, but also through
humanitarian supplies and the caring work of our
volunteers. Indeed, with respect to the crisis in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the situation of its refugees,
Argentina has not only expressed solidarity with them
but has sent a team of White Helmet volunteer experts
to camps under the direction of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and has also
sent humanitarian supplies to the Lebanese Republic,
with the same aim of supporting assistance that is being
provided there to Syrian refugees.
Furthermore, our country is formalizing its
provision to the Secretary-General of expert teams of
White Helmet volunteers for managing refugee camps,
distributing food, medicines and other donations,
providing psychological and social support and
general logistics, and training for local staff on these
issues. The volunteers are to be deployed to assist
Syrian refugees in Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon, Turkey and
wherever the United Nations deems it most appropriate,
thus underscoring our solidarity and commitment to
improving humanitarian situations affecting fraternal
peoples in the region.
As in any conflict, the primary responsibility for
finding a solution lies first and foremost with the leaders
of the parties directly involved, in this case the States
of Israel and Palestine, which must show that they are
willing to work to build sustainable peace and security
for the benefit of their peoples. But it should also be
clear that the international community represented
here, in particular the Security Council, has a collective
responsibility and cannot stand at the sidelines of a
conflict that perpetually goes on without any prospects
for a solution. Throughout the years we have noted that
there can be no military solution to this conflict, so we
as the international community must devote ourselves
as a priority to creating anew a genuine political plan
and redouble our efforts so that the Palestinians and
Israelis can regain the hope that peace is still possible.
The parameters of a negotiated solution have been
set forth on numerous occasions in the Security Council
52/67

26/01/2016

and at the General Assembly, as well as in agreements
signed by the parties, the Quartet road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative and other international instruments.
Israel must end its occupation of the territories
occupied in 1967, find a mutually acceptable solution
to the status of Jerusalem and resolve the refugee issue
in a fair manner. Israel must end its policy of building
settlements in the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem, which are illegal under international
law and an obstacle to peace. The negative impact of
settlements on the ground is enormous and works to
undermine the two-State solution.
At the same time, Palestinian leaders should
honestly address Israeli security concerns. Hamas
and other Palestinian groups must stop incitement
and attacks against Israeli civilians. The launching
of rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israel must cease
immediately. Accordingly, my country vigorously
condemns such terrorist acts against Israel and is
convinced that just as there is no military solution to
this conflict, so there is no solution that can be imposed
by terrorist methods.
Regional instability is being fuelled by a terrorist
threat that is far more complex than in the past. It is a
threat that includes violent extremism and the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters to the Middle East, particularly
to Syria and Iraq. This serious threat shakes the very
foundations of humankind. As such, terrorism must be
firmly and unambiguously condemned in all its forms
and manifestations and must be met in an effective
manner through joint action by the international
community.
Moreover, Argentina believes that the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East would represent a
major step forward in the peace process in the region.
In that regard, my country regrets that the failure to
reach agreement on the subject at the ninth Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, held in May 2015 here in New
York, prevented the adoption of a consensus outcome
document.
We believe that the revival of the peace process in
the Middle East could decisively contribute to greater
stability in the region. It is essential that a substantive
and committed dialogue for peace resume immediately,
with the clear objective of ending the occupation and
bringing about the full independence and sovereignty
of the State of Palestine, so it can become strong,
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

living in peace side by side with the State of Israel,
on the basis of terms accepted by the international
community, that is, the two-State solution, with pre1967 borders, guaranteeing Israel’s right to live in peace
with its neighbours, within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
The quest for peace must be a cherished goal for
all parties. Examples such as the expansion of the selfstyled Islamic State/Daesh are possible only as a result of
States’ failure to resolve internal and external conflicts
and of the power vacuum that ensues. To the extent that
States make progress in resolving their conflicts, gaps
that serve to fuel the growth of fundamentalism and
extreme violence will disappear.
I would now like to express Argentina’s concern
about the humanitarian situation in Syria, which has
undoubtedly contributed to the deterioration of the
situation in the region and added extraordinary pressure
to countries hosting refugees. Next March marks the
fifth anniversary of a tragedy that horrifies us daily,
having led to the worst humanitarian crisis of our time.
The figures are well known but still dramatic: more than
250,000 people dead, half of them civilians, 6.6 million
internally displaced and 4.3 million refugees. Half the
Syrian population, approximately 13.5 million people,
require urgent humanitarian assistance. These numbers
make us realize the size and impact of the conflict,
which has left in its wake a country destroyed, a people
experiencing untold suffering and a region at the
boiling point.
But just when we thought we had seen it all in Syria,
our conscience was struck once again by the images
from Madaya from a few days ago. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the use of food as an instrument
of war constitutes a war crime under international
humanitarian law. There will likely be other situations
in Syria like that of Madaya, which makes it necessary
for urgent and unconditional access be given to
humanitarian assistance throughout the territory of the
country. The serious violations of international law and
international humanitarian law go far beyond what has
happened in Madaya and require that those responsible
for them be held accountable. The International
Criminal Court may have a very active role to play in
that regard.
A solution for the conflict in Syria will have to be
political, not military, much less terrorist, which was
recognized in resolution 2254 (2015), unanimously

S/PV.7610

adopted by the Council on 18 December. Argentina
is pleased that, after years of misunderstandings and
disunity with regard to Syria, the members of the
Security Council were able to speak with one voice in
support of this political solution, which should lead to
preserving the sovereignty, independence and unity of
Syria and respecting the principle that only the Syrian
people have the right to determine their own future.
Two years after the Geneva II Conference on Syria,
we are pleased that negotiations between the Syrian
parties will resume in a few days, under the mediation
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The
negotiations should lead to a political transition process
led by the Syrians themselves and set the terms for a
total ceasefire throughout the country. Hopefully, both
results will be achieved quickly, with all countries with
influence over the parties acting in concert to achieve
an early agreement. In that regard, we support the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. At the same time, we must
prevent the further militarization of the situation, and
therefore we appeal that an end be put to the supply
and flow of weapons to all parties. At this stage efforts
must be focused on eradicating the terrorist threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the Al-Nusra Front, in order to protect the civilian
population, in strict observance of international law
and international humanitarian law.
This year, the Republic of Argentina will celebrate
the bicentennial of its independence. Argentina’s identity
has always been based on diversity and the peaceful and
harmonious coexistance of its communities of different
origin, ethnic groups and religions. This characteristic
has forged a unique society, of which we are proud. It is
also why Argentina particularly feels the tragedu of the
Middle East. We urge for a just, peaceful, negotiated
and lasting solution that makes it possible for the
peoples to live in harmony, accepting the differences,
growing as a result of diversity, learning that dialogue
is more valuable than confrontation and that it is more
important to broaden horizons than turn ourselves
inward. I hope, although it may be naive, that wisdom
will prevail over irrationality and that where today
there is death and the ashes of destruction, tomorrow a
solid peace will be built with the strong determination
of a people prepared to lead their destiny with order
and justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
flooor to the representative of Qatar.

16-0180653/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/01/2016

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, and
we thank the Secretary-General for his briefing this
morning.

Bin Khalifa Al Thani’s city in Gaza, implementing
25 per cent of a 1,201 residential unit building project,
establishing a hospital for rehabilitation and protheses
and implementing 45 domestic roads projects.

We also align ourselves with the statements made
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The continued suffering of the Syrian civilians,
given the international community’s inability to end the
suffering and stop the war crimes and crimes against
humanity that continue to be carried out by the Syrian
regime and associated militias and to implement United
Nations resolutions, the horrifying images transmitted
by humanitarian agencies of civilians fighting death
as a result of starvation policies and newborn babies
that have been deprived of the right to life, through the
use of indiscriminate barrel bombing, is all a disgrace
to humankind — humankind that has assumed the
obligation to learn from the past. The Security Council
demanded in resolution 2254 (2015) that all measures
be taken to protect the civilians in Syria. It also called
for unconditional and immediate access to the suffering
population in Syria, to release the detainees who have
been detained arbitrarily, to stop immediately all
attacks against civilians and civilian targets and to
fully implement all Security Council resolutions on
Syria. Unfortunately, none of those demands have
been implemented, which necessitates consideration of
additional measures based on paragraph 6 of resolution
2258 (2015).

The Israeli violations continue in the Palestinian
territories, including the ongoing unilateral actions
and settlement activity by Israel, the blockade imposed
on the Gaza Strip, the restriction of access to the holy
sites of Jerusalem, the Judaization of Jerusalem and
other violations of United Nations resolutions and
international law. It is very concerning that that these
severe violations continue without any consideration
of their consequences: the escalation of tensions and
the destruction of the basis of a settlement of the ArabIsraeli conflict.
The Security Council’s obligations to achieve
peace in the Middle East require an end to the Israeli
occupation of all occupied Arab land, the attainment
of a peaceful, sustainable and lasting solution that is
based on the two-State solution, the establishment of
the independent State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security, and in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1968) and 338 (1973), the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, the return of
refugees and the restoration of all of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. We call on the Security
Council to compel Israel to respect international
law and international humanitarian law and to reject
all illegal practices and policies of the occupying
Israeli authorities. We also call on the Council to put
in place measures to stop these practices, to provide
international protection to the Palestinian people, to
strive to make tangible progress in the peace process
and achieve security and stability for the peoples of the
region and to deprive the extremists of the excuses they
use to recruit extremists and spread radicalization.
The State of Qatar spares no effort to achieve
peace and stability in our region. We have used our
various capabilities to assist in the humanitarian aspect
to address the consequences suffered by the civilians
in Gaza. In fulfilling our humanitarian pledges, we
have thus far implemented reconstruction projects
for Gaza valued at $230 million, including 1,060
residential apartments in His Excellency Sheikh Hamid
54/67

The State of Qatar stresses the contents of resolution
2254 (2015), that the only lasting solution for the crisis
in Syria is through an inclusive Syrian political process
with Syrian leadership that fulfils the aspirations of the
people and fully implements the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) through an inclusive transitional
authority with full executive powers. My country will
participate in the high-level Syria pledging conference
to be held in London next month. Qatar will contribute
to all international efforts to achieve peace and stability
in the Middle East and to achieve the aspirations of all
peoples of the region and will participate in all efforts
towards achieving these goals.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Despite continued turmoil
in the Middle East, some political developments give
cause for cautious optimism. The recent implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a
victory for diplomacy and an important milestone for
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation efforts
internationally. The agreement demonstrates the
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

strength of joint political efforts and the importance
of political will and leadership. Norway is pleased to
have contributed to the implementation, in line with the
work being done in the run-up to the Nuclear Security
Summit to be held in the spring.

the situation in Gaza. With respect to reintegrating the
governance framework under a single authority, the
parameters of the security agreements between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization must be fully
respected.

We are hopeful that the forthcoming talks in
Geneva will contribute to a political settlement of the
conflict in Syria. We support all efforts to that end,
and we are continuing to contribute to Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura’s efforts to facilitate the talks.
However, while we work to find a political solution
to the conflict, we must step up our work to alleviate
the grave humanitarian situation. Norway therefore
urges the international community to be prepared to
make pledges when we meet in London next week for
the conference on supporting Syria and the region.
We need to clearly demonstrate our solidarity with
the millions of people in need of our support. We urge
the international community to mobilize the resources
needed to alleviate the humanitarian situation.

Fourthly, there is a need for urgent cooperation
between the parties on tangible measures to strengthen
the Palestinian economy and the reconstruction of Gaza,
with a view to advancing a political process. During the
current stalemate, Norway, along with the international
community, will make every effort to encourage the
parties to maintain the vision of the two-State solution.

Let me now turn to my Palestinian and Israeli
friends. In line with political efforts throughout
the region, Norway urges both parties to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to take all the steps necessary to
resume political dialogue and end the current stalemate.
The only viable route to achieving lasting peace and
stability is a credible political process aimed at a twoState solution. The responsibility, and thereby the key
to resolving the conflict, lies primarily with the parties
themselves.
Norway encourages the Security Council to resume
its responsibility and provide constructive assistance in
the process. The situation as it is now cannot continue.
The current tensions call for immediate and coordinated
political steps by all sides. In order to make progress,
the following four actions need to be taken.
First, violence must stop. Everyone must strive to
lower the level of conflict.
Secondly, Israel should stop building new
settlements on occupied land and stop expanding
existing ones. Israel should refrain from land
confiscation and house demolitions. Activities of that
kind only serve to undermine any political process.
Thirdly, Palestine needs to strengthen its political
institutions and governance structures and implement
essential reforms. In particular, efforts on a far larger
scale than we are seeing today are needed to improve

While we are aware that donor countries are facing
ongoing budget reallocations and development budget
cuts, we urge all donors to maintain their current level
of aid to the Palestinian Authority. That is particularly
important during this turbulent period in the Middle
East. We cannot afford to see the Palestinian Authority
institutions start to unravel. Supporting long-term
institution-building is key to achieving stability.
Supporting viable Palestinian State-building remains
at the core of our engagement and commitment to
peace. Those efforts are vital in order to prepare for
the next meeting of the international donor group, the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians, which is
scheduled for April.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate.
The Middle East is today more unstable and
unpredictable than at any time in recent history.
However, the proliferation of crises in the wider region
must not distract us from the urgent need to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remains a core
challenge.
The continuing Israeli occupation and its practices
in contravention of international law, such as the
recent decision on land appropriation in the West
Bank, hamper efforts to establish a permanent peace.
The expansion of illegal settlements, the denial of the
Palestinians’ rights to use natural resources, arbitrary
arrests, the suppression of freedom of association and
assembly, the excessive use of force, as well as efforts
aimed at undermining the status and Islamic sanctity of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, must immediately stop.

16-0180655/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation in Gaza also remains worrisome.
The international community cannot afford to stand
by idly in the face of the tragedy of 1.8 million people
suffering under an inhumane blockade for nine years.
Israel should respond to the continuous calls and lift the
siege on the Gaza Strip in order to allow the Gazans to
build their livelihoods.
The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people, reinforced by the illegal practices of Israel
on the ground, is fuelling hatred, alienation and
radicalism in the region and beyond. To the extent that
the Palestinian people lack hope, their reaction grows.
The only way out of this impasse is to convince the
Palestinians that their future will be better than today
and that they will be sitting at the negotiation table as
the State of Palestine in equal standing with Israel.
We all agree that the status quo is unacceptable
and unsustainable. The international trend towards the
recognition of the State of Palestine is a reflection of that
frustration. The recent decision by the European Union
with regard to labelling products from the settlements
and the raising of the Palestinian flag at United Nations
Headquarters are steps in the right direction. Needless
to say, the root cause of the problem is the illegal
occupation of East Jerusalem and other Palestinian
territories by Israel. In that regard, the establishment of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
is the only viable solution. The Security Council
should also assume its primary responsibility vis-à-vis
international peace and security.
The situation in Syria today is the greatest disaster
we have encountered since the Second World War. As
a neighbouring country, Turkey is extremely concerned
by the humanitarian and security impacts of the crisis,
which constitute a major national security threat. In
that regard, we maintain our resolute stance in the
fight against terrorism, without making a distinction
between the terrorist organizations.
We are at a critical time in Syria. The crisis can
be overcome only by a political solution. The work
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) and
the subsequent adoption of resolution 2254 (2015)
accelerated the efforts to revitalize the political
process. The political process should lead to a transition
period with concrete timelines, a new constitution and
elections. In the meantime, the Council should assume
the implementation of all the measures, including those
related to a nationwide ceasefire and to humanitarian
56/67

26/01/2016

access, and outlined in its very own resolution 2254
(2015).
The Syrian people can regain their faith in the
international community only if they see an improvement
of humanitarian conditions on the ground. The tragic
stories of starvation and death in the besieged town
of Madaya are just the latest examples of violations of
the most fundamental principles of international law.
The regime’s brutal policies and indiscriminate attacks
against its own population, as well as the recent air
strikes by its allies targeting civilians and moderate
opposition under the pretext of fighting Daesh, must
stop. Such attacks not only undermine the prospects for
a political solution, but also contribute to the worsening
of the scourge of terrorism.
The moderate opposition cannot be expected to
negotiate under fire. In addition, it should be entitled
to designate its own representatives. Non-intervention
by third parties in the composition of the opposition
negotiation team is a must for the credibility and
sustainability of the process. Attempts to dilute and
weaken the opposition would only harm the process
before it even starts.
The current tragedy will not end unless the people
of Syria have a legitimate Government that truly
represents their will and enjoys their full consent. On
that score, the Syrian people have already spoken.
Now it is time for us — the members of the ISSG — to
prepare the ground for a real process that will lead to
genuine political change.
Syria’s security is also linked to the international
community’s efforts to counter Daesh in Iraq, as a
lasting victory against Daesh can be achieved only if
coupled with an inclusive strategy. We welcome the
recent progress by the Iraqi army and the liberation of
Ramadi. However, it is important to consolidate those
gains and increase the capability of Iraqi forces. In that
regard, we would like to reiterate our commitment to
supporting Iraq in its efforts to fight Daesh.
Some recent developments have served to
demonstrate once again the merits of diplomacy. In
that regard, we welcome the announcement on the
achievement of the implementation date of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action regarding the Iranian
nuclear programme. In addition, the signing of the
Libyan political agreement and the recent steps towards
the establishment of the Libyan Government of national

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

accord are also promising for the restoration of stability
in Libya.
We have affirmed our full support to the future
Libyan Government during the visit to Ankara on
11 January by Prime Minister-Designate Fayez Sarraj.
We stand ready to respond to future requests of the
Government of national accord.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to congratulate Uruguay on assuming its seat on the
Security. In its capacity as President of the Security
Council, we thank Uruguay for having convened this
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, with a focus on Palestine. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
dedicated efforts to resolve the conflict in the Middle
East, and take note of his trip to Palestine in October
of last year.
It is with grave concern that the Maldives notes
that a peaceful resolution of the situation in Palestine
is moving ever further out of reach. Although Israel
has expressed commitment to a two-State solution, its
actions have not substantiated that. On the contrary, it
continues to strengthen and expand its control of the
occupied territory of Palestine, including the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, with no
regard for the 1967 borders. My delegation calls on
Israel to translate its words into concrete actions, not
to make empty promises purely for diplomatic and
political gain.
My delegation is pleased to acknowledge the
increasing support for recognizing Palestine as an
independent and autonomous State under a two-State
solution, symbolized at United Nations Headquarters on
30 September 2014 by the raising of the flag of Palestine
as an observer State. While this is a meaningful step in
the right direction, we still have a long way to go to
affirm that recognition in the international sphere. The
Maldives continues to support Palestine on its journey
to becoming a full State Member of the United Nations.
The privileges and respect that it deserves as a State
have been denied it for far too long.
My delegation also firmly condemns the
unwarranted restrictions that Israel has imposed on
the Palestinian people, hindering their access to basic
necessities and threatening their lives and livelihoods.
This is particularly relevant in the light of the continued

S/PV.7610

violence being perpetrated against Palestinian
communities. It is regrettable that at the beginning
of this month the United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories felt compelled to tender his resignation
because Israel had repeatedly refused to grant him
access as an impartial and objective observer. The
Maldives has always supported and facilitated the work
of the special mandate holders of the United Nations,
and we believe their duties as objective arbitrators on
behalf of the international community should not be
obstructed. My delegation calls on the Israeli authorities
to cooperate with United Nations mandate holders and
other officials in order to enable them to carry out their
assigned tasks.
The Palestinian conflict has been constant
throughout much of history, and for the past five
decades the Palestinian people have been subjected
to life under occupation. It is inhumane to make these
people continue to suffer and submit to that suffering
as a normal way of life. Families live in a constant
state of fear, and children are growing up with no
understanding or comprehension of peace and stability.
In circumstances like these, where all hope is lost and
injustice prevails, radicalism and terrorism begin to
spawn.
There has been an alarming increase in violence and
hostility in the Middle East over the past few months.
The Government of the Maldives strongly condemns
the despicable attack by violent protesters on the Saudi
Arabia Embassy in Iran. We urge that the perpetrators
be brought to justice, and highlight the importance
of respecting mandatory international obligations,
including those under the relevant Vienna conventions.
My delegation also strongly condemns the heinous
attacks carried out in Beirut in November by the socalled Islamic State. We reiterate that the ideologies and
activities of that terrorist group are completely contrary
to the principles and beliefs of Islam. We welcome the
initiatives the international community has taken to put
an end to this evil before it claims more innocent lives.
My delegation calls on the members of the Security
Council to take stronger and more meaningful action
to end the conflicts in the Middle East, including in
Palestine. We welcome political initiatives aimed at
achieving permanent and peaceful solutions rather than
piecemeal approaches that could aggravate existing
conflicts. We also welcome the humanitarian aid that is
being dispatched to alleviate the adverse conditions in

16-0180657/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

these war-torn countries. It is important to realize that
at the end of the day, peace and security are what every
country in the region aspires to achieve for its citizens.
With that common goal in mind, we must figure out the
shortest non-violent route to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Vice-Chair of the Committee on the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (spoke in Spanish): We are
honoured to have the Eastern Republic of Uruguay
presiding over the Security Council this month, and it
is doubly pleasing that two countries of Latin America,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
will fulfil that task in 2016.
With 2015 now ended, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, remains
deeply troubling. The acts of violence to which the
prevailing despair drives Palestinian youth continue,
and Israel, the occupying Power, continues to respond
with overwhelming and excessive force. And while
there are a host of challenges facing the region as well
as affecting many Member States outside it, the IsraeliPalestinian conflict remains a top priority and should
not be relegated to secondary status by other, seemingly
more urgent, crises.
What many who talk, with good reason, of the
dangers of violent extremism are missing is the fact
that the unresolved question of Palestine is one of
the principal tools for extremist recruitment, and that
Israel’s occupation of Palestine’s lands and ill-treatment
of its people is one of the main reasons that idealistic
and impressionable young people are attracted to such
extreme and unforgivable forms of rebellion. If we, the
nations of the world, are fully committed to preventing
violent extremism within our own borders and fighting
it wherever it occurs, we must do all we can to find
a comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine that will enable the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights within a
sovereign country of their own, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace with Israel.
The path to that solution is clear, and has been
for a long time. The terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the League of
Arab States in 2002, and the Quartet road map for a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, endorsed by the Security Council in 2003, form

58/67

26/01/2016

the basis for it. They are accepted by the international
community as the best, indeed the only, way to arrive
at a peaceful settlement.
The situation on the ground today remains bleak,
and the temptation to give up — or at least to press
the pause button on the issue and for the time being to
deal with others — is great. Gaza is still under a neartotal blockade and its reconstruction is progressing far
too slowly. The Israeli settlement construction has not
stopped; Israeli settlers continue their extremist acts;
and the Israeli Government continues to apply a double
standard to the violence committed by Israelis against
Palestinians versus the Palestinians’ struggles against
the Israeli occupation. Jerusalem remains a classic
tinderbox, one spark away from igniting a religious war
that could embroil the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the
other regional conflagrations.
Yes, the situation does indeed seem bleak. But it
is at this moment — at a time when the Palestinian
people cannot envisage a viable future, when the Israeli
people have given up all hope of a peace process, when
after more than 20 years of on-and-off negotiations no
mutual trust remains — it is precisely at this point that
we, the peoples of the world who have come together
at these United Nations, must step up and provide the
blueprint for a path forward. We must rekindle the
candle of hope and ensure that it is never extinguished.
That is our responsibility and we must not fail to carry
it out. Within the Organization, it is the Security
Council, as the organ to which the Charter assigned the
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security, that must assume that responsibility and act
to promote the cause of peace for Palestine and Israel.
Over the past 12 months, there have been efforts and
discussions behind the scenes, but the time has come
to bring all of that out into the spotlight and onto the
Council floor. A resolution that sets clear parameters
and a time frame for ending the conflict would be the
appropriate step. The Palestinian people cannot wait
any longer. Every delay raises the risk that the damage
on the ground will become truly irreparable. If we
allow that to happen, we will not only have failed the
Palestinian people and their neighbours, but also the
nations of the world that have entrusted their peace and
security to us.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes all the efforts
undertaken by the Council and its members, the Middle
East Quartet and all actors with a view to finding a
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

way out of the current situation and to resolving the
question of Palestine in accordance with the formula
of two States living side by side in peace and security.
The Committee will do its best to support those efforts
through its own work and reaffirms its commitment
to the principle of a peaceful resolution of the conflict
based on those premises.
Following the previous debate on the situation
in the Middle East in October 2015 (S/PV.7543), the
Committee organized events around the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People in
November. Together with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, we convened a conference on the question
of Jerusalem and a civil society forum on the question
of Palestine, in Jakarta. One aspect that the two events
highlighted was the fact that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is not a religious one, and that anyone trying
to exploit it to ignite a religious confrontation is
misrepresenting the values of their own religion. These
two events reaffirmed our shared universal values of
peaceful coexistence among all peoples of the Earth.
In March in Amman, we will hold a round table
on legal issues to strengthen the capacities of the
State of Palestine to meet its obligations in light of its
recent accession to a series of international treaties and
conventions. Throughout the year, we will continue to
promote the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and to support efforts to achieve
the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders and a just resolution of all issues related to
the final status and mobilization of and assistance to
the Palestinian people, as mandated by the General
Assembly.
The Committee remains open to everyone —
Government representatives, members of academia,
civil society — who wishes to join us in this noble task.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the presence of Minister
Rodolfo Nin Novoa and we are very pleased to see him
preside over the Council, in particular as his country
is one of the representatives of our regional group. We
congratulate him and the Uruguayan Mission on their
work at the helm of the Security Council this month.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing.

S/PV.7610

The issue before us today remains of particular
importance to Costa Rica, in particular on the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. We are
convinced that the situation in the Middle East should
remain among the priorities of the Organization.
For that reason, we will never tire of calling for the
peaceful resolution of conflicts between peoples and
States, characterized by respect for international law
and human rights. I shall focus my remarks on three
clashes in the area: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
situation in Syria and the situation in Yemen.
The escalation of violence in the area remains a
concern. Civilians, including women and children,
continue to pay a high price, which we strongly
condemn. As Miroslav Jenča, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, said when he addressed
the Security Council on 16 December:
“The current circumstances should not
be accepted as the new normal. Israelis and
Palestinians should not be resigned to living under
the threat of violence.” (S/PV.7584, p. 2)
My country reiterates that it is urgent to resume
negotiations on the pending core issues of the conflict,
based on the obligations already assumed and the
agreements previously agreed between the parties, and
supported by international law and the decisions of
both the Security Council and the General Assembly.
It is imperative that a political solution be found to
this conflict and that a new architecture of peace to
resolve differences be established. Furthermore, those
responsible should be prosecuted, and efforts must be
pooled in order to halt the spiral of violence and prevent
further civilian suffering. We call for efforts, such as
those made by the Secretary of State of the United
States, John Kerry, which will reach their two-year
mark this March, to be pursued, and we hope to obtain
results that are as good as those achieved during the
negotiating process with Iran.
Costa Rica regrets that the conflict in Syria is
entering its sixth year and that the situation continues
to deteriorate. It is important to bring an end to the
armed conflict and to seek a swift political solution,
above all to the humanitarian crisis. As was stated
before the Security Council on 15 January by the
Assistant Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, the gravity
of the humanitarian situation in Syria is increasing and
all members of the Security Council are responsible for
meeting the basic needs of the victims of the Syrian

16-0180659/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conflict. “The Council cannot let more people die on its
watch” (S/PV.7605, p. 3).
The use of barrel bombs and of civilians as a
weapon of war in the conflict, as well as the continued
trafficking in arms, including in clandestine tunnels,
are unjustifiable. In fact, they are detrimental to the
situation. We must ensure the full implementation of
resolution 2235 (2015) of 7 August 2015, through which,
for the first time, accountability will be established for
those who have used chemical weapons in Syria against
the civilian population.
We also welcome the emblematic adoption by
consensus of resolution 2254 (2015) of 18 December
2015 in support of the peace process in Syria. That
was the first time the Security Council has endorsed
the Vienna negotiations and Geneva communiqués.
It is important that the Security Council pursue its
implementation of the resolution, in favour of the
ceasefire and the inclusion of the opposition, so that a
formal dialogue can be established with a view to the
transition process, as well as free and fair elections. We
hope that the peace negotiations to begin in Geneva on
29 January will achieve the best results possible and,
as Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura said, start on the
right foot. We hope that the negotiations will truly mark
the beginning of a real peace process.
With regard to the current situation in Yemen,
my delegation is concerned about developments in
the conflict and in the situation in which even the
Al-Thawra hospital has been repeatedly attacked. Basic
services and items, such as water and medicine, are
scarce. In the light of this situation, we join the calls
of the United Nations to allow humanitarian access to
the area and for a permanent ceasefire. We welcome
the statements of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights announcing that the
Yemeni Government has revised its position and will
allow the Special Envoy to Yemen to continue his work
in the country.
Costa Rica reiterates its concern about rising
tensions among regional Powers that escalate the tone
of the fighting and therefore makes a strong call for
peace in the Middle East. We remain confident that
the Security Council can fully exercise its mandate
to maintain international peace and security and fully
uphold international justice and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.

60/67

26/01/2016

Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
of serious concern to the international community.
Furthermore, it is particularly worrisome that the
Security Council continues to hold open debates on
the Middle East, in which there is overwhelming
support for the Palestinian cause, but has not adopted
a resolution demanding that Israel put an immediate
end to the military occupation of Palestine and other
Arab territories, the blockade on the Gaza Strip and the
construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
and the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and be accountable for the war crimes and
collective punishment committed by Israel against the
Palestinian people.
Why is this organ not assuming its responsibilities?
What is it waiting for? Who is it trying to protect by
failing to act? Why is it that, even in the face of a clear
breach to international peace and security, no tangible
measures have been taken but yet, there is an increasing
number of debates being held in the Council daily on
issues that do not fall within its purview? Regrettably,
persistent opposition from the United States, through
the anachronistic use of the veto, has prevented a
decision from being taken on the question of Palestine
in the Council.
The Council should take steps to ensure an end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and
guarantee the peaceful coexistence of two States, based
on the establishment of an independent, sovereign
and viable Palestinian State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem and in line with the pre-1967 borders, and a
fair solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We are convinced that resolving this long-standing
conflict would help to greatly reduce current tensions
in the Middle East.
Once again, my delegation reiterates its strong
condemnation of the Israeli colonization campaign
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and all measures, policies and practices
associated with the campaign, which include, in addition
to the construction and expansion of illegal settlements
and the wall, the destruction and confiscation of
Palestinian land and property, the forced displacement
of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian families and
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the transfer of settlers into the occupied Palestinian
territory, among other violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and United Nations
resolutions. Such actions jeopardize the viability of a
Palestinian State and the ability to resolve the conflict
in a fair and balanced manner.
We also condemn, and demand a definitive end
to, violence, provocation and incitement to hatred and
terror by Israeli settlers and mass arbitrary arrests and
imprisonments.
Cuba reaffirms its full support for the admission
of Palestine as a full Member of the Organization and
calls on the Security Council to decide and accept
without delay Palestine’s application in 2011 to be
recognized as a State Member of the United Nations, as
clearly desired by the vast majority of the Members of
the Organization. The historical debt to the Palestinian
people is enormous and must be repaid. The Council
must assume it responsibility and take action to end to
such a long period of injustice.
The situation in Syria continues to be of concern
to the international community. It will be possible to
achieve peace in that country only by respecting the
right of the Syrian people to decide their own destiny. A
political solution through dialogue and negotiation is the
only option for ending the conflict in Syria. We demand
that an end be put to interference in Syria’s domestic
affairs. Those who fuel the conflict from the outside,
with the stated goal of regime change, are responsible
for the thousands of civilian casualties recorded in the
four years of fighting. Once again, we reiterate our
concern about the loss of innocent lives as a result of
the Syrian conflict and condemn all acts of violence
being perpetrated against the civilian population in that
country. The putative protection of human life and the
fight against extremist elements cannot be a pretext
for foreign intervention. That is why we demand the
cessation of the foreign presence in Syria, as it does not
have the approval of its Government and is not working
in coordination with its authorities.
The role of the Security Council is crucial in
achieving the aspirations of well-being, peace and
development that all peoples in the Middle East deserve.
Its member States should be advocates of peaceful
solutions, without foreign interference, that safeguard
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
contribute decisively to the preservation of the lives of
the people affected by conflict in the region.

S/PV.7610

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
your country on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and wish it every
success. I also thank you, Sir, for having convened
today’s open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of your friendly
country for being here and for presiding over some of
today’s meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing at the start of the meeting. I would also like
to congratulate all of the countries with a seat on the
Council this year and wish them every success in their
work.
Allow me to thank the Council for its honourable
position in firmly condemning the barbaric aggression
perpetrated on the Embassy of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in Tehran and its Consulate in Mashhad. We
hope that the Council will ask the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to respect its legal international
obligations in protecting diplomatic missions and
prosecute all those responsible for such attacks,
including those who incited, planned and carried them
out. It is not enough to just make apologetic statements
on behalf of the Iranian authorities.
My delegation would like to state that the Palestinian
cause has always been and remains at the very heart of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s interests. Regardless of
the challenges or the difficulties that are ravaging our
part of the world, none of this will deter us or prevent us
from standing side by side with the Palestinian people
in their ongoing resilient defence of their territory and
sacred heritage against the Israeli occupation and its
colonial practices and its violations of international
legitimacy.
We have come to the Security Council, as we have
done repeatedly in the past, to ask that it condemn
the official organized terrorism carried out by Israel
as well as the crimes committed by its colonial army
and terrorist settlers, starting with the systematic
assassinations, the construction of settlements, the
Judaization and the ethnic cleansing, all of which are
war crimes or crimes against humanity. All of this has
been documented in the United Nations reports. All
of this is taking place without Israel worrying about
anything or anyone — and being accountable to no one.

16-0180661/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As a result, Israel continues the use of deadly force
against Palestinians, exploits and tortures Palestinians,
including women and children and adolescents. The
Israeli war machine continues to deport Palestinians,
seize and confiscate their lands and pursues settlement
policies, while ignoring any of the legal consequences,
without being accountable to anyone and without
fearing anything. The Israeli authorities continue to
Judaize Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the historic Islamic and
Christian sites and attempt to erase the Arab identity
and change the historic situation of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and its esplanade, without being accountable to anyone.
Israel continues to defy the will of the international
community. It continues to build the wall of separation.
It also continues to exploit the resources of the
occupied Arab Golan and engage in the illegal trade
of Israeli settlers’ goods and produce coming from
occupied Palestinian and Arab lands, in brazen and
fearless violation of the International Court of Justice
and various United Nations resolutions. The unfair
blockade imposed by Israel, the occupying Power,
over the Gaza Strip continues from year to year. That
is compounded by Israel’s arbitrary practices in the
West Bank, which have led to a deterioration in terms
of poverty and the absence of any possibility for a
decent life for Palestinians — all of this without being
accountable to anyone or fearing anything.
We will always remind the Security Council of its
responsibility and its duty to hold Israel responsible
for what it does and asking it to account for the war
crimes it has always carried out. We ask the Council
again to set up an international protection regime for
the occupied Palestinian State, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention
and the resolutions of international legitimacy.
We also call upon the Council to take the immediate
steps needed to safeguard genuine opportunities for
peace and the two-State solution. We call upon Israel
to cease its settlement policies and the confiscation of
Palestinian lands. We also call upon Israel to implement
all political, security and economic agreements that
have been signed but never implemented. We also ask
the Council to back efforts aimed at setting up a timeline
for Israel to end its occupation of Palestinian lands, the
remaining part of Lebanese lands under occupation
and the Syrian Arab Golan, and to withdraw to the
borders of 4 June 1967 until a lasting and just peace
is achieved pursuant to resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to

62/67

26/01/2016

ensure that the Palestinian people will be able to enjoy
their independence and build their sovereign State.
In the past five years, the Security Council has
not been able to discharge its duty when it comes
to the protection of the Syrian people against the
killing, terrorism and genocide carried out by the
Syrian authorities against their people, which have
claimed over 300,000 victims, led to the displacement
of 12 million Syrians and destroyed the country. We
regret that the Security Council has not been able,
despite its repeated relevant resolutions, to lift the siege
of Madaya and the other cities that are currently being
besieged to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches
inaccessible regions, leaving over 400,000 individuals
under the threat of famine. This brings us back to a
situation that could rightly have occurred in the Middle
Ages.
We have seen with our own eyes what has happened
in Madaya and how human beings have become living
skeletons. Those images should lead to increased
humanity in us; they need to move us to action. We
have seen how efforts undertaken to exert pressure on
the Syrian regime have led to an opening of partial
access to humanitarian assistance to certain besieged
regions. I believe that it is simply unacceptable that the
international community is forced to exert pressure
on the Syrian authorities to meet the nutritional and
medical needs of its own citizens. What the Syrian
authorities are doing in that regard is inhuman. It is
tantamount to a war crime.
We affirm our condemnation of all types of siege
or blockade that plunge the population into hunger.
It matters little that the authorities are behind these
crimes, but we remind the Council that 12 of the 14
besieged cities are under the control of the Syrian
Government, their Hizbullah allies and criminal
gangs. We would like to state clearly that the volume
of humanitarian assistance is simply insufficient and is
not an alternative to forcing the Syrian authorities and
their allies to immediately lift the sieges on all cities
and villages in Syria.
We see no path forward in resolving this humanitarian
disaster other than through a political solution based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
the two Vienna declarations. We would therefore like
to reiterate our support for the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and for
his mandate pursuant to the resolution which calls for
the total and complete implementation of the Geneva
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7610

communiqué and a launch of official negotiations for a
political transition phase (resolution 2254 (2015)). We
also back efforts aimed at implementing a ceasefire
pursuant to that resolution, in parallel with political
efforts, and to take steps towards the implementation
of the ceasefire following the implementation of the
first stages of the political transition process under
the auspices of the United Nations on the basis of the
Geneva communiqué.

activities in the occupied Palestinian territories violate
international law and fuel the resentment of the
Palestinians. They also undermine the viability of the
two-State solution, which the international community
broadly accepts as the only path to resolving the question
of Palestine. The Israeli authorities must freeze all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, in compliance with their obligations under
international law.

We are also going to continue our work through the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to ensure a
political transition pursuant to the Geneva communiqué
and Vienna declarations. The position mandated by the
ISSG has attempted to bring together a broader ranger
of the opposition to select their representatives in the
negotiations and fix their positions without foreign
interference.

The role of the Quartet remains vital to the Middle
East peace process, and Nigeria continues to follow
very closely the activities of the group. In that regard,
we welcome the recent visit of the Quartet envoys
to the region and their engagement with Israeli and
Palestinian officials. We take positive note of their
discussions, which focused on, among other issues, the
need for both sides to oppose incitement, de-escalate
the situation and take concrete actions to demonstrate
their commitment to the two-State solution. We urge
Israel and Palestine to maintain and indeed strengthen
their engagement with the Quartet in the search for
peace.

The various factions and groups of the Syrian
opposition attending the conference in Riyadh were
able to unify their positions, which was a very important
step on the path to identifying a political solution to the
Syrian crisis. We pay tribute to the efforts undertaken
by the Syrian opposition, and we will unconditionally
maintain our absolute support for the Syrian people in
fulfilling their needs and aspirations, while preserving
the unity and sovereignty of Syria, regardless of sect
or origin.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): My delegation thanks the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his lucid
briefing and for his leadership in the search for peace
in the Middle East.
Nigeria is concerned about the upsurge in violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory. That presents
a risk of a wider escalation of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. It also complicates the search for peace.
Extremists on both sides must be prevented from
dictating the political agenda. Provocative actions and
hostile rhetoric must be avoided. Political leaders must
take the lead in ensuring that calm is restored.
Reports of the Israeli Government’s decision to
expropriate 150 hectares of land in the West Bank are
deeply worrying. If implemented, the expropriation
would constitute the largest seizure of land by Israel
in the West Bank since August 2014. The expropriation
of land, the construction of homes and other settlement

The current stalemate in the Middle East peace
process is neither ideal nor sustainable. Both sides
must take concrete steps to return to negotiations on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the relevant agreements between
them. Nigeria reiterates its strong support for a twoState solution with Israel and Palestine, existing side by
side in peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Madam President,
on Uruguay’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank the delegation
of the United States for presiding over the Council
so skilfully last month. I also congratulate the new
members of the Security Council. Jordan fully supports
all the efforts of the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt,
the Arab member of the Security Council.
Fundamental changes have taken place in the
international security architecture over the past several
years. Civil wars have spread throughout the world.
Conflicts are by their very nature more complex,
entailing terrible humanitarian consequences. In 2015,
the crisis in the Middle East accounted for 35.5 per cent

16-0180663/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Security Council’s meetings on specific States
or situations in the region. Furthermore, the region
was discussed in numerous other thematic meetings
under other items concerning terrorism and defending
religions, civilizations and cultural heritage. The
situations in the occupied Arab territories, Syria and
Yemen were among the subjects most debated during
the closed consultations of the Security Council last
year and they year before.
Those statistics reflect the gravity of the situation
in the Middle East, where millions of people are living
through a conflict — the Arab-Israeli conflict — that
dates back more than 60 years, with the PalestinianIsraeli conflict at its core. The international
community, through various resolutions, has laid out
the parameters for a solution that have been ignored
rather than implemented. To live in peace and security
is a fundamental right and need for all peoples wishing
to build a future based on dignity. We therefore believe
that the failure to achieve such a future would have
terrible consequences for the region and world, in
general.
The only way to achieve peace in the Middle East
and to prevent bloodshed is for the Palestinian people
to recover their legitimate right to live in security,
dignity, freedom and security without occupation, in
an independent and viable State within its pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and in
accordance with the terms of reference of the peace
process and the Arab Peace Initiative, in peace and
security with all the States and peoples of the region.
Jordan is living the question of Palestine; we are
not just outside observers or mere mediators. We have
a historic role in that cause and its service. We will
continue our efforts on behalf of negotiations leading
to the two-State solution within a set time frame, and
take up all of the final status issues, in accordance with
international initiatives and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We shall do so in a way that meets all of Jordan’s vital
interests with regard to those issues, particularly with
regard to the refugees and Jerusalem.
Unilateral and provocative measures, especially
settlement policies, must be abandoned. The Israeli
occupation authorities must cease all unilateral
measures in occupied East Jerusalem and all Islamic
and Christian sites in Jerusalem. In that context, let
me stress that Jordan will continue to confront all
Israeli violations, provocations and aggressions that
target Islamic and Christian holy sites, in particular the
64/67

26/01/2016

Al-Aqsa Mosque, because His Majesty King Abdullah
II ibn Al Hussein is the trustee of all Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem. Israel must cease its
illegal behaviour. The international community must
reject all illegal unilateral measures that block the path
to peace.
Jordan stresses the need to maintain and increase
the diplomatic momentum aimed at finding a
comprehensive political solution to the tragic situation
in Syria. Jordan’s position under the leadership of King
Abdullah II has been clear. We have stressed the need
to work for a political solution that maintains Syria’s
territorial integrity and political independence, restores
peace and stability, repairs its social fabric and ensures
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). As a
step towards achieving the solution set forth in the
resolution, the announcement of the commencement of
negotiations on 29 January is very encouraging.
My country is hosting a very large number of
Syrian refugees, with whom we are sharing our meagre
resources. The international community must be aware
of all the burdens we are bearing in that regard and
it should help us bear them. We therefore call on the
international community to support Jordan’s appeal for
$10 billion for the next three years.
The dangers of terrorism have spread throughout the
world under different names and those terrorist groups
are now using different means of war. A coalition has
been established and His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein has stated that this is our war, as Muslims,
against those who distort our noble religion. It is of the
utmost importance to coordinate and cooperate at the
international level to combat extremist thinking and
ideology for the long term.
We are convinced that peace, security and stability
can be achieved in the Middle East for the prosperity of
our people. We in Jordan are committed to playing our
role in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Perhaps never
before in the recent history of the situation in the Middle
East has the region been fraught with so many threats
to international peace and security. It is therefore the
honour and duty of the Security Council, aware of its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, to strive to meet the challenge posed by
the current situation. In that regard, it is fitting to pay
16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

tribute to the initiative of the presidency of Uruguay,
which represents an innovative and courageous step in
that direction.
Terrorism, with its serious consequences, is
undoubtedly at the forefront of the plethora of risks and
threats to international peace and security. The threat
posed by terrorist and extremist groups to regional
stability, international security and human rights is
omnipresent. Revolting acts of barbarism have plunged
the Middle East into bloodshed — and the people and
minorities, notably in Syria and Iraq, into a nightmare.
Terrorism is an affront to the conscience of humankind.
The recent attacks in Paris, Istanbul, Beirut, Jakarta,
San Bernardino, Bamako and Ouagadougou all
compound the long list of atrocities committed by those
groups, whose tentacles now extend to all continents.
That dramatic expansion is accompanied by a
constantly growing wave of refugees, of persecution of
religious and ethnic communities, and of widespread
violations of human rights. Moreover, the increasing
possibility of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
falling into the hands of those terrorist entities
considerably increases both the scale and severity of
the threat.
In addition, the current impasse in the peace process
between Israel and Palestine removes any prospects of a
negotiated solution and thereby compounds the threats
confronting the region. The destabilizing effects of
the suspension of peace talks between the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority are clear.
They contribute in particular to fuelling extremism,
which, as we know, uses the unresolved conflict as
a pretext to carry out its fanatical work. The recent
outbreak of violence that has indiscriminately struck
Israeli and Palestinian civilians is a sad illustration
of that. Such a situation could deteriorate at any time
and clearly shows the extent to which the status quo is
untenable.
The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
undoubtedly a key to stability and peace in the Middle
East. The Republic of Haiti is pleased to participate in
this open debate, which affords us an opportunity to
reiterate our position on this conflict, which has lasted
far too long; to express its absolute respect for the
major principles of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, whose respect alone can ensure a lasting
settlement to the conflict; and to lend its support to the
Council’s approach aimed at renewing dialogue and

S/PV.7610

enabling the parties to resume the path of negotiations,
which remains a necessary precondition for peace.
The position of my delegation is based on a
fundamental principle, that is, the right of Israel to
exist and to live in safety, within secure and recognized
borders, must be universally and unequivocally
recognized, just like that of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and sovereignty in the framework of
a viable and democratic State. My delegation believes
that the coexistence of two States living in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders,
taking into account the legitimate security concerns
of Israel, is the cornerstone of any solution to the
conflict. Pursuant to that position and in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, Haiti, which is linked to Israel
through historical ties of friendship dating back to
Israel’s creation in 1948, has also recognized the
Palestinian State, in the belief that the boundaries
and borders of that State must be determined through
an agreement in the context of a comprehensive,
negotiated and final settlement between the two States.
To that end, my delegation fully supports the two-State
solution — the only one that is worthwhile — and
supports all international initiatives, whether they
come from the United Nations or other bodies, aimed
at reaching a just, equitable and sustainable solution,
the modalities of which fall first and foremost to the
parties to resolve.
Never has the dynamic commitment of the United
Nations to the Middle East been as necessary and
desirable as it is today. Faced with the dual challenge of
the fight against terrorism and of resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, the international community
must act. On the one hand, it is imperative to take and
strengthen the collective measures that are urgently
needed to counter the growing threat of terrorism
and extremism. On the other hand, is important that
the United Nations make every effort to restore the
momentum of the peace process between Israel and
Palestine. Both actions must be taken with the same
resolve.
My delegation believes that the United Nations,
with its long experience in the field and the efforts
already made to solve the structural problems of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is now best placed to
promote a resumption of talks, which are the only route
to peace. This solution can be achieved only through a

16-0180665/67

S/PV.7610

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

negotiated peace. It requires above all a return to the
negotiating table. There can be no conditions attached.
The holding of this meeting is evidence that it
will be possible to reach a solution through United
Nations mediation. My delegation fully agrees with
this approach on the part of the Security Council. It
extends its best wishes for this meeting and hopes that
it will lead to new ideas and innovative approaches that
can pave the way to stability in the Middle East and
the early resumption of the diplomatic process between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority as the only way to
achieve the negotiated, just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement desired all parties.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Israel has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Allow me to refer to some of
the accusations that we have heard here today.
The representative of Lebanon sat here and
accused Israel of attempting to undermine the tripartite
mechanism and questioned its commitment to resolution
1701 (2006). Interestingly enough, there is no evidence
in United Nations reports to support these baseless
claims. In fact, it was the Lebanese side that was
recently accused of violating the resolution by General
Portolano, Head of Mission and Force Commander of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, after the
launch of rockets at Israel from southern Lebanon. The
rockets were fired by Hizbullah, an armed terrorist
organization that still acts freely in southern Lebanon
and holds seats in the Lebanese Parliament, which has
not even been able to elect a President for the past year
and a half. Still, the representative of Lebanon had
the audacity to criticize Israel’s democracy. Just as a
reminder, the terror organization Hibzullah, which
sits in the Lebanese Parliament, is the same Hizbullah
that assists Al-Assad’s forces in besieging the town of
Madaya in Syria and in starving its people to death.
The element that is sponsoring Hizbullah’s heinous
activities is Iran. The sad truth is that wherever there
is terror in the Middle East, we can be sure that Iran
is behind it. Iran’s interventions in Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen continue to wreak havoc in the region.
As for Saudi Arabia, as a State that continues to
attack and bomb the civilian population in Yemen
indiscriminately, it may want to refrain from giving
lectures about violations of international humanitarian
law.
66/67

26/01/2016

As for Syria, I would advise its representative to
direct the time and energy he spends in writing hateful,
false and conspiratorial statements towards approving
United Nations requests for humanitarian assistance
convoys.
It took a lot of nerve for the representatives of
Malaysia and Venezuela — two of the world’s worst
human rights violators — to criticize the human rights
record of the only democracy in the Middle East. We
can only hope that one day the people of their countries
will enjoy the same freedom of expression as their
representatives do here at the United Nations.
With reference to my Palestinian colleagues, after
listening this morning to the Palestinian observer I am
still left without answers to the fundamental questions.
Why will the Palestinians not come to the negotiating
table? Why do they continue to refuse to condemn terror
against Israel? I have read and reread their statement.
It contains not a word of condemnation of terror and
nothing about accepting Prime Minister Netanyahu’s
offer to negotiate.
While the Palestinians demonstrate such passion
and energy defaming Israel here at the United Nations,
they neglect their responsibility for the people of the
Gaza Strip. For their sake, and for the sake of various
States that sadly failed to learn the facts before
taking the floor here today — including Bangladesh
and Nicaragua — allow me to share real information
about Israel’s major efforts to rehabilitate Gaza and to
improve the lives of its population. These are just a few
examples of Israel’s commitment.
The Israeli Cabinet has approved a range of short-,
medium- and long-term measures to address Gaza’s
water and energy needs, including the addition of a
temporary power line and increased accessibility to
gas. Every day, thousands of people enter Israel from
the Gaza Strip in order to work, do business and receive
medical treatment in Israel. This continues despite the
fact that we know that Hamas exploits this policy in
order to promote terror. Hamas has even used a cancer
patient being treated in an Israeli hospital as a carrier to
pass information to terrorists.
As we have stated time and again, Israel is
committed to the two-State solution and believes in
a better future for Israelis and the Palestinian people
alike.

16-01806

26/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Malaysia has asked to make a further statement. I
now give her the floor.
Mrs. Abdul Hamid (Malaysia): Malaysia takes
the floor to reply to the comments made by the
representative of Israel.
I would first categorically reject the allegations
raised by the representative of Israel against my
country. These allegations are baseless and serve no
other objective than to divert the Security Council’s
attention from the real matter at hand — the situation in
occupied Palestine. Let me remind the representative of
Israel that Malaysia holds the highest respect for human
rights and international law. This is in contrast with
Israel, which continues to violate countless resolutions
and decisions of the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council and even the
International Criminal Court.
Israel also continues to disrespect human rights
by not cooperating with numerous United Nations
human rights mechanisms. The resignation of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on human rights in
the occupied Palestinian territories earlier this month,

S/PV.7610

which he attributed to frustration at Israel’s denial of
access to Palestinian territories, provides yet another
example of the policy of the so-called only democracy
in the Middle East.
I should also reiterate that Malaysia is not an
occupying Power, unlike Israel, which is roundly
condemned for its illegal practices related to its ongoing
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories.
Malaysia is a member of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories. This places us in a unique position
to see with our own eyes the true nature of the countless
extreme violations of human rights committed by the
occupying Power.
My delegation’s positions on the matter under
consideration were made clear in our statement delivered
earlier. We therefore urge the Israeli delegation to focus
its energy on addressing the various concerns raised
by Malaysia and other Member States today instead of
attempting to divert our attention with false allegations.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

16-0180667/67
