A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/127
23 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 106
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/621)]
53/127. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/106 of 12 December 1997 and all previous relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the Beijing Declaration1 and the Platform for Action2 of the Fourth World Conference on
Women, the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the World
Summit for Social Development,3 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development,4 the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World Conference on Human
Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993,5 the Plan of Action for Implementing the World Declaration
on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children in the 1990s of the World Summit for Children,

1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2

Ibid., annex II.

3

Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
4

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/53/127
Page 2

held in New York on 29 and 30 September 1990,6 the World Declaration on Education for All and the
Framework for Action to Meet Basic Learning Needs adopted at the World Conference on Education for All,7
the Declaration and Agenda for Action of the World Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of
Children, held at Stockholm from 27 to 31 August 1996,8 and the conclusions of the Commission on the
Status of Women on critical areas of concern identified in the Platform for Action of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, adopted by the Commission at its forty-second session,9 in particular those relating to
the girl child,
Deeply concerned about discrimination against the girl child and the violation of the rights of the girl
child, which often result in less access for girls to education, nutrition, physical and mental health care and in
girls enjoying fewer of the rights, opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys and
often being subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic exploitation and to violence
and harmful practices such as incest, early marriage, female infanticide, prenatal sex selection and female
genital mutilation,
Deeply concerned also that girls, in particular adolescent girls, continue to be silent and invisible
victims of violence, abuse and exploitation and that some legal systems do not address adequately the
vulnerability of girls in the administration of justice, including the need for better protection of child victims
and witnesses,
Stressing that discrimination and neglect of the girl child can initiate a lifelong downward spiral of
deprivation and exclusion from the social mainstream,
Deeply concerned that, in situations of poverty, war and armed conflict, girl children are among the
victims most affected and that thus their potential for full development is limited,
Concerned that the girl child has furthermore become a victim of sexually transmitted diseases and the
human immunodeficiency virus, which affects the quality of her life and leaves her open to further
discrimination,
Reaffirming the equal rights of women and men as enshrined, inter alia, in the Preamble to the Charter
of the United Nations, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women10
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,11
1. Stresses the need for full and urgent implementation of the rights of the girl child as guaranteed to
her under all human rights instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child11 and the

6

See A/45/625, annex.

7

Final Report of the World Conference on Education for All: Meeting Basic Learning Needs, Jomtien,
Thailand, 5-9 March 1990, Inter-Agency Commission (UNDP, UNESCO, UNICEF, World Bank) for the World
Conference on Education for All, New York, 1990, appendices I and II.
8

A/51/385, annex.

9

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/1998/27
and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. B.IV.
10

Resolution 34/180, annex.

11

Resolution 44/25, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/127
Page 3

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,10 as well as the need for
universal ratification of those instruments;
2. Urges all States to take all necessary measures and to institute legal reforms to ensure the full and
equal enjoyment by the girl child of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, to take effective action
against violations of those rights and freedoms and to base programmes and policies for the girl child on the
rights of the child;
3. Urges States to base programmes and policies for the girl child on the rights of the child, the
responsibilities, rights and duties of the parents and the evolving capacity of the girl child, in accordance with
the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women2 and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child;
4. Also urges States to prepare programmes for the girl child as part of their national action plans in
order to implement fully the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women;
5. Urges all States to enact and enforce legislation protecting girls from all forms of violence,
including female infanticide and prenatal sex selection, female genital mutilation, rape, domestic violence,
incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, child prostitution and child pornography, and to develop ageappropriate safe and confidential programmes and medical, social and psychological support services to
assist girls who are subjected to violence;
6. Calls upon all States and international and non-governmental organizations, individually and
collectively:
(a) To set goals and to develop and implement gender-sensitive strategies to address the rights and
needs of children, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, to take into account the rights and particular
needs of the girl child, especially in education, health and nutrition, and to eliminate negative cultural
attitudes and practices against the girl child;
(b) To take measures to ensure the non-discrimination and equal enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the girl child with disabilities;
(c) To generate social support for the enforcement of laws on the minimum legal age for marriage, in
particular by providing educational opportunities for girls;
(d) To give attention to the rights and needs of adolescent girls, which call for special action for their
protection from sexual and economic exploitation and abuse, harmful traditional and cultural practices,
teenage pregnancy and vulnerability to sexually transmitted diseases and human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and for the development of life skills and self-esteem, reaffirming
that the advancement and empowerment of women throughout the life cycle must begin with the girl child at
all ages;
(e) To review teaching materials, including textbooks, to promote the self-esteem of women and girls
through positive self-images and to revise these materials, highlighting the effective role of women in society,
including in decision-making, development, culture, history, sports and other social, political and economic
endeavours;

/...

A/RES/53/127
Page 4

(f) To take measures to increase awareness of the potential of the girl child and to promote gendersensitive socialization of boys and girls from early childhood, with the aim of achieving gender equality,
development and peace within the family and the community;
(g) To ensure the equal participation of girls and young women on the basis of non-discrimination and
as partners with boys and young men in social, economic and political life and in the development of
strategies and the implementation of action aimed at achieving gender equality, development and peace;
(h) To strengthen and reorient health education and health services, in particular primary health-care
programmes, including in sexual and reproductive health, and to design quality health programmes that meet
the physical and mental needs of girls and attend to the needs of young expectant and nursing mothers;
(i) To make information and counselling widely available to adolescent girls and boys, especially on
human relationships, reproductive and sexual health, sexually transmitted diseases and adolescent pregnancy,
in a manner that is confidential and easily accessible, and to emphasize the equal responsibility of girls and
boys;
(j) To provide adequate infrastructure and support services to respond to the needs of the survivors of
violence against women and girls and to assist them towards full recovery and reintegration into society;
(k) To provide gender-sensitive training for personnel in the administration of justice, law enforcement
agencies, security, social and health-care services, schools and migration authorities and to develop guidelines
to ensure appropriate police and prosecutorial responses in cases of violence against women and girls;
7. Urges States to enact and enforce strictly laws to ensure that marriage is entered into only with the
free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact and enforce strictly laws concerning the minimum
legal age of consent and the minimum age for marriage and to raise the minimum age for marriage where
necessary;
8. Also urges States to eliminate all barriers so as to enable girls, without exception, to develop their
full potential and skills through equal access to education and training;
9. Urges States, educational institutions and the United Nations system to provide gender-sensitive
training for school administrators, parents and all members of the school community;
10. Encourages States to consider ways and means to ensure the continuing education and training of
married women, pregnant women and young mothers and to protect them from discrimination;
11. Urges States to take special measures for the protection of children, in particular to protect girls
from rape and other forms of sexual abuse and gender-based violence in situations of armed conflict, paying
special attention to refugee and displaced girls and taking into account the special needs of the girl child in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance;
12. Urges States parties to fulfil the obligations they have undertaken under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women to
protect women and girls from all forms of violence, including domestic violence, sexual exploitation and
trafficking and child prostitution;

/...

A/RES/53/127
Page 5

13. Urges States to formulate comprehensive, multidisciplinary and coordinated national plans,
programmes or strategies to eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls, which should be widely
disseminated and should provide targets and timetables for implementation, as well as effective domestic
enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring mechanisms involving all parties concerned,
including consultations with women’s organizations;
14. Also urges States to implement measures to protect women and girls from all forms of violence, in
line with the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on violence
against women, its causes and consequences;
15. Requests all States to implement, on an urgent basis, measures to protect children from all forms of
sexual exploitation, including measures in line with those outlined in the Declaration and Agenda for Action
of the World Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children;8
16. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and non-governmental organizations
to promote human rights education and the full respect for and enjoyment of the human rights of the girl
child, inter alia, through the translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate information
materials on these rights to all sectors of society, in particular to children;
17. Calls upon Governments to encourage efforts by civil society and non-governmental organizations,
including women’s organizations, to establish community-based groups or local committees that could assist
with the safety and welfare of children;
18. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, to
ensure that all organizations and bodies of the United Nations system individually and collectively, in
particular the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, the World Health Organization and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, take into account the rights and the particular needs of the girl child, especially
in education, health and nutrition, and eliminate negative cultural attitudes and practices against the girl child
in the implementation of the outcomes of all recent global conferences, in particular the Platform for Action
of the Fourth World Conference on Women, and of the system-wide medium-term plan for the advancement
of women for the period 1996-2001;12
19. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to pay particular attention to the human rights of the
girl child;
20. Requests all human rights treaty bodies, special procedures and other human rights mechanisms of
the Commission on Human Rights and the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights to adopt regularly and systematically a gender perspective in
the implementation of their mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of
violations of human rights of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening of cooperation and
coordination in that regard;
21. Calls upon States and international and non-governmental organizations to mobilize all necessary
resources, support and efforts to realize the goals, strategic objectives and actions set out in the Platform for
Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women;

12

E/1993/43, annex.

A/RES/53/127
Page 6

22. Also calls upon States and international and non-governmental organizations to implement fully, as
appropriate, the conclusions on the girl child adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its fortysecond session.9
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
