S/PV.7317

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7317th meeting

Thursday, 20 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Bishop .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The role of policing in peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding
Letter dated 4 November 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/788)

14-64052 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1464052*

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
The President: I acknowledge the presence in the
Chamber of the representatives of those countries elected
to serve as Security Council members for the period
2015-2016: Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain
and Venezuela, who commence formally observing
Council proceedings from today in preparation for their
membership.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The role of policing in peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding
Letter dated 4 November 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/788)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Police Adviser, the Heads of police
components and the other representatives.
I am very pleased that the Council is convening this
briefing from Heads of police components — the firstever dedicated Council meeting on policing issues.
The number of police deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
has increased dramatically in recent times, and policingrelated tasks in mission mandates have become more
complex. It is appropriate that the Council consider in
a holistic way the increasingly important role that the
United Nations work on policing plays in the restoration
and maintenance of international peace and security.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Greg Hinds, Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia; Mr. Fred Yiga,
Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan; and Mr. Luis Miguel Carrilho, Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

2/30

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

20/11/2014

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous:
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like to express our great gratitude to you,
Madam President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this first Security-Council debate devoted to
all issues associated with United Nations policing. I
also thank you for your initiative on draft resolution
S/2014/828 — a first, I believe, in United Nations
history — which is quite in line with all the efforts
we at the Secretariat have deployed, especially in the
recent period, to better integrate the development of
United Nations police within what we call the strategic
guidance framework. I think all of this will contribute
trememdously to strengthening both the doctrine and
the way we try to resolve the problems that come before
us.
As you have said, Madam, President, it is true that
there has been unprecedented growth in United Nations
policing in recent years — from a few thousand police
at the begiing of the 2000s to exactly 12,352 deployed
police today, from 91 Member States, throughout
13 peacekeeping operations and 4 special political
missions. That exponential growth illustrates the
challenges we face in the contemporary period. Changes
in the nature of the security situation, including changes
in the type of needs, along with an increasing number
of threats that include traditional problems related to
basic security as well as the fight against terrorism,
transnational organized crime and corruption — all of
this is part of the current reality experienced by our
police. I wish to pay tribute to United Nations police for
the courage and creativity they display in those often
difficult circumstances.
I always say that United Nations police are often
the daily face, as it were, of a mission, whether
peacekeeping or political. It is therefore very imporant
that this first impression be convincing and make an
impact. But allow me also to refer to a saying in the
language I know best. It is often said in my country
that fear of the policeman is the beginning of wisdom. I
think that is quite true, and it illustrates the major role
our police must play in all of our tasks — beginning
overall with stabilization.
However, those tasks are spread out across three
areas. The first is to provide assistance to host countries
in the areas of the rule of law via police services. In

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

some cases, such as in the weakest countries and those
with the least infrastructure, it is a matter of temporarily
carrying out police duties, including law enforcement.
And finally, their role is to support efforts at reform,
restructuring and, sometimes, simply creating a
national or other police service to be responsible for
enforcing the law.
Ultimately, all of that calls for increasingly
sophisticated capacity. Above and beyond the
traditional distinction between individual police and
formed police units, we are daily seeing a growing
need for specialized police, including in scientific and
technological terms — and by that I am referring to
twenty-first century technology, not that of 100 years
ago or longer. Once again, this touches on ensuring
domestic laws and combating organized crime. And all
of that requires growing sophistication.
Member States are providing us significant support
in all those areas. From here at the Council, I should
like to appeal for additional language capabilities.
We are operating in places that necessarily require, at
least for basic training, a mastery of the most prevalent
language in the country. Specifically, I have in mind
the Arabic language and French.
However, we also always have a need for more
women. That is because we have set ourselves the
goal — one that may perhaps be too ambitions — of
reaching the target of 20 per cent women police for this
year. I humbly admit that we are far from meeting that
goal, but I would add that this also reflects the situation
as it exists in national police services. Although some
may be quite ahead when it comes to gender issues,
others are not quite that advanced. And clearly, we
reflect what the Member States provide us.
However, we are increasingly deploying allwomen police units. And that is because, as we must
acknowledge, law-and-order problems often include
a level of danger and impact that is more pronounced
on women. Our experience with such units — in the
Congo, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
Haiti and in Liberia — leads us to be convinced of that
fact.
I should like once again to thank you for this
initiative, Madam President, which I think all of us will
find very useful. I also want to say that we will continue
to work with United Nations police chiefs to constantly
adjust to the needs, in terms of quantity and quality
alike, given the contribution of United Nations police

S/PV.7317

to our shared values of peace, security and respect for
human rigths.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hinds.
Mr. Hinds: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity for my colleagues and
me to brief the Security Council on the role of United
Nations police in peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. I also look forward to the Council’s
adoption of the first Security Council resolution on
United Nations policing. As a Police Commissioner
in the field, that will be a significant outcome, as it
will provide us with the much-needed strategic and
practical guidance that will help us to do our work more
effectively.
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude,
on behalf of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), to the Council and to the police-contributing
countries (PCCs) for the support that we have received
during the Ebola crisis. The commitment and
dedication of the PCC police officers has been and
remains crucial to the maintenance of peace, stability
and security in Liberia in these extremely challenging
and unprecedented times.
My briefing today will focus on the role of
United Nations police in reforming, restructuring and
rebuilding host-State policing institutions. Based on
my experiences in Timor-Leste while working for the
Australian Federal Police in close coordination with the
United Nations Mission there, and in Liberia as head
of the United Nations police component for UNMIL,
I would like to discuss four key factors that I consider
critical to effective police institution-building — clear
and specific mandates for policing, standardized and
cohesive approaches to institution-building, effective
partnerships and, lastly, the skills and expertise that
police components need to effectively build policing
institutions.
First, with regard to developing clear and specific
mandates for policing, the ability of police components
to successfully implement mandates related to police
institution-building is dependent on being provided
with operative language that is specific and realistic and
that clearly acknowledges the political and technical
nature of policing reform. Mandates that outline
specific critical reform areas would be of considerable
assistance in successful institution-building and

14-640523/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mandate implementation. A number of missions have
already benefitted from such mandates, including
the Missions in Timor-Leste and Haiti. And that too
is something that UNMIL’s police component is now
focusing on in its impending mandate renewal next
month.
The establishment of governance and accountability
mechanisms for the internal and external management
of police is critical for institution-building. However,
those issues are frequently absent from policing
mandates, which can result in the neglect of reform of a
more political nature, such as new policing legislation
or the establishment of effective oversight mechanisms.
In Liberia, 11 years since the end of the conflict and
the establishment of UNMIL, the legislative framework
for the police remains piecemeal. Moreover, a focus on
the development of a clear legislative framework at a
much earlier stage would have led to those organizational
and institutional limitations being addressed and a
much stronger foundation for subsequent reform being
provided. For example, mandates that include a focus on
implementing community-oriented policing strategies,
which often address the issue of a population’s deepseated distrust of the police, would improve the more
traditional security-focused mandates by adopting
proven community-oriented processes and approaches
in order to address law-and-order and security concerns.
Secondly, there is a need for a standardized and
cohesive approach to delivering capacity development
at the start of a mission. Reform planning must be done
in consultation with the host State and key stakeholders,
with the necessary political buy-in to ensure national
ownership, leadership and sustainability. It is essential
that the responsible central ministry within the host
State provide an overarching policy framework and
identify priorities for the reform of policing. It is
also important to formalize the separation of powers
between the ministry and the police in order to ensure
independent policing institutions. These are sensitive
issues, and the value of having the heads of United
Nations missions use their good offices to promote
agreement on those issues at the political level with
host Governments, communities and other stakeholders
cannot be overstated.
Strategic reform planning, including benchmarking,
must occur throughout the life cycle of peacekeeping
missions, and a transition and exit strategy must be
developed for when those benchmarks are achieved.
The approach taken by United Nations police should
4/30

20/11/2014

include a strategic but joint development plan, utilizing
project management principles in achieving capacitybuilding, capability development and reform goals,
as well as setting clear targets that are underpinned
by a robust monitoring and evaluation framework to
measure progress and success. The joint development
frameworks used in UNMIL and in Timor-Leste are
clear examples of a good approach.
Reform in such areas as governance structures,
legal and regulatory frameworks, civilian and
Government oversight, ethical leadership and enabling
services are all essential for ensuring sustainable,
democratic policing services and must be included
in any strategic police development plan. Building
professional institutions requires United Nations police
to help host-State counterparts create efficient human
resource systems, transparent budgeting and public
procurement processes and functioning logistics and
fleet management structures, inter alia. In that respect,
the Police Division’s Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping will provide a sound
model for building policing institutions and will allow
for a more structured and standardized approach for
United Nations police.
Thirdly, with respect to effective partnerships, the
sustainability of host-State police development efforts
depends on continued support after the end of United
Nations peacekeeping. Partnership building with
United Nations country teams, coupled with bilateral,
multilateral, regional and local partners, is critical from
the outset of a mission to enabling close coordination
and integration of priorities.
The early engagement of partners at the start-up
of a mission provides for a more collaborative and
cooperative platform for development and reform, and
strengthens transitional arrangements at the end of any
United Nations mission. For instance, in Liberia, the
United States of America has well-placed resources
to continue building the capacity of specialized police
resources, while Sweden has invested logistical and
technical support in the development host-State police
forensic capabilities.
Additionally, the further inclusion of police in the
United Nations delivering as one context should be
considered through a police development coordination
framework to ensure a holistic and cohesive approach
to donor activities in relation to police reform and
institution-building. The Global Focal Point for Police,
Justice and Corrections has also been a useful initiative
14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for coordinating rule-of-law partnerships, as it provides
a mechanism for joint delivery and offers a single point
for United Nations police, justice and corrections
interventions. It has been used successfully in Liberia in
relation to a number of projects designed to strengthen
security-sector responses during the Ebola crisis.
Lastly, with regard to the skills and expertise
that police components need to effectively build
police institutions, in many cases successful
institution-building also calls for transforming
organizational cultures. However, that is a significantly
time- and resource-intensive process and takes years,
even in well-developed organizations. At best, United
Nations police will be able to work with host-State police
colleagues to lay the foundations for a transformation
process, such as establishing clear governance
instruments, appropriate training and revised incentive
structures. But even that requires targeted, highly
specialized skill sets that go way beyond the generalist
police profile that has constituted the bulk of PCC
contributions to United Nations policing over the years.
Experts are needed in such areas as finance,
human resources and fleet and facility management,
and also for strategic planning, legal and policy
development and project management. The complexity
of police-mandated tasks is growing, at a time when
demands for delivery are increasing and accelerating
and resources are becoming more constrained and
scarce.
The continuing mismatch between mandates and
resources must prompt a candid discussion among
missions, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and police-contributing countries as to the type of skill
sets necessary for institution-building that can be made
available to peacekeeping operations and how gaps can
be filled with civilian police experts deployed within
police components. I have seen the success of that
model in Timor-Leste and in Liberia. When we have
the right people with the right skills in the right roles,
the results are decisively positive.
The challenges in obtaining appropriate skill sets
are well known, and considerable efforts have been
made over recent years to develop innovative approaches
to address them. However, we must recognize that
challenges still remain. This is a key issue that could
be considered further by the independent panel during
their strategic review of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions.

S/PV.7317

I believe the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is delivering on its police institution-building mandate,
but I also believe that we can collectively do more.
Opportunities exist for Member States, the Security
Council and the Secretariat to improve our readiness
and our delivery. That can be achieved through careful
and specific mandate development and implementation
that is based on lessons learned and adapted to the
evolving operating environments in which we find
ourselves, delivered through standardized international
approaches to institution-building, supported by the
correct mix of skills and expertise and underpinned
by committed and inclusive partnerships with all the
relevant actors. With the Council’s ongoing support and
influence, we can successfully contribute to sustainable
peace through efficient and effective delivery on
police-related mandates.
I thank you again, Madam President, for affording
me this opportunity to brief the Council on United
Nations police institution-building.
The President: I thank Mr. Hinds — a fine
example of the Australian Federal Police on the
international stage and the Police Commissioner of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia — for his thoughtful
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yiga.
Mr. Yiga: Thank you very much, Madam President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
on issues that touch on United Nations policing in the
field. May I also thank the Council for supporting South
Sudan since 15 December 2013, when hell broke loose
and we began to experience what we are going through
today. I hope that my statement will be able to bring out
the issues that require the Council’s attention in order
to sort out peacekeeping in today’s world.
The performance of United Nations police has
clearly emerged as a critical issue for the success of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Police officers
are commonly seen in post-conflict settings, which are
dominated by military actors and continuing abuses of
civilian populations, as the bridge between transitional
or new Governments and civilians, as the return to law,
order and justice is a much desired peace dividend. The
investment in the rebuilding of police institutions will
always be critical to effecting and maintaining true
public order, management and peace in conflict-torn
and fragile nations. We must endeavour to strengthen
that role in our peacekeeping operations and provide

14-640525/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the United Nations with police officers who are capable
within that arena. To achieve that, the following issues
must be addressed.
First, police-contributing countries must take a
closer look at selection, guidance, training and skills
selection before deployment to make sure that the needs
of peacekeeping operations are met. Secondly, we
must maintain host nation police and United Nations
police relationships without compromising the United
Nations principles of impartiality and while acting
within the requirements of the due diligence policy
with regard to human rights. Thirdly, partnerships with
regional organizations must be enhanced in setting
host nation police standards and developing mission
strategies. Lastly, Member States need to ensure that
police components are adequately equipped to do their
work and that policing and police-related activities are
firmly embedded in Security Council discussions, both
thematic and country specific.
Let me relate what is happening in South Sudan to
justify the statement I have just made. In South Sudan,
the following stand out as both immediate and longterm policing challenges that will require the Council’s
attention.
For the past 50 years, true policing has never been
genuinely offered to the South Sudanese people. United
Nations police are therefore taking on the mantle to
ensure that for the first time good policing — true
policing — is provided to the people of South Sudan.
Policing had largely been done by combatants and
former combatants, whose ethos and experience were
often those of a soldier in battle.
South Sudan is largely a pastoralist and nomadic
society. The policing models require special skills,
policies and equipment to enable United Nations
police to do their work effectively. While the
policies — for example, the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping — will
help harmonize the policing practices that United
Nations police personnel come with, the appropriate
equipment will greatly facilitate their ability to face
the daunting challenges of executing their work. For
example, we are policing a rebel community under the
conditions of a very high proliferation of arms, very
high illiteracy, high poverty levels, disease and extreme
levels of criminality: murder, rape, defilement and all
the big categories of crime. United Nations police are
in the middle of that kind of situation, and the Council’s

6/30

20/11/2014

support is going to be very crucial to make them
perform this role.
The events of 15 December last year ushered in a
crisis that has left over 100,000 internally displaced
persons stranded and taking shelter within Mission
sites. United Nations police require special training
and orientation, skills and equipment to cope with the
challenges of policing those sites, as mandated by the
Security Council.
The contribution of peacekeeping operations to the
building of policing institutions is limited in time. It
must be premised on clear benchmarks — for example,
improving basic law, order and security, which is a key
peace dividend, and laying the foundations on which
other partners will capitalize to continue with the
process of police development, which will help define
good exit strategies for peacekeeping operations.
Let me conclude by restating the strategic objective
of all peace processes, that is, bringing soldiers back
to the barracks and police officers to the streets. That
alone illustrates the need for the Council’s unreserved
attention and support. In terms of equipment, we are
looking for basic equipment. We need mobile police
units that can be set up within five minutes in a situation
such as the protection of civilians. That is the kind of
equipment I am talking about. Even meals ready to eat
would be of great help for our police officers. If a police
officer wants something to eat, he can eat because it is
readily available.
The President: I thank Mr. Yiga as Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan for his excellent briefing, particularly in relation
to the challenges in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Carrilho.
Mr. Carrilho (spoke in French): Let me first offer
my sincere congratulations to Australia and to all the
members of the Security Council for organizing this
meeting. It is a great honour for me to participate in
the discussion and to be able to brief members of the
Council on our actions on the protection of civilians and
the participation of women in peacekeeping missions
with regard to peace and security.
First, the protection of civilians. Although the
implementation of a strategy for the protection
of civilians is now recognized as a cross-cutting
responsibility applicable to all components of a
mission, my briefing will focus on activities undertaken

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

by the police components. The police components
represent the front line of protection of, and contact
with, the local populations. The police components
play an important role in the protection of civilians
and in capacity-building for local police. Beyond
their security role, United Nations police (UNPOL)
are involved in restoring trust between the population
and their police. Beyond preventive diplomacy, United
Nations police contribute to the protection of civilians
by working particularly on two fronts: protection from
physical violence and the establishment of a protective
environment.
For the police component, protection from
physical violence means preventing, deterring and, if
necessary, responding to situations in which civilians
find themselves under threat of physical violence.
Police activities include, among other things, patrols,
protection of the freedom of movement and security on
the roads in order to allow for humanitarian aid and aid
to refugees, as well as maintaining public order.
For the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), the mandate stipulates that the protection
of civilians is the priority. Specifically, UNPOL
participates directly in the protection of civilians by
offering operational support to the national security
forces and directly to the population. I can cite the
following initiatives as examples. A flash-point matrix
is integrated into all components of the Mission. Security
patrols are undertaken 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, by the formed police units, as well as UNPOL,
and there are joint patrols with the international and
Central African security forces. UNPOL has frequently
intervened to extract and protect civilians who found
themselves in dangerous situations.
I turn to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which in the framework
of the fight against organized crime has conducted
significant operations jointly with the Haitian police.
The MINUSTAH police and military components
assist the Haitian police in anti-crime operations, and
that has made possible the apprehension of numerous
criminals and the seizure of significant quantities of
weapons and drugs. MINUSTAH has established a plan
for maintaining order for the camps at risk. Permanent
UNPOL focal points have also been established in the
seven largest camps for displaced persons. With regard
to the restoration of a protective environment, for us
this activity is based on providing assistance to the

S/PV.7317

national security forces and on promoting respect for
human rights.
In MINUSCA, the police intervene in blatant cases
and also in applying urgent temporary measures. On
7 November, the MINUSCA police, together with
their military colleagues, arrested and handed over
to the national judicial authorities 107 criminals for
serious infractions. In the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), United Nations police provide
support in the form of specialized training, specifically
in the fight against sexual violence.
I will now turn to initiatives already in place. In
New York, there is training in protection of civilians.
In 2011, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
finalized the first programme on the protection of
civilians in the framework of pre-deployment training.
The training modules are aimed at establishing a
common understanding of the protection of civilians.
The MINUSCA police have designated focal points that
work with the other Mission components on protection
of civilian issues, which translates into permanent
action on the ground. At МONUSCO, the Working
Group on Protection has created a manual for police
and military alike, which explains the concept of
protection of civilians and provides concrete examples
of problems that police and military might have to face.
I now turn to the issue of women, peace and
security. One of the important measures taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is that of
increasing the number of female police in the ranks.
The United Nations therefore launched its global effort
in 2000, and then again in 2009. Its goal is to have at
least 20 per cent female police officers in 2014. That
initiative includes dialogues with police-contributing
countries and the creation an international network of
women police. In addition, a pilot training programme
and a selection process for women police officers have
allowed for the nprecedented appointment of 2,000
women. In 2014, three training courses were conducted
in Rwanda, Burkina Faso and Cameroon. The presence
of women in UNPOL teams increases the ability
of missions to build relationships of trust with the
population, especially with women. The role of female
police officers is essential to creating an environment
in which the victims, particularly victims of rape or
sexual violence, feel a sufficient level of trust to come
forward and report the crimes.

14-640527/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The police components throughout all missions
use the female police presence to improve access to
and support of populations, particularly women, and to
raise awareness of gender-related problems among the
national authorities. For example, in MINUSTAH the
police have established a Gender Unit. It is specially
dedicated to the prevention of, and the fight against,
sexual violence in the camps for internally displaced
persons. UNPOL is also working to increase the
recruitment and the deployment of women in the police
stations.
The presence of female police officers in UNPOL
contributes to the acceptance of women by serving as
examples for their male colleagues. In Timor-Leste, the
police component established a Vulnerable Persons Unit
tasked with investigating domestic violence, sexual
abuse and human trafficking and providing protection
to victims of sexual crimes. During the transition, the
Unit was integrated into the Criminal Investigation
Division of the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste.
UNPOL and its local counterparts have also
cooperated in order to include women in police
services. Networks for female police officers were
created in peacekeeping operations in the following
missions: the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, MINUSCA, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, MINUSTAH, MONUSCO and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). The
UNPOL networks have enabled the establishment of
similar networks in local police services.
With regard to the structural reform of national
police, United Nations police is encouraging local
police to set quotas for the recruitment of women.
Several countries have established such quotas,
including Liberia, which, with the support of UNMIL,
has established a quota of 20 per cent. In Afghanistan,
the police service of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan plays a coordinating role and
provides technical advice for the implementation of
the Afghan Democratic Policing Project, a programme
that aims to strengthen the capacity of female police
officers and improve access to justice for women and
children.
What are the challenges faced by the United Nations
police? With regard to Security Council resolutions,
the best way to guide the missions, including their
police components, is to ensure that the resolutions are
particularly explicit concerning the priority activities

8/30

20/11/2014

and resources that have been authorized. With regard
to the transition between different peacekeeping
operations — as was the case with the peacekeeping
operations of the African Union and the United Nations
in MINUSCA — there is a need to increase the number
of female police officers. Despite the efforts deployed,
the road ahead remains long. Certain challenges are
tied to recruiting obstacles arising from directives or
existing practices in the Member States in question. It
is important to reiterate our call to Member States to
consider the implementation of a policy aimed at having
20 per cent of its deployed police officers be women.
In conclusion, strong leadership, such as that of
MINUSTAH and MINUSCA, within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and in the United Nations
police is necessary to define and carry out the strategies
that enable the implementation of police mandates
conferred unto UNPOL by the Security Council.
I thank the Council for this opportunity. I would
like to underscore that we will do our utmost to continue
to ensure the credibility of the United Nations police,
including in its protection of civilians mission, and to
maintain the trust of the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Carrillo for his
informative briefing.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/828, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic
of Korea, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2185 (2014).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia.

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Australia deeply appreciates the important role of
policing in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, reflecting
the lessons we have learned as a contributor to peace
operations in our region of the Indo-Pacific — from
Cambodia to Solomon Islands to Timor-Leste and
elsewhere. We are pleased that the Council is focusing
on policing issues in countries emerging from conflict.
Australia’s close friend and neighbour Timor-Leste
provides a striking example of the vital importance
of building effective host-nation police and other law
enforcement institutions. In 2006, four years after
Timor-Leste’s independence, violence broke out in Dili,
with Timorese police and military fighting each other
in the streets, dozens of deaths and over 150,000 people
displaced. The Council authorized a new peacekeeping
operation — the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste. And Australia led an International
Stabilisation Force, including 200 Australian police.
The focus of those police transitioned over time
from stabilization to institution-building. Just two
years later, Timor-Leste faced another shock — dual
assassination attempts against President Ramos-Horta
and Prime Minister Gusmão — yet overall law and
order remained intact. That was due to Timor-Leste’s
efforts in the interim, with United Nations and other
international support, to build its own police and other
rule-of-law institutions.
Police are the public face of security, to whom
populations should turn for protection. That is why
the work of the United Nations on policing is so
vital. It can repair the community’s faith and trust in
local authorities, build a sense of safety and security
and lay the groundwork for long-term stability and
development.
Australia has invested heavily in international
police peacekeeping. The Australian Federal Police
International Deployment Group is one of the world’s
few stand-alone deployable police peacekeeping
capacities, and the first in the world to receive United
Nations recognition for its predeployment training. In
the last 12 months alone, the Group provided training
to over 3,500 law and justice officials from 20 nations.
This year, we celebrate 50 years of Australian police
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping.
Over the years, there has been a massive increase
in the number of police deployed by the United Nations.
Just 20 years ago, there were around only 1,600 police
in United Nations missions; today there are over 12,300.
And the policing-related mandates authorized by the

S/PV.7317

Council have become increasingly complex. We must
ensure that United Nations police components are as
effective as possible in achieving those mandates.
This meeting and resolution 2185 (2014), which we
have just adopted, are landmark steps. The resolution
includes clear and strategic guidance for United
Nations police, and practical, concrete measures to
improve their effectiveness. It reflects the breadth of
contemporary developments in United Nations policing,
including the adoption of modern technologies and
the use of specialized police teams in areas such as
sexual and gender-based violence and complex serious
crime. It articulates the relevance of policing across the
areas of focus of the Council, from the protection of
civilians — which is central to all the United Nations
work — to combatting transnational organized crime
and terrorism, countering violent extremism and
fighting impunity. I will highlight three elements.
First, with regard to training, standards and
guidance, over 100 countries contribute police to United
Nations missions, each with their own nuanced policing
approaches. The resolution calls on the SecretaryGeneral to continue to work on unified standards,
guidance and training.
Secondly, building police institutions is vital to the
United Nations work on justice, corrections and the rule
of law, but it is not easy. It requires highly specialized
skills. The resolution asks the Secretary-General to
focus on ensuring police components have the right
expertise to achieve this. The political dimensions of
reform can often be as important as technical aspects.
The Secretary-General’s envoys must make that a focus
of their good offices work. Many arms of the United
Nations work on policing reform, and the resolution
calls for better coordination of those efforts.
Thirdly, on women and peace and security, in order
to be effective, police must recognize the particular
needs of women. The best way to ensure that is to
involve women in outreach and decision-making and to
have more female police officers, so that police forces
better reflect the diversity of the communities in which
they operate and can better respond to their needs.
A useful example is Vanuatu, where Australia
funded the establishment of female police barracks,
allowing large numbers of women to participate in
and graduate from recruit training and in turn become
mentors and role models. This has helped dramatically
redress the gender imbalance in the Vanuatu Police

14-640529/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Force. That issue was also raised by Mr. Ladsous, and
I ask Commissioner Carrilho what more we can do
to encourage and support more women to join police
forces in countries hosting United Nations missions.
Today’s resolution paves the way for continued
Council focus on policing issues, including an annual
meeting with heads of police components, so as to ensure
that the Council’s decisions on policing are informed
by the actual experiences of police components in the
field. It makes the case for the Secretary-General’s
forthcoming strategic review of peace operations to
deal with policing issues.
Policing is an integral part of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding work. Importantly, the
development of effective, accountable and communityfocused policing institutions is an integral part of
responsible exit strategies for peacekeeping operations.
It is Australia’s objective that today’s meeting and
resolution make a practical contribution to enduring
peace, security and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important briefing on
expanding the role of policing and peacekeeping in postconflict peacebuilding. Your presence here today amply
gives this meeting its due merit. I also thank Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and our police commissioners, Greg Hinds
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL),
Fred Yiga of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and Luis Miguel Carrilho of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
for their informative presentations.
As the concept note (S/2014/788, annex) prepared
by the Australian presidency reminds us, over the
past 20 years we have seen an unprecedented growth
of police components in peacekeeping and special
political missions. That is due to the changing nature
of peacekeeping, which, in the past few years, has
increasingly been facing situations where there is no
peace to keep and where mass atrocities are committed.
The role of the police has therefore become more
important and more complex as it moves away from
its traditional mission of observation to that of the
protection of civilians.
10/30

20/11/2014

Police in peacekeeping missions are also called
upon to provide operational policing support across
the entire spectrum of policing duties, including the
protection of very important persons, the protection of
the security of key installations, escort duties, crowd
control and humanitarian assistance. That is done in
parallel with the crucial mandate of supporting host
countries, both in conflict and post-conflict settings,
in strengthening the rule of law through the rebuilding
and reform of their policing and other law enforcement
institutions. That has flowed from the recognition of
the central role that host-State policing institutions
can play in the restoration and maintenance of law and
order, security and stability in post-conflict contexts,
including in building trust between the Government
and the population, with police officers often serving
as the main interface between the Government and the
community on security issues.
As the seventh largest contributor of United Nations
police, Rwanda is well aware of those rapidly growing
demands on police components, and that operational
context has guided us in the ways we prepare our
contingents. In recognition of the importance of the
police component of peacekeeping operations, Rwanda
supported resolution 2185 (2014), which we have just
adopted and which outlines practical steps to improve
the effectiveness of police components in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as the need for policing expands in peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding environments.
We are very much aware of the importance of police
contingents in peacekeeping operations. Nonetheless, it
is important that the Council take serious note of the
letter sent by the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries to the President of the
Council recalling that United Nations policing is an
integral part of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and that the Security Council should not act in any way
to encroach on the mandate of the General Assembly,
especially the mandate of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the Fourth Committee of
the General Assembly.
As we know, a mission is best executed when using
an integrated and coordinated approach. Therefore, all
components of peacekeeping operations, mostly the
military and the police, need to be very compatible
and complementary. I have just a few comments and
questions for the heads of police components who are
here with us today, as requested in the concept note.

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

On UNMIL, we thank Commissioner Greg Hinds,
of course, and his entire team for their efforts and their
support to the Government of Liberia’s response to
Ebola. We would be grateful to hear him speak more
on the progress in the implementation of the UNMIL
road map relating to reforming and restructuring the
Liberian police force and law-and-order institutions,
especially factoring in the Ebola outbreak. I would also
be grateful if he could share with us his experience with
regard to the deployment of the Liberian police force
throughout the territory of the country.
On MINUSCA, the United Nations police
has a critical role to play in protecting civilians,
re-establishing the rule of law and assisting the
transitional Government in the fight against impunity.
In that connection, I have a question for Commissioner
Carrilho. Given the challenging operating environment
in the Central African Republic, how can the Council
ensure that individual police officers and formed police
units are adequately equipped and appropriately trained
to carry out their mandate? What do they need in order
to perform their mandated tasks that they do not already
have? Does he think that deploying more specialized
protection or support units would boost MINUSCA’s
efforts to protect civilians and, if so, are there certain
areas of expertise that he urgently needs to fill?
I also have a question for Commissioner Fred
Yiga. The UNMISS mandate was reinforced so as to
improve the protection of civilians and the monitoring
of human rights and to support the implementation of
the cessation of hostilities agreement. Are there best
practices that UNMISS police could share with others
in implementing that mandate? I think that question
can also be answered by other police commissioners
with respect to the best practices in their Missions.
We all know that the Government of South Sudan has
the primary responsibility to protect its people. Does
Commissioner Yiga foresee a time when UNMISS
can hand over those tasks to the South Sudanese
authorities? It is important that we find ways to build
their capacities. We were told that he recently trained
the South Sudanese police. Is there a framework that
he put in place to monitor and coach his trainees in
implementing their police duties?
I have an additional question for both
Commissioners Carrilho and Yiga. Given the need
to be able to rapidly respond to the violence in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, how are they
reinforcing coordination with the military component

S/PV.7317

of their Missions? Is the division of labour and areas
of responsibility between the military and police clear,
and do they see some overlaps?
On a final note, allow me to share Rwanda’s
experience as one of the biggest contributors of
female police officers to United Nations missions. As
the Rwandan Constitution requires the appointment
of women to at least 30 per cent of the posts in
decision-making organs, a third of Rwandan police
officers are women. Therefore, we have been able
to deploy female police officers to United Nations
missions. They are fulfilling critical tasks as individual
police offers and members of formed police units in
policing communities, connecting with local women
and offering expertise in reporting and investigating
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence.
Unfortunately, not all countries have reached the
point where they can draw from large pools of qualified
female candidates ready for deployment to the field or
to United Nations Headquarters for senior directorship
posts. Perhaps relaxing some of the rigid recruitment
requirements, such as requiring 15 years of relevant
experience in some cases, would allow more member
States that would like to contribute female officers
to step up and do so. It is, of course, necessary for
member States to create incentives for women to enter
police forces, but it also requires a little creativity and
flexibility from the United Nations Secretariat, without
compromising the quality of the candidates.
The President: I acknowledge the significant
contribution that Rwanda has made to United Nations
policing efforts, including, as I understand, as the
fourth-largest contributor of female police officers.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks Australia for organizing this first
meeting of the Security Council on the role of United
Nations police in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
fact that you, Madam President, are presiding over this
meeting demonstrates your country’s commitment to
this matter. I also wish to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, as well as Commissioners Greg Hinds, Fred
Yiga and Luis Miguel Carrilho for their briefings.
This morning, in adopting resolution 2185 (2014),
the first stand-alone resolution on policing, the Security
Council has made a practical and useful contribution
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations and
to security sector reform. Luxembourg was therefore

14-6405211/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

a sponsor of the resolution initiated by Australia.
As recalled by the concept note for this meeting
(S/2014/788, annex), the past 20 years have seen an
unprecedented increase in the number of contingents of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. The missions
have grown ever more complex and diverse, operating
in situations of increasing difficulty that are subject
to rapid deterioration. The briefings we have just
heard from the heads of the police components in
Liberia, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
have amply shown that. It is therefore correct for the
Security Council to devote increased attention to police
components.
The protection of civilians lies at the heart of
the mandate of most United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Police components are a key player in
the proper implementation of those mandates. It is
therefore essential for police components to be well
trained and qualified, and for them to be aware of the
need for civilian protection. They must have sufficient
capacity and the necessary resources for the effective
protection of civilians, in particular woman and
children, who are the first victims of conflicts. Today,
as we commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
we welcome the fact that the resolution just adopted has
taken that aspect into account. Indeed, resolution 2185
(2014) reiterates that the protection of children in armed
conflict must be an important factor in any general
strategy aimed at conflict resolution or peacebuilding.
It also underscores the importance of strengthening
coordination between police components and the
advisers responsible for the protection of children and
women. It also encourages the training of police prior
to their deployment, through role-playing, in order to
strengthen their ability to prevent sexual and genderbased violence and to reinforce their capacities in the
area of child protection. That provision is in line with
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict.
In the interactive spirit of this meeting, I would like
to ask Commissioners Yiga and Саrrilho to tell us how
they view the way in which the protection of women
and children is being implemented on the ground in
South Sudan and the Central African Republic. I would
also like to know how the coordination between the
police components and the advisers responsible for the
protection of women and children is working out within
the frameworks of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United

12/30

20/11/2014

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Would the designation of focal points for the protection
of children within police components help to further
strengthen that coordination? And what measures
could be taken by the Security Council to strengthen
the ability of the police components in UNMISS and
MINUSCA to protect civilians?
Allow me now to say a few words about the issue
of women and peace and security. As the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has
noted, it is clear that female police officers make an
essential contribution to the work of police components,
above all when missions are required to interact with
women affected by sexual violence during conflict. It
is therefore important to redouble efforts to increase
their number and to eliminate any obstacles to the
participation of women in police components. Female
police officers also need to have access to all levels
of responsibility in the field and at United Nations
Headquarters.
As guardians of peace, the police are the most
visible face of the State for citizens. They need to meet
the most stringent criteria in terms of professionalism,
quality and discipline. In that respect, we believe that
the mentoring dimension in the training of national
police by United Nations police components is essential,
as is the training of more senior officials. I take this
opportunity to ask Commissioner Hinds what specific
measures are being taken in Liberia to ensure that the
capacity-building of national Liberian police is lasting,
in other words, that the local police can function in
the long term without the support of United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
To conclude, I would like to express Luxembourg’s
deep gratitude to the more than 12,500 police
officers deployed in the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and special political missions.
Alongside peacekeepers and civilian personnel, those
police officers carry out essential work, often under
difficult conditions, in the implementation of the
mandates that the Council defines. We applaud their
commitment, as we salute the memory of those who
have given their lives in the exercise of their duty in the
service of the United Nations.
The President: I thank the representative of
Luxembourg for her country’s support for the resolution
adopted this morning.

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7317

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you,
Madam President, for being here and for presiding over
today’s meeting, the first ever Security Council meeting
dedicated to policing, one of the most important tools in
our collective arsenal to prevent violence and conflict.
Your presence here is a testament to Australia’s deep
and enduring commitment to improving United Nations
policing in the context of peacekeeping operations.

ensure the swift deployment of United Nations police
units from Benin, Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo. It
is why we commend the recent commitments of police
personnel by Bangladesh, China, Finland, Mongolia,
Nepal and Rwanda, announced at the peacekeeping
summit co-chaired by Vice-President Biden in
September. Those contributions are critical to filling
the current gap between capacity and need.

I had the privilege recently of engaging with
Commissioner Hinds, the Australian head of the United
Nations police in Liberia. He was extremely impressive
in a very difficult operating environment. Of course,
every one of the missions represented here presents a
difficult operating environment of various kinds. So, I
thank those gentlemen for their great leadership.

United Nations police are showing they can
handle complex duties such as protecting civilians
and maintaining law and order. In South Sudan it is
the responsibility of just three United Nations formed
police units, made up of 350 police from Bangladesh
and Nepal, together with 500 United Nations individual
police officers, to provide internal security in nine
camps that are sheltering approximately 100,000
internally displaced persons. People who support the
Government and people who oppose it live in close
proximity in those camps — as do people from ethnic
groups that have been pitted against one another in
South Sudan’s brutal civil war — making the job of
policing the camps an extremely challenging one. The
United Nations gets and deserves a great deal of credit
for opening its gates in South Sudan to people fleeing
violence, but it is also worth singling out the United
Nations police, who are responsible for preventing
violence once people are inside those gates. In the
Central African Republic’s capital of Bangui, five
formed police units and 100 individual police officers,
together with a pair of military battalions, are fully
responsible for public security in the city from 4 p.m.
to 8 a.m. every single day.

We meet at a time of growing demand for United
Nations peacekeeping missions. In April, the Security
Council authorized the deployment of 1,800 United
Nations police for a single peacekeeping mission in
the Central African Republic. That is more than all the
United Nations police deployed in every peacekeeping
mission in 1994, when there were only 1,677 all told.
In 2012 there were 56 authorized formed police units;
today there are 72, so we are seeing that kind of
difference in just a two-year period.
The increasing demand for United Nations police
reflects our evolving understanding of their role.
We recognize that they are central to ensuring the
overarching objective of peacekeeping missions, which
is not merely to stop conflicts but to build a sustainable
peace in their place. Given that, what we ask of United
Nations police has evolved too, from passive monitoring
of local police performance to taking on many lawenforcement duties and the training of host-country
forces. That is logical. If one of the main reasons we
need peacekeeping missions in the first place is the
fragility or utter lack of public security, it follows that
for countries to be able to protect their own people, and
for missions to be able to eventually wind down, we
have to strengthen host-country law enforcement. Our
ability to build more accountable, professional police in
host countries is the sine qua non of broader efforts to
re-establish — or in some instances to establish for the
first time — the rule of law.
That is why the United States is investing in
strengthening United Nations police forces. This year
alone we have provided training for 15 formed police
units that have been deployed to five different United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and equipment to

Given the rising demand for and demands on United
Nations police, it is remarkable that this is our first ever
Security Council meeting dedicated to the issue, and
the first time that Council members are being briefed
by police contingents. That is indicative of a broader
lack of communication from the field to the Council.
The Council will benefit tremendously from having
more insight into the challenges and problems in the
field. We must establish fluid lines of communication
that enable missions to swiftly share information from
the field. That should not mean only through Security
Council meetings such as this one; we should have
multiple means of getting regular feedback on what
is working and what is not. That will make operations
more accountable and more effective, and we will be
more helpful in supporting police contingents in their
hour of need.

14-6405213/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Rising demands and responsibilities are also why
we must do a better job of tracking performance. To
that end, we welcome the development of the Strategic
Guidance Framework, particularly the focus on human
rights, the protection of civilians and transparency.
The United States Government participated in the
regional consultation on the Framework in Norway,
and we found that session appropriately critical and
constructive. That approach — learning in real time
from successes and failures in the field, and bringing
Member States into the discussion — is the right way
to address the increasingly complex challenges that
United Nations police face. For the Framework to be
effective in the real world, it must be made actionable
for police leadership on the ground, and we must keep
adapting and improving it, based on the feedback of
those who know best.
In that spirit, we see our questions today for the
Police Commissioners as an initial exchange in what we
would like to be a much more regular back-and-forth. In
conclusion, I have two questions.
First, the protection of civilians is central to the
mandates of modern peacekeeping operations. It is also
a fundamental responsibility of law enforcement. Yet
as we have often highlighted in the Council, in practice
missions routinely fail to live up to that mandate. For all
those here who are active in areas where the issue has
arisen — at some point in the life of a mission — of how
police in particular can help implement the mandate to
protect civilians, I would like to ask what obstacles they
have encountered in fulfilling that responsibility. Do
the police under their command have clear guidance
on what the protection of civilians entails, and how
it should be carried out? What steps can Police
Commissioners take, or have already taken, in the
field to ensure that police from very different policing
cultures, and from different contributing countries,
have similar interpretations of what the protection of
civilians means? That is of course also an issue on the
troop contributors’ side, but it bears exposition and
explanation on the policing side too.
Secondly, and lastly, in understanding the critical
role that police can play in building up the capacity
of host countries’ law-enforcement bodies, one of
our collective challenges is balancing the need for
providing law and order in certain circumstances
where there is a policing vacuum, while at the same
time rapidly and intensively training local police so that
they can re-assume their responsibilities. The presence

14/30

20/11/2014

of international police cannot become an excuse for
local police not to step up, and that is a risk. I would be
very grateful if each of the Police Commissioners could
speak to that question of balancing the importance
of actually providing law and order when civilians
are in need of security against the importance of not
becoming a crutch for host countries. That is a very
challenging issue, and we welcome any insight that can
be offered as to what the Council could do to remove
obstacles the police have in strengthening host-country
law enforcement on the ground.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Commissioners
Hinds, Yiga and Carrilho for their briefings. Lithuania
welcomes the adoption of the first stand-alone resolution
(2185) (2014)) on United Nations police, which we
were happy to sponsor. We appreciate this first-ever
opportunity for the Security Council to speak directly
with the heads of United Nations police components. It
should become a regular event and practice, and should
be as interactive as possible.
With United Nations peacekeeping becoming
increasingly multidimensional, the success of a mission
depends, more than ever, not just on its military
component but also on its skilled police officers,
who are on the front lines when it comes to stopping
community violence, supporting victims, holding
criminals accountable and helping to build national
justice institutions. A dedicated Council discussion
on United Nations police was long overdue. The rapid
growth of United Nations police personnel, which
started with deployments to the former Yugoslavia in
the early 1990s, has continued ever since. The numbers
of United Nations police have doubled in the last 15
years and now account for more than 12 per cent of
United Nations uniformed personnel. They are deployed
in 12 of 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Only a few years after joining the United Nations,
Lithuania began deploying police officers to missions
in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. Today
our officers are present in Haiti, Liberia and Cyprus, as
well in the missions in Afghanistan and Ukraine of the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
I would like to briefly focus on two topics selected
for today’s discussion, the protection of civilians and
the importance of police training.
The protection of civilians by police components
is often front-and-centre of United Nations police
14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

deployments. While military components intervene to
protect civilians under imminent threat, United Nations
police provide a key contribution by patrolling in areas
of increased risk, managing public order, facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and ensuring
security in camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. Nowhere is that more evident than in Liberia,
where the challenges faced by the police officers of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and
Liberian National Police in fighting the Ebola outbreak
are enormous and deserve our respect and admiration.
At the same time, the outbreak has exposed persistent
weaknesses in the Liberian police force, such as
insufficient skills and mobility, corruption and a
lack of accountability. Those shortcomings should be
addressed once the crisis of Ebola is behind us.
In South Sudan, what started as a political crisis
is now a humanitarian catastrophe with deep ethnic
divides. The police component of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has the tremendous
task of operating in overcrowded camps amid rampant
crime, increasing tensions along ethnic lines and evergrowing sexual violence. In order to ensure successful
implementation of its realigned mandate, the Mission
should provide its personnel with mediation and
community engagement skills. Additional deployments
of women police officers will be essential to improving
the protection of women and children and addressing
sexual violence in displacement camps.
In the Central African Republic, police will be
instrumental in restoring law and order and stopping
violence, violent crime and looting. Yet police officers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
should not be given a task that extends beyond their
capabilities. A more robust United Nations military
presence is needed to confront the heavily armed
militias responsible for violations of the ceasefire and
attacks against civilians.
Protection against sexual and gender-based violence
remains a key priority in implementing protection-ofcivilian mandates. United Nations police are again
expected to be at the forefront of an effective response.
In that regard, we welcome proactive approaches, such
as the deployment of a specialized United Nations
police team in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti to support national police in preventing and
investigating cases of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as the outreach to sexual violence survivors by

S/PV.7317

female United Nations police officers in Liberia and
Darfur. Furthermore, women police officers do not
just serve and protect, they also inspire local girls and
women to stand up for their own rights and to become
active participants in their country’s future. They serve
as role models and encourage women to join national
law-and-order and justice institutions, thus enabling
them to contribute to the security of their communities
long after the United Nations is gone.
Ensuring proper United Nations police training
is both a challenge and an essential element of each
mission. Officers often come from diverse national
police forces with different perceptions about the police
role in the community. In addition to an unfamiliar
location, they face more hostile environments, poor
infrastructure and difficulties dealing with the host
State police authorities. The United Nations and the
police-contributing countries should do their utmost to
ensure that the entire police component is prepared to
act as a single team united by the mission’s mandate.
Just as the objectives of United Nations missions
should be closely adapted to the situation of each
host State, so should the training. While conducting
actual police work might be necessary in countries
where national law-enforcement structures are weak
or absent, it can only be an interim measure. United
Nations police officers must be capable and willing to
pass on their experience, with a view to rebuilding the
host State’s capabilities and handing over policing to the
national authorities, functioning within the framework
of the rule of law and democratic civilian oversight.
Police components, including mission leadership, must
receive relevant predeployment training, in particular
on the protection of civilians, women, children and
their human rights as well as addressing sexual and
gender-based violence. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support guidelines on
United Nations police in implementing protection-ofcivilians mandates.
Finally, United Nations police must ensure they
remain close to the communities they serve. Speaking
the local language is often indispensable for the
effective implementation of community policing and
the training of national police authorities. We welcome
the partnership between the International Organization
of la Francophonie and the Police Division aimed at
increasing the number of francophone police officers.

14-6405215/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Before concluding, I should like to ask a few
questions of the participating Police Commissioners.
With regard to UNMISS, what additional measures are
being taken to ensure that UNMISS police officers have
sufficient skills to mediate, defuse tensions and address
the needs of the victims of sexual and gender-based
violence? With regard to MINUSCA, how will United
Nations police assist the national authorities in arresting
individuals responsible for crimes and violence? With
regard to United Nations Mission in Liberia, how will
the Mission adapt its efforts in building the Liberian
National Police, following the lessons learned during
the Ebola crisis?
The President: I thank Lithuania for its support of
the resolution 2185 (2014), adopted this morning.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too would like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and each of the Police Commissioners for their concise
and very useful message, which allows us to take
stock of the importance of the role played by police
components in peacekeeping operations, a message that
we also understand relates to the challenges we face.
Through them, I would also like to pay tribute to the
women and men who make up these police components.
I pay tribute to them for their commitment and devotion
in the service of the cause that we are defending at the
United Nations.
I would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing today’s debate and for the first Security
Council resolution 2185 (2014) on United Nations
police, a resolution that recognizes a major evolution in
peacekeeping operations.
That transformation can be explained by
the transformation in the international strategic
environment and the evolution of conflicts, which have
led to systematizing the presence of police components
in peacekeeping operations. Police components are
today making a vital contribution, and I think that
has been clearly acknowledged in the stabilization of
situations.
I wish to emphasize three major aspects of the
increased role of police in peacekeeping operations.
First, in qualitative terms, the effective contribution
of police components to civilian protection, together
with other components of peacekeeping operations,
requires that police and gendarmes be well equipped,
not only for their own protection but also when it comes
16/30

20/11/2014

to the necessary communication resources for a strong
chain of command and to serve as responsive mobile
units. They need to be trained for specific missions,
notably in combating violence against women and
children, as many of us have stated. The deployment
of women police officers is an essential aspect
for reassuring vulnerable victims of human rights
violations. Achieving that goal is vital, as local police
will help to progressively rebuild trust between the
population and local police forces.
Secondly, these changes require more staff and
expertise — a message that the Police Commissioners
have related. Apart from traditional public security
tasks, United Nations mission police components are also
being asked to participate in rebuilding and developing
the policing capacities of host countries. In liaison with
host countries, police components of peacekeeping
missions now need to be further supported through
more specialization, based on specific recognized
expertise as well as the ability of police to speak the host
country’s languages. The great success of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti team, which
is responsible for training Haitian police to combat
sexual violence and gender-based violence, I believe is
a good example. Robust mobilization by Member States
should make it possible to further deploy such teams
for peacekeeping operations in host countries. On that
issue, we should also focus on the need to transfer
to host countries standardized norms, not national
police expertise, to facilitate national ownership. I
welcome in that respect the work already done and
under way by the Police Division of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which for several years
has been establishing operational guidelines and
standards, notably the Strategic Guidance Framework
for International Police Peacekeeping.
Thirdly, the fight against organized crime to
support the host country and to rebuild its capacities
should be an integral part of policing activities during
peacekeeping operations. Transnational organized
crime is sometimes associated with terrorism, and
a global response is needed. We believe that greater
cooperation among the Secretariat, host countries,
regional and subregional organizations, INTERPOL
and regional police organizations could be achieved
through training and the sharing of operational
information and expertise. Of course, that should be
accompanied by ever-closer cooperation between the
police and justice sectors that is in line with the same
final objective, that is, rebuilding the population’s trust
14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and neutralizing criminals, thereby making it possible
to rebuild the rule of law. In that regard, following on a
question raised by other delegations, I would like to ask
Police Commissioner Carrilho if he could tell us a bit
more about the joint task force in Bangui, particularly
its role in civilian protection. We believe that to be a
very interesting development that could perhaps serve
as a model for other United Nations policing activities.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that United
Nations policing challenges remain numerous. They
include the need for good coordination between police
components and civilian and military components, the
requisite ownership on the part of host countries of the
efforts carried out by peacekeeping operations, the use
of modern technologies to protect personnel in carrying
out their tasks and, as I already mentioned, the ability
to speak the host country language in order to restore
confidence between the local population and State
institutions. All of that should enable us to have United
Nations police who are more professional and effective.
The recommendations of the panel of experts on
the strategic review of peacekeeping should provide
useful proposals in that regard. France looks forward
with great interest to receiving those recommendations,
and reiterates its readiness to contribute to this debate.
The President: I thank the representative of France
for the issues he has raised. I acknowledge France’s
support for resolution 2185 (2014).
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for your important initiative in
convening this debate. I fully appreciate the exceptional
role played by the police components of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. I also thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
exhaustive briefing on the challenges encountered by
United Nations peacekeeping police. I also thank the
Police Commissioners of the peacekeeping missions in
Liberia, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
for the information they have shared on the importance
of expertise, training operations and capacities to
ensure the success of peacekeeping operations. We
are also grateful for the briefing on the protection of
civilians and women.
We commend the men and women of all nationalities
who have served under the United Nations banner to
keep the peace. We hail the Blue Helmets who have
assumed the noble duty of helping to prevent armed

S/PV.7317

conflict, including in the Middle East. We Jordanians
are proud to be among those nations that have made
significant contributions to international efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are fully vested in this noble approach at the highest
level. Our commitment to this duty is rooted in our
unswerving devotion to respect for human rights and the
rule of law in the establishment of a safe and sustainable
environment that offers stability and a decent life for
peoples suffering through war and conflict.
Since 1983, Jordan has participated in more than
20 United Nations peacekeeping operations and several
special political missions. We have participated under
various peacebuilding and peacekeeping mandates
focused on police reform and capacity-building. Our
experienced officers have contributed to those efforts.
We have deployed 21,556 troops and 5,254 police
officers to such missions.
There is an urgent need to improve the performance
and capacities of police components to implement the
mandates of Security Council resolutions, especially
in the light of the recent surge in demand for police,
in terms of both numbers and quality, in peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding exercises. Given the
complexity of these tasks, the role of the police has
evolved from its traditional oversight and monitoring
tasks to diverse capacity-building efforts. Resolution
2185 (2014), adopted today — for which we thank the
delegation of Australia — represents a cornerstone of
our work and is strictly aligned to the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping
adopted and updated by the Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Resolution 2185 (2014) underscores the criticial
role played by the police components of peacekeeping
operations and addresses practical measures to improve
police performance in the implementation of mandates.
Through the resolution, the United Nations will be in a
position to ensure the adequate participation of Member
States in peacekeeping operations by providing officers
and formed police units with specialized skills that
meet international criteria for the implementation of
mandates with professionalism and expertise. That will
allow us to promote security and reduce the catastrophic
impact of conflicts on civilians, while protecting them
from a range of physical and psychological torments
and threats. It will also help to strengthen security
capacities in all their aspects.

14-6405217/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Jordan is considered to play a lead role through its
participation in peacekeeping operations. Above and
beyond the expertise that our country has developed
in this area, our officers have accumulated years
of experience in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
My Government is striving to further develop these
capacities by enhancing specialized training so as to
respond to the growing and diverse needs in undertaking
the broad array of tasks assigned. A higher degree of
expertise will also increase the trust of citizens and
civilians in our police. Jordanian police officers make
use of United Nations training curricula to enhance
the skills they deploy in formed police units and as
advisers.
I have a question for Police Commissioner Hinds
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. What are
the lessons learned by and value added to the police
experience of the Ebola crisis? We know that police
components do not work in the medical field, yet they
have had to meet this additional challenge.
Next, I have another question for the Police
Commissioners in general. What is the level of
exhaustive and complementary planning between the
military and the police, on the one hand, and the local
administrative authorities on the ground, on the other,
in implementing mandates while increasing efficiency
and avoiding duplications of effort, wherever possible?
Lastly, we wish to thank the Government of
Australia for this very important initiative, which
will have a positive impact on the ground and in the
performance by the police components of their various
duties.
The President: I thank Jordan for its support
for resolution 2185 (2014). I also acknowledge with
sincere appreciation Jordan’s contribution as the largest
provider of police to United Nations missions.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
today. I should like to congratulate Australia on the
adoption of the Security Council’s first-ever resolution
on policing (resolution 2185 (2014)), and for holding this
inaugural briefing by heads of police components. It is
really a great idea. The United Kingdom looks forward
to this becoming at least an annual meeting, and to
hearing more from police components in the course of
our normal Security Council business. We think that
is an extremely important part of the work that we do.

18/30

20/11/2014

This debate, we believe, is long overdue. The United
Nations first deployed police to the Congo in 1960. In
the past 20 years, there has been a significant increase
in demand. The United States set out the figures, which
represent an eightfold increase in 20 years. As we heard
from our briefers today, United Nations policemen and
policewomen are building the capacities of host-State
police, providing operational support, and in some
cases actually acting as interim police and protecting
civilians.
The need for effective United Nations police
is likely to continue to increase in the future. The
nature of conflict is changing. New challenges require
the Council to change how we respond. Deploying a
large number of military troops may not always be the
right approach to dealing with failing States. Instead,
an effective United Nations policing component can
sometimes be a more flexible and effective way to
support countries. This is especially true in contexts in
which the lines between political violence and criminal
violence have become blurred. I thought that came out
particularly clearly from Mr. Carrilho’s briefing. In
that context I would like to ask just one question, which
is: In the Central African Republic, where we have put
a much stronger emphasis on policing in the mandate,
have we got the balance right, or is it not enough?
Moreover, as the military components of peacekeeping
missions start to draw down, such as in Haiti, United
Nations police could provide an important bridge. This
model of a “police-keeping mission” could become a
Security Council tool in future.
An effective United Nations policing response
to these new challenges requires that they place the
safety and security of civilians at the centre of all
their activities. Sir Robert Peel, the British Home
Secretary who established London’s Metropolitan
Police in 1829, was the first to articulate the principles
of “policing by consent”. Nearly 200 years later, these
Peelian principles remain the central tenet of British
policing and for many other countries around the world.
Nowhere are these principles more important than in
countries that have been ravaged by conflict. Stability
requires citizens to trust their police and to perceive
them as legitimate. We must work together to ensure
that United Nations policing has the tools and skills to
help build police forces that focus on the welfare and
security of citizens.

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7317

In order for the United Nations police components
to achieve this, we would suggest focusing on three
main areas, and I think that they have come out very
clearly from the briefings that we have heard this
morning.

also operate in this area. The joint Department of
Peacekeeping Operations-United Nations Development
Programme global focal point for police, justice and
corrections is a welcome step towards this on internal
coordination, but more needs to be done.

First, we need reform at Headquarters and in the
field to strengthen international policing doctrine,
standards and training to ensure that the United
Nations police is ready to face future challenges. We
strongly support Australia’s call for this today. There
are several promising initiatives under way, including
the development of the Strategic Guidance Framework,
which is a single policy to guide all United Nations
policing activity. Greg Hinds spoke to this in his
presentation, and it is important. But more needs to
be done. For example, there is still no standardized
approach to how training is delivered. We urge the
Secretary-General’s high-level panel review on peace
operations to present us with bold and ambitious
recommendations on how we can take action to improve
United Nations policing.

The United Kingdom is committed to doing our
part to support United Nations policing. We have
United Kingdom officers deployed to Haiti, South
Sudan and Iraq. We want to increase this support,
especially through providing niche capabilities in
areas such as organized crime, community policing,
and sexual and gender-based violence. We are also at
the forefront of donor efforts, working in 14 conflictaffected countries, spending $80 million on security
and justice programmes in 2013 and providing more
than 10 million women with improved access to security
and justice services.

Secondly, we must get the right people with the
right skills on the ground swiftly. We need to broaden
and deepen the pool of available expertise, including the
range of police-contributing countries. Fred Yiga made
that point very clearly in the presentation that he gave
on South Sudan earlier. We need more female police
officers, and we urge the Police Division to do more to
reach their 20 per cent target. I think, frankly, that we
all envy the statistics that Rwanda gave us about their
own police force earlier today. Formed police units
and individual police officers will remain critical, but
we also need to deploy specialized teams with niche
capabilities and skills such as the ability to deal with
sexual and gender-based crimes. We need civilian
policing experts who can work with development actors
to build the capacities and institutions of the host State’s
police force.
Thirdly, we need to improve coordination within
the United Nations system and strengthen partnerships
with other actors. An effective United Nations policing
effort requires the better joining up of all of the United
Nations departments and agencies working on these
issues. We need a mission-planning process that takes
into account the comparative advantages of all the key
United Nations actors working in the rule-of-law sector
and sequences their activity accordingly. And we need
improved mechanisms to coordinate with international
financial institutions and regional organizations that

I have two other questions that I wanted to put to
our briefers now that we have this opportunity. The
first is the fact that they all raised the need for more
specific mandates to help effective policing. We need
more specific detail from the field of key challenges,
and I think, again, that that has come through very
clearly from other members of the Security Council
today. So my question is: what is their view — because
we have, I think, begun to express ours — on the best
way to achieve this?
The second question for all of them is how they
would measure success. We clearly need effective
benchmarks to tell whether we are succeeding or
failing in transitioning to host State police forces, but
how would they achieve that?
Finally, I do not want to lose this opportunity
today to pay tribute to all of the men and women
serving in United Nations police components across
the world. As we discuss the challenges and reforms
required to improve United Nations policing, we must
never forget the risks that they take every single day to
make our world a safer place. Today’s debate is also an
opportunity for me, on behalf of my Government, to
say thank you.
The President: I acknowledge the United
Kingdom’s contribution to United Nations policing and
peacekeeping.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Ladsous,
as well as to the heads of the United Nations police

14-6405219/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

components in Liberia, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. We congratulate our Australian
colleagues on the consensus adoption of their proposed
draft resolution as resolution 2185 (2014).
We regard police components as an integral part
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. These components make their
contribution to implementing the unique mandate for
each mission, as determined by the specific situation
of the country in which they are deployed. Thanks to
regular reporting, in line with the relevant mandates,
to the Security Council on mission mandates, Member
States are well informed about the processes taking
place in the countries of deployment and in the
missions themselves. However, we hope that today’s
discussion will help us to somewhat better understand
the difficulties facing police components in the field as
they carry out their tasks.
Modern United Nations police have wide-ranging
tasks before them, owing to the increasingly complex
and integrated nature of their mission’s mandates.
They now have to not only observe situations and
report on breaches of public order in the areas of their
responsibilities, but also play an important auxiliary
role in the post-conflict reform of law-enforcement
institutions and in building and improving the national
capacities of host States.
We believe that police can achieve effective
and long-term results if they strictly abide by the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
closely cooperate with the host country, being guided
in that respect by the priorities that the countries have
identified and the principles of national ownership and
respect for national sovereignty.
It is important to avoid imposing external pressure
or one’s own views of the core of reform processes.
Often it is the police who serve as link not only
between the population and the peacekeeping presence,
but also between the population and Governments.
When transformations are achieved at an early stage,
even minimal successes can build citizens’ trust in the
authorities, create favourable conditions for a return
to normal life and establish the preconditions for
lasting peace and national reconciliation. Experience
has shown that it is vitally important also to take into
account the specific country situation when providing
assistance to States. Ignoring this and seeking to apply
universal approaches to reforming such an important
and sensitive part of society as law-enforcement bodies
20/30

20/11/2014

will inevitably lead to the rejection of the formulas
being proposed.
Recently we have seen a significant intensification
of the potential for conflict in various parts of the
world, where, unfortunately, civilians are those most
affected. However, we do not share the interpretation
of peacekeeping that is being disseminated today, one
seen exclusively through the lens of the protection
of civilians and the provision of humanitarian
assistance. We believe that the primary responsibility
for implementing these tasks belongs to the States
themselves. Nor should we forget about traditional but
still-in-demand tasks such as observing compliance
with peace agreements and separating opposing sides.
We support the need for an ongoing dialogue
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries on all aspects of peacekeeping operations’
activities, including at the stage of planning and
developing mandates.
We must accord a special role to the General
Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which is the main inter-State forum for
establishing guidelines for the Secretariat in the area of
peacekeeping. In that context, we welcome the holding
of a forthcoming briefing to the Special Committee by
the heads of police components.
In conclusion, for policing tasks to be carried out
effectively, especially given the additional complicating
factors of conflict, there must be predictable financing
and due equipment support and staffing. In that
context, as a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation will continue to send officials to missions
with the relevant equipment and skills. We are also
ready to train police peacekeepers in keeping with
United Nations standards at our specialized higher
educational institutions.
The President: I thank the representative of
the Russian Federation for his country’s support for
resolution 2185 (2014) adopted today.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Australian presidency for having convened
today’s informative briefing and for the concept note
(S/2014/788, annex), which allows us to address the
role of policing in peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding. We also appreciate the briefings from
the Police Commissioners of the Missions in Liberia,
South Sudan and the Central African Republic.

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Chile understands the concept of peacekeeping
operations in the broadest sense, considering it to
include peacekeeping and peacebuilding tasks with
military, police and civilian components working in
a comprehensive framework. Today’s meeting allows
us to assess one of those components — the police
component — and to discuss ways to help States reach
agreement and overcome conflicts.
The increase in the number of police personnel
deployed and the changing nature of their functions
reflect ever-more complex realities and an understanding
of the fundamental role of their work. As we know, its
functions today include, inter alia, provisional police
efforts that support processes of reform, restructuring
and reorganization of national police and other entities
that are charged with maintaining a robust rule of law.
Whatever their functions are, they should be guided by
respect for human rights and the protection of civilians,
including, of course, the concept of national ownership.
The police function comes with a daily interaction
with the civilian population, hence the importance of
the police component having the training and equipment
needed to enforce the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the protection of civilians, in particular
women and children, in the face of gender-based and
sexual crimes. It is important for each State to protect
its civilian population, but if that does not happen,
the principle of the responsibility to protect brings
us necessarily before the need to act. Further, this
contact with the civilian population allows in practical
terms the police component to act as an early-warning
mechanism. consistent with the Secretary-General’s
Human Rights First initiative.
We must increase the presence and leadership
profile of women in the police components, which is
directly linked to the effectiveness of their function. We
call upon the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to incorporate in its reports recommendations in step
with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013). We also
encourage police-contributing countries to give their
police sufficient training so as to close the competency
gaps.
Police components contribute to the laying of
the groundwork for a robust rule of law in which
reconciliation and the promotion of development
through economic growth and the eradication of
poverty and social development are key elements when
it comes to overcoming conflicts and building peace.
In that context, I should like to mention that since 1996

S/PV.7317

my country has undertaken assistance programmes
with the Haitian National Police, through which nearly
60 officers are trained each year in the Chilean police
curriculum.
A trained and duly equipped United Nations police
has the ability to facilitate reconciliation processes
and confidence-building among civilian populations,
armed groups and Governments, while favouring
peacebuilding, the rule of law and the overcoming of
crises through inclusive development. We urge that
this forum for exchange be maintained, as it allows
for more informed decision-making based on firsthand knowledge about the challenges, perspectives and
concerns of the police forces working on the ground.
We would also like to underscore and appreciate
the efforts made by countries providing police forces
in the different peacekeeping operations, in particular
those countries for which this contribution, unlike other
contributions, also means additional effort because
they are providing less support for their own domestic
public security.
Lastly, I should like to say that we would have liked
for the resolution adopted this morning (resolution
2185 (2014)) to have directly recognized the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in the
terms set forth in the 2006 resolution adopted by the
General Assembly (resolution 61/291).
The President: I thank Chile for its support of
resolution 2185 (2014). I also acknowledge Chile’s
important policing contribution, particularly in Haiti.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to congratulate the Australia presidency for taking the
initiative to hold this meeting on the role of policing
in peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. I
welcome the adoption of resolution 2185 (2014), which
we were pleased to co-sponsor.
I thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and the heads of
the police components of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
for their briefings. We welcome the Australian
innovation of inviting heads of police components to
brief the Security Council.
Chad notes the increasing role of United Nations
police in peacekeeping operations and the increasing

14-6405221/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

number of individual police and formed police units.
Police staffing has increased from 1,677 personnel in
1994 to over 12,300 personnel as of last 30 September,
throughout 13 peacekeeping operations and 4 special
political missions, which constitutes 14 per cent of
United Nations personnel in uniform today. We believe
that strengthening the police component of United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions
is making a great contribution to stabilization in postconflict situations and in peacebuilding, security sector
reform, the protection of civilians and the rule of law.
Issues related to police training, skills and
equipment and their geographical distribution are
crucial ones. It is important for the police-contributing
country to ensure that the personnel deployed have
among their skills a high level of expertise, appropriate
training and equipment that is adapted to the situation.
Otherwise, they will not be able to effectively discharge
their duties.
Consequently, it is logical that the United Nations
Police Division and Member States maintain close
collaboration in order to identify areas where there are
shortcomings to be addressed or where improvements
could be made. In that regard, we urge Member States
with the resources available to provide them to those
who need them. Furthermore, given that United Nations
police are called upon to interact with the population,
it is important that they have general skills, including
linguistic and cultural knowledge of the host country.
While knowledge of the language and culture of the
host State should not a prerequisite, it is one of the most
important elements that should be taken into account in
the selection process.
Another crucial element is geographic and
linguistic representation, particularly in those areas of
United Nations policing responsibilities. Moreover, we
encourage the Secretary-General and Member States to
increase the number of women police in peacekeeping
operations, including in positions of responsibility, with
at least 20 per cent female representation being reached,
in accordance with the global campaign launched in
2009. We would also encourage closer cooperation
between the United Nations Police Division and the
African Union, which recently established the regional
police organization — the African Police Cooperation
Organization. Furthermore, we welcome the efforts of
the African Union in launching policing missions on
the continent, including in the African Union Mission
in Somalia.

22/30

20/11/2014

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to all
police, men and women, in the service of the United
Nations, and to all police-contributing countries that
have made deployments to countries in conflict or postconflict situations. Their support to the host country
police in the areas of civilian protection, security
sector reform, rebuilding and providing operational
assistance and other functions for maintaining public
order is considerable. For its part, Chad remains willing
to make its modest contribution to peacekeeping and
international security, as demonstrated by its recent
and current commitments, through the deployment
of police in different United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
With your permission, Madam President, I would
like to ask one question to all three heads of police
components of the three operations. What do the
Police Commissioners think about including general
knowledge, such as linguistic and cultural knowledge
of the host country, in the selection process? Should we
make that a selection criteria?
The President: I thank the representative of Chad
for his country’s support for resolution 2185 (2014),
which we have adopted today.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Police Commissioners Greg Hinds, Fred Yiga
and Luis Miguel Carrilho for their briefings. We also
thank the presidency for organizing today’s first-ever
briefing from the heads of the police components.
Establishing the rule of law is a fundamental
pillar in consolidating post-conflict peace. Initial
peacekeeping operations would be fruitless unless they
are strategically supported by efforts to institutionalize
law-enforcement functions through reforms in the
security and justice sectors. Police components in
peacekeeping and special political missions are
increasingly called upon to play a more constructive
role in that process. Even though they make up merely
15 per cent of the total United Nations uniformed
personnel, their role is unique and irreplaceable. Their
professionalism and expertise can assist in closing the
loopholes in civilian protection activities and enable
tailored advice in the institution-building process.
Police tend to face less psychological resistance than
the military in host countries. Female police officers
are also better positioned to deal with gender- and
child-related crimes, which often occur with impunity
in conflict-ridden areas. That comparative advantage

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

should be fully utilized and appropriately systemized
in the composition of the police components.
Different perspectives on the rule of law deserve due
attention in assisting a host country’s capacity-building.
However, we believe that post-conflict societies,
without exception, require an end to impunity, as well
as transitional justice and national reconciliation. The
political leadership should play a pivotal role in that
regard in a transparent, impartial and inclusive manner.
Otherwise, a mission’s assistance and engagement will
have limited effect.
Having said that, I would like to ask the briefers
some questions.
United Nations missions are often exposed to
unexpected circumstances. Based on the United Nations
police policy and the Strategic Guidance Framework
for International Police Peacekeeping, scenario-based
training needs to be continuously elaborated.
In Liberia the outbreak of Ebola seriously threatens
the peacebuilding achievements made thus far. The
security situation may deteriorate unless it is addressed
appropriately and in a timely fashion. I would like
to ask Commissioner Hinds what specific efforts are
being made to coordinate with the host Government
and other key partners? What are the main obstacles
undermining the work of security institutions?
With regard to the protection of civilians,
inter-communal fighting widely displaces civilians,
as we have witnessed in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. Displaced civilians can no longer
find safe haven. Even around the protection-of-civilian
camps of the United Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
compound, women and girls fall victim to sexual
violence. Last May, through resolution 2155 (2014), the
Security Council refocused the UNMISS mandate to
stress the protection of civilians, with enhanced police
personnel. I would like to hear from Commissioner Yiga
what specific actions have been taken on the ground to
protect civilians since last May. I also wonder whether
there are any negative repercussions from suspending
support for South Sudan’s capacity-building?
In the Central African Republic the security
situation is much worse, with far weaker Government
functioning. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) is being forced to assume more
responsibility for policing, as the national police service
is virtually non-existent. Impunity persists amid an

S/PV.7317

endless cycle of retaliation between communities.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gaye
once stressed the importance of establishing a criminal
justice system in cooperation with international
partners. In that regard, I would like to hear from
Commissioner Carrilho whether the MINUSCA police
component has helped that idea materialize with the
transitional Government.
Before concluding, we would like to pay special
tribute to all United Nations police component
personnel. We believe that resolution 2185 (2014),
adopted today, will be a good reference for the highlevel independent panel on peace operations in carrying
out their comprehensive review, due next year.
The President: I particularly thank the Republic of
Korea for supporting our resolution 2185 (2014) today.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Australia for organizing this first-ever
specific briefing in the Security Council on an issue
to which Argentina attaches particular importance
as the leading regional contributor of political
observers to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, we thank the Police Commissioners from
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic for their briefings to the
Council. We highlight the courage and dedication with
which they carry out their complex tasks in difficult
environments and with scarce resouorces. And we urge
that this type of meeting be repeated regularly in future.
The role of United Nations police has gained
increasing importance in recent years, along with
the evolution of multidimensional peacekeeping
operations and the increasing use of special political
missions. In both such missions, the police personnel
of the Organization is currently carrying out essential
functions aimed at rebuilding security institutions,
promoting and protecting human rights and
consolidating democracy and the rule of law in host
States.
My country has supported the evolution of those
tasks, having established, in 1992, the first regional
training centre for officers involved in peacekeeping
missions, the Training Centre for Police Peace
Operations. Our security forces have had a constant
presence in peacekeeping operations since 1991. Today,
Argentina is a member of the Group of Friends of United

14-6405223/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations Police and the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform. We also organized one of four regional
workshops held in the course of the development of the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping, an inclusive process that included due
consultation with Member States.
Argentina also participated constructively in the
negotiations on resolution 2185 (2014), the Council’s
first-ever resolution on the subject. I should like briefly
highlight some specific issues with regard to this
important resolution.
First, we believe that the resolution adequately
describes the significant development and increasing
significance of the role of police components in
peacekeeping missions. It also emphasizes the need for
close coordination with the States concerned and with
the other elements of missions in their various tasks,
especially those related to the promotion and protection
of human rights, strengthening rule-of-law institutions,
the rule of law, the reform of the security and justice
sectors and fighting transnational crime, among others.

20/11/2014

in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.
We agree with the text of the resolution as to
the need for deployed personnel to possess the skills
and abilities necessary to perform their functions, in
particular in the context of peacekeepinng missions
with complex and multidimensional mandates.
Peacekeeping missions increasingly rely on the ability
to deploy high-level specialized personnel, including
in particular specialized police and civilian personnel
such as experts in the rule of law and security-sector
reform. In that regard, we note the important role of
technical cooperation and in strengthening SouthSouth cooperation.

In addition, we welcome the fact that the resolution
reaffirms the role that police components could have
in facilitating the participation and inclusion of women
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, as well as the
need to increase the number of women police deployed
in peacekeeping missions and the coordination between
police and advisers on the protection of women and
children.

We agree with the other members of thd Council
about the special importance of this first resolution
on police components in peacekeeping and special
political missions, which we supported and voted in
favour of. There is, however, one aspect in particular
that prevented us from becoming a sponsore. That
aspect is related to the lack of specific mention in the
text of the resolution to the mandate of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), as
wet out in paragraph 20 of the Commmittee’s report
(A/68/19). That mandate has been standardized by
virtue of it having been repeated over the years without
being questioned by its members. In accordance with
that traditional and widely recognized mandate, it is
understood that the C-34 is the only forum of the United
Nations that has been entrusted with carrying out a
comprehensive review of the issue of peacekeeping
operations in all its aspects, including measures to
improve the capacity of the Organization to carry
out such operations. That implies that the SecretaryGeneral, in the development and implementation of
standards, guidelines and procedures for improving
peacekeeping activities of the maintenance of peace,
including the police components, must take full account
of that mandate. Therefore, Argentian, which is part
of the C-34 Bureau, does not understand or share the
reluctance on the part of some members of the Council
to include an explicit reference to the Committee’s
mandate in such a broad and comprehensive resolution
as the one we adopted today.

Argentina highlights the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, as well
as all the subsequent resolutions. We reiterate the need
for the full, equal and effective participation of women
in all stages of peace processes, given their vital role

Above and beyond those comments, I would like, in
conclusion, to welcome the resolution. We members of
the Council worked hard on it over the past few days in
the hope that the consensus text would help us to make
further progress on this important issue.

The resolution also stresses the important role
of the police component of the United Nations in
protecting civilians, in particular populations under
threat of physical violence, including all forms of
gender-based and sexual violence, in areas where
peacekeeping operations are deployed, all the while
recognizing that the protection of civilians is a primary
responsibility of the host country. In that regard, while
the respective wording addresses the essential on this
issue, we would have preferred that there be more more
emphasis in the operational paragraphs as to the role
that police components could have in protecting against
violations of human rights, in particular against women
and children.

24/30

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President: I acknowledge Argentina’s policing
contribution to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We, too, thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous and the Police Commissioners and heads
of police components from the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
for their comprehensive and highly informative
briefings. Your own statement this morning, Madam
President, has inspired us greatly.
We note that, more than any other institution, the
police is the most important link between the population
and the State. Rightly, the French have a saying: the fear
of the gendarme is the beginning of wisdom. We believe
that should permeate even in the areas of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. There is nothing
more sobering or more reassuring to the population that
the presence of a police officer — the symbol of the
State, a representative of law and order and the executor
of justice.
With that reflection in mind, we commend the
delegation of Australia for organizing this first-ever
briefing by heads of police components of peacekeeping
missions, which provides the Council with an
opportunity to hear directly from, and to interact with,
those responsible for implementing Council mandates
as they concern policing in peacekeeping.
We also welcome the adoption today of resolution
2185 (2014), the first-even Council resolution on
policing, which Nigeria was pleased to join as a sponsor.
We commend your delegation, Madam President, for its
leadership role in the drafting of the resolution. In our
view, this resolution should complement the similar
resolution 2151 (2014), adopted in April during Nigeria’s
presidency. Through today’s resolution, the Council
demonstrates its commitment to backing, among other
things, policing mandates with appropriate resources.
That is significant because police components are taking
on increasingly complex and multidimensional tasks in
the context of peacekeeping missions. To be effective,
they need to be adequately supported. The resolution
also shows that the Council recognizes the need for
close consultation between the Secretary-General and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
as well as Member States, in order to promote systemwide coherency in the policing-related work of the

S/PV.7317

United Nations. In that regard, the prerogative of the
General Assembly should also be respected.
To take a trip down memory lane, we would like
to note that policing in the context of peacekeeping
missions and special political missions is a matter of
great interest to Nigeria. Our involvement in policing
in the United Nations peacekeeping dates back to 1960,
when a Nigerian contingent of 400 police officers was
deployed to the Congo alongside the United Nations
Operation in the Congo. Since then, Nigeria has
participated in over 20 United Nations missions across
the world, involving the deployment of over 12,000
Nigerian police officers.
As indicated in the concept note for this briefing
(S/2014/788,
annex),
peacekeeping
operations
have become multidimensional and now include
the protection of civilians, security sector reform
and support for electoral processes, post-conflict
stabilization, peacebuilding and the rule of law. The
role of the components of peacekeeping missions has
been transformed subsequently. Given that new reality,
Nigeria believes that the time is appropriate to address
policing in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions. We share the opinion
expressed by the delegation of the United Kingdom
that this is very timely and indeed long overdue, and
that there should be a continuation of today’s process
in terms of inviting heads of police components to brief
the Council on an annual basis and to participate in
deliberations as and when necessary.
Given that reality, Nigeria believes that the
time is appropriate, as I said, to address policing in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Being an integral part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the police component must function
interdependently with all other components, including
the military and civilian components, during mandate
implementation. Our briefers have charge of critical
aspects of policing in peacekeeping and special political
missions. It is crucial to note that each peacekeeping
operation and special political mission has unique
challenges, requiring unique responses. For effective
policing in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, the following measures
might be taken into account.
First, policing mandates must be clearly
formulated. We support the position of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations that this can be

14-6405225/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

effectively achieved through sustained triangular
cooperation between the Council, the Secretariat and
police-contributing countries. In that regard, that trio,
in consultation with host States, must come up with
workable standards, including relevant training and
effective coordination to facilitate the implementation
of policing mandates.
Secondly, police-contributing countries must be
encouraged to provide personnel with the relevant
competence to carry out mandated tasks.
Thirdly, the police must have the requisite
predeployment training to enhance understanding of
the environment in their areas of primary assignment.
That will facilitate their integration and allow them to
function effectively.
Fourthly, adequate resources, including equipment
and funds, must be made available for the police to
implement their mandates without any hindrance.
Fifthly, the host State must guarantee the safety of
United Nations police whenever deployed and cooperate
fully with them in the discharge of their mandate.
Sixthly, in order to enhance the role of women in
United Nations policing, emphasis should be placed on
assigning roles based on comparative advantages. We
consider it appropriate for policewomen to be given a
central role in the protection of women and children.
That, we believe, will help to promote the women and
peace and security agenda of the United Nations.
As policing mandates continue to evolve in response
to the changing pattern of conflicts, it is crucial that
the Council be kept abreast of developments related to
United Nations policing in order to adopt the relevant
mandates. That will be aided by regular briefings by
heads of police components, as reflected in resolution
2185 (2014), which we have just adopted. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s strategic review on
United Nations peacekeeping, which we expect will be
carried out in consultation with Member States through
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
We also call upon the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to invite all
heads of police components to participate in the review
of the PBC’s work to be held in June 2015.
The President: I recognize the valuable
contribution that Nigeria makes as one of the top 10
contributors of police to United Nations missions.

26/30

20/11/2014

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Australia’s initiative to hold this open
briefing of the Security Council on United Nations
peacekeeping policing. We welcome Minister for
Foreign Affairs Bishop, who is personally presiding
over our deliberations today. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous and the Police Commissioners of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for their briefings.
China salutes all United Nations peacekeeping
police officers, who are working in very difficult
conditions, for their dedication. The maintenance of
international peace and security is one of the purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations and a pillar of the
United Nations work. In recent years, as the nature
of conflicts and disputes has become more diverse,
peacekeeping operations face increasingly complex
situations and tasks. The United Nations peacekeeping
policing mandates have also grown continuously.
To ensure the sound and effective conduct of United
Nations peacekeeping police work, it is necessary to
change with the times and to strike a balance between
mandate formulation and implementation results, and
between efficiency and scale. In that connection, China
would like to make four points.
First, United Nations peacekeeping police should
strictly abide by the Council’s mandate and the three
principles of peacekeeping. They must respect the
sovereignty of the host State, heed the opinions of host
States while helping them carry out activities such as
security sector reform, constructively provide training,
advisory assistance and support, and work to find
assistance programmes that are best suited to local
conditions.
Secondly, to strengthen the focus of United Nations
policing, when the Council deploys peacekeeping
operations it should ensure that the peacekeeping
mandate is viable and practical, explicitly prioritize
tasks, and avoid all-inclusive mandates. The
implementation results of peacekeeping policing
mandates should be reviewed in a timely way. The
mandated tasks and deployment scales should also be
adjusted according to the developments in the host
States in a timely way.

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Thirdly, in order to comprehensively increase
the efficiency of peacekeeping policing, the rapid
deployment and operational capabilities of peacekeeping
police have a bearing on whether the missions can play
their role at key moments. The Council, the Secretariat,
host States and troop-contributing countries should
strengthen
communication
and
coordination,
improve the formation and deployment processes of
peacekeeping civilian police and formed police units,
and optimize logistics. In that process, the Secretariat
should carefully heed and value the opinions and
recommendations of the police-contributing countries.
The mission should strengthen scientific planning
and management, improve the efficiency of resource
utilization, and avoid unnecessary waste and overlap.
Fourthly, in order to strengthen capacity-building
for peacekeeping police, China supports the Secretariat’s
engaging in close consultation with police-contributing
countries and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations; developing standards for the organization,
training and monitoring of peacekeeping police; and
strengthening the safety and security of peacekeeping
police in view of the security situation in the areas
of operation. The United Nations should step up its
support for capacity-building for peacekeeping police
from regional organizations, such as the African Union,
and help them play a bigger role in maintaining regional
peace and stability.
China sent peacekeeping police to the United
Nations for the first time in 2000, and we are now an
important police-contributing country at the United
Nations and also the biggest contributor of police among
the permanent members of the Council. To date, China
has sent altogether more than 2,000 peacekeeping police
officers to eight missions. Currently, we have over 170
peacekeeping police officers working to implement
peacekeeping mandates of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.
Chinese peacekeeping police fulfil their duties
strictly, perform well and have won extensive acclaim.
China is willing to send more peacekeeping civilian
police, formed riot police units and specialized
police experts, such as forensic experts and criminal
investigation officers, to the United Nations Blue
Helmets and is committed to helping police-contributing
countries, including those of Africa, improve their
capacity-building.

S/PV.7317

China stands ready to work with the international
community to make a positive contribution to the
promotion of sustainable development of United
Nations peacekeeping police as well as the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The President: I thank China for its support for
resolution 2185 (2014). I also acknowledge China’s
contribution to the United Nations policing, including
in the United Nations Mission in Liberia police
component led by Commissioner Hinds.
I shall now give the floor to the briefers to respond.
I give the floor to Mr. Hinds.
Mr. Hinds: In response to the first question posed
by the representative of Rwanda in relation to progress
in reforming, rebuilding and restructuring the Liberian
National Police and the other security institutions, in
the case of Liberia it was actually a matter of recreating
the security institutions, post-conflict. There has been
steady progress. Over this time, we have seen a police
force that was decimated grow into a force of almost
5,000 officers, who provide a policing service to the
populace of Liberia right across the entire country.
It is a maturing organization. It still has a way to go,
which is why we are still there. Importantly, it works in
partnership with a number of other security agencies:
the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, the
Drug Enforcement Agency and the Transnational
Crime Unit. Those civilian agencies have responsibility
for domestic security in Liberia, and are all doing their
best, with the limited resources available to them, to
provide a professional response.
The Ebola crisis over the past eight months in Liberia
has seen sustained pressure put on those organizations,
and there have been cracks in what we saw as maturing
institutions with regard to improving performance and
operationalization. What we can try to do is build on
what we have seen as a result of Ebola. We have seen
services that had been delivered at the national level
devolve to the county level. We have seen decentralized
structures,
decentralized
decision-making
and
decentralized resource mobilization right across
Liberia. It has been a challenge to move what has been
an overcentralized and bureaucratic process in the
capital, Monrovia. That has perhaps been seen as one
of the silver linings. In our remaining time in Liberia,
we will look to strengthen those local mechanisms.
We have seen improved relationships with the
community and improved responsiveness on the part

14-6405227/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the security agencies. They have taken on a range
of tasks that are not typically policing functions, but
under the health, humanitarian and other crises that
Ebola has created in Liberia and across West Africa,
we have seen the police perform admirably. Even
though many officers have been affected by the crisis
themselves, with a number of these agencies losing lives
to the crisis, they are still committed to their role and
function and to improving and professionalizing their
organizations. We will continue to work with them.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Yiga.
Mr. Yiga: I thank the Council for the overwhelming
support that has come out of this important meeting.
It has taken us to the next level as United Nations
peacekeeping police officers. The ball is in our court
now to make it work. I have three categories of answers
to the questions that have come from members.
First of all, let me make a general statement. From
what I have heard, the Council does not want us to be
any less than what it expects us to be in the field. That
has come out very strongly. We must be the United
Nations police (UNPOL) that we should be in the
field, and we therefore need all possible support that
can come our way to do our work. Sometimes we have
to be good diplomats in our role as UNPOL. We have
to be very strong professionals in terms of operations,
and sometimes we need to mix in a bit of politics to
understand host State situations.
The second point I would like to make is that
there has been a lot of support for training and
readiness to prepare UNPOL to carry out its functions.
Perhaps it is time to influence some Member States
to offer peacekeeping training at police institutions
all over the world. If training is seen as a serious
matter — whether or not someone is going to be
deployed in peacekeeping — then officers will emerge
from police training with the knowledge that the world
may require their skills in case they are chosen. I think
that would make a very big difference. I know that
police commissioners who would be willing to come as
guest speakers to police institutions.
Finally is the issue of equipment. That is very
serious. We need to be equipped. Let me give one
example. There is a lot of crime taking place now. As
police officers, we cannot afford to just look on as
crime increases every day. Moreover, we do not have
strong data bases to share with the world when stability
has been restored. We need equipment and we need

28/30

20/11/2014

support in terms of scientific management and research
into crime. We need to be able to categorize the kind
of crime that is happening in our situations in order to
enable the Security Council to develop relevant policies.
Let me reply to the question posed by the
representative of Rwanda with regard to whether
training police offers has helped in any way. A lot of
effort was put into police training in South Sudan, but
it was all lost when the crisis began. Still, we managed
to create a sense of shame among police officers. The
Inspector General of Police belongs to the biggest
regional police organizations, and when he attends their
meetings he represents South Sudan’s national police
service. When he mixes with colleagues, he is expected
to tell them what he is doing in his own country as head
of the police, which holds him to a standard that links
him to the common fraternity of policing all over the
world.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Carrilho.
Mr. Carrilho: With respect to women in
peacekeeping, and particularly in the police, of course
much more can be done. A lot has already been done
at the instrumental level by the Security Council,
through several resolutions, but in terms of improved
outreach, the police-contributing countries should
clearly be encouraged to participate with more females
in peacekeeping. When we are speaking about working
with the most vulnerable groups — victims, women,
children, the elderly, internally displaced persons and
persons with disabilities — the presence of females
in peacekeeping really makes a difference. Maybe
we can also enhance their conditions in terms of their
participation and welfare in peacekeeping; we might
give them shorter terms of duty.
Of course, as my colleagues have said, training is
essential. But if Member States have more females in
their national institutions, it will be easier to have more
of them in peacekeeping, so it is a global effort. And
finally there is the issue of providing special training in
language and driving skills, which can be a difficulty
in peacekeeping. Of course, we welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2185 (2014), which is an excellent
initiative that will undoubtedly result in more women
entering peacekeeping.
Concerning the question posed by the representative
of Rwanda on cooperation between the military and the
police — and in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African

14-64052

20/11/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Republic in Bangui we have a battalion from Rwanda
that is participating in the Bangui Joint Task Force — we
have several instruments, either the normal type, with
meetings, but operationally speaking, the operations
centre is the same, with both police and military. In
the case of the Central African Republic, within Bangui
the United Nations forces, police and military, are
under a single command, a unique experiment that is
going very well and that we hope will produce even
better results than it has so far. As I said, more than
107 people have already been arrested. We also have
international security forces from Operation Sangaris
and the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR RCA), as well as the national security forces.
So all of that entails a level of coordination that we are
organizing through that operations centre in order to
achieve coordinated action.
(spoke in French)
Concerning the question from the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on coordination in
the protection of women and children, that is a very
important issue for us, the police. Even at the Mission
level we have counsellors for the protection of children.
At the United Nations police level, we now have a focal
point — as we also do where we have responsibility for
judicial cooperation and criminal investigation — in
Bangui, as we hope we will also have in the provinces
in the future. That is because the country’s future, of
course, depends on its children, and though it may not
be able to deal with that issue, despite the fact that,
let us be clear, as many Council members have said,
principal responsibility for protection belongs to the
national authorities. And, as my colleague from the
United Nations Mission in Liberia expressed it well, it
is our responsibility in terms of building the capacity
of the national police and gendarmerie to help them
become effective in this area.
(spoke in English)
Concerning the question from the Permanent
Representative of the United States on how we are
implementing the protection of civilians, leadership
is of course essential. At the level of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions of the United Nations
Police Division, there are clear guidelines; in fact, new
standard operating procedures are being developed to
make our strategy sharper and more precise, including
on the ground, where we must be able to deliver. I
would point to the example I mentioned of a flash-

S/PV.7317

point matrix, where all areas are properly listed, with
frequent meetings at both the strategic and operational
levels geared to working out how we should tackle
them. In one particular neighbourhood in Bangui we are
specifically conducting operations on the protection of
civilians with a police and military capacity, ensuring
as far as possible that the people can have a normal life.
Of course, for us in Bangui the protection of civilians
is essential.
(spoke in French)
Regarding the question from the Permanent
Representative of Lithuania on how the United Nations
police assist the national judicial authorities, the
resolution that the Council has given us is a useful
instrument for temporary emergency measures, and
we have already arrested more than 100 people, but
it requires cooperating with the judicial authorities,
which we are doing. We are working together with the
national police and gendarmerie as well as prosecutors
and judges, and, at the end of the process, we are also
protecting prisons, so that is the level at which we are
working and assisting the national authorities. Where
training is concerned, we are helping the national
authorities both on the separation of the legislative
and executive powers and on basic training of police
officers and magistrates.
Concerning the question from the representative
of France about how things are going with the Bangui
Joint Task Force, we have the police and military of the
Mission’s reserve units working together, as well as the
French forces, with whom we have an excellent working
relationship, as well as the European Union’s EUFOR
RCA. As I said, we have an operations centre where
the various representatives are all together, sometimes
with liaison officers and, when necessary during a
crisis, with increased participation of those groups. In
terms of the protection of civilians, roles are identified
and we coordinate in order to avoid duplication of
efforts. In every neighbourhood, especially those that
are particularly threatened, we coordinate means with
deployments. We also have targeted operations, and
checkpoint and combing operations, and, when there
are threats in more specific spots, we coordinate — and
regarding that, I should thank France and Operation
Sangaris for their direct cooperation.
The representative of Jordan asked about how
we coordinate between the police, the military and
local authorities. We are trying — because that is our
mandate and because peacekeeping missions are always

14-6405229/30

S/PV.7317

United Nations peacekeeping operations

temporary — to ensure that the national institutions
always play the primary role in security, and we support
that. We have the mechanisms to do so.
(spoke in English)
Concerning the question from the representative of
the United Kingdom about manpower, I do not know
a single police commissioner or special representative
who will ever be happy with the resources he has,
whether human or material. Of course we would be
delighted to have more, but we will not complain that
the resources we have prevent us from achieving our
mandates, particularly when the issue is the protection
of civilians. And the level of expectations, particularly
in the Central African Republic, is very high. I can
assure the members of the Council that we will do
our best to successfully implement our mandate. The
measure of success is always the end result, and the
aim for the end result is to have national security forces
and police that are able to provide security to their own
people. That is how we measure it. And there are tools.
My colleague from Liberia spoke about a few. The
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping will help.
I think that I have addressed all the questions, as
well as that posed by the representative of the Republic
of Korea concerning the case management system. We
have an integrated approach, which is what the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
offers. MINUSCA enables the protection of human
rights, justice, community violence reduction and civil
affairs, which will naturally aid in the implementation
of the mandate, not only for police authorities, but
also for the political authorities and the transitional
Government to establish a country where everyone can
help and can have a normal life.
(spoke in French)
Finally, to the representative of Chad, the United
Nations police are cooperating with the national and
international police, and with the representatives of
the African Union. Of course, the African police will
always be welcome in terms of coordination.
(spoke in English)
Finally, it is our intention at MINUSCA to
continue to support national institutions operationally

30/30

20/11/2014

and, as has been stressed by several members of the
Security Council, we are in the process of establishing
a development plan to strengthen the capacities of the
national police and gendarmerie.
The President: I believe that there was one
further issue raised by the representative of Chad
about language capacity. I would ask Mr. Carrilho to
comment on that and the impact it has.
Mr. Carrilho (spoke in French): As regards
language, of course since the United Nations police
(UNPOL) is the most visible face of the State, we want
the Central African police to be present everywhere,
and we are there to support them. All of UNPOL
staff now speak French in the Mission. This includes
individuals not only in UNPOL but also in the formed
police units. This is really the first mission in which I
have participated where we have had that capability. We
even have men and women police who are capable of
speaking Sangho because, as they were deployed with
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic to the regional headquarters
of the African Union, it was very important to have that
contact.
But we need to be more specific in terms of
qualifications. Especially when we talk about
development, there are also capacities that may be
more important than language skills. For example, with
respect to the database in Haiti, it is more important
to have the relevant capacities and language skills
may be redundant. But as to the question asked by the
Permanent Representative of Chad, for which I thank
him, each and every officer in UNPOL speaks French
at this time.
The President: Again, I take this opportunity to
thank members for supporting resolution 2185 (2014), I
also thank the briefers, including Assistant SecretaryGeneral Titov, for their participation in this debate,
which, like the resolution, is the first ever dedicated
to policing issues. We now have a platform for further
work and outcomes.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

14-64052
