A /ES-10/PV.38

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

38th meeting

Wednesday, 13 June 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Resumption of the tenth emergency special session
The President: I declare the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, on illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory, resumed.
Members will recall that, in paragraph 4 of its
resolution ES-10/19 of 21 December 2017, the General
Assembly decided
“to adjourn the tenth emergency special session
temporarily and to authorize the President
of the General Assembly at its most recent
session to resume its meeting upon request from
Member States”.
I should like to draw the attention of delegations
to document A/ES-10/786, which contains a letter
dated 8 June 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Algeria to the United Nations, in his capacity as
Chair of the Group of Arab States, and the Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Summit of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, requesting the resumption of the
tenth emergency special session.
I intend to conduct the proceedings of this meeting
in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly and past practice of the tenth emergency
special session.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (Article 19 of the
Charter) (A/ES-10/787)
The President: In keeping with established
practice, I should now like to invite the attention of
the General Assembly to document A/ES-10/787,
concerning Member States that are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
The President: In that connection, I should like
to recall that at the 37th plenary meeting of the tenth
emergency special session, the General Assembly
decided to follow the provisions of resolution 72/2,
by which the Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome
and Principe and Somalia are permitted to vote in the
General Assembly until the end of its seventy-second
session and to allow these Member States to vote at the
emergency special session.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.23)
Draft amendment (A/ES-10/L.24)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-45867 (E)

*1745867*

A/ES-10/PV.38

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria to introduce draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.23.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to express our warmest thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for reconvening this
tenth emergency special session during the very delicate
and critical conditions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, a situation that
represents a threat to international peace and security.
This meeting is convened in response to the urgent
call of the Group of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in accordance with the
decisions of the Arab Ministerial Council held in Cairo
on 17 May and the OIC Summit held in Istanbul on
18 May. Let me also express our thanks and gratitude
to all Member States that supported the reconvening
of this emergency special session in line with their
consistent position on the just question of Palestine.
I will not take up too much of the Assembly’s time,
and will not quote the terrifying numbers of people
killed and wounded in the peaceful demonstrations
where they were confronted with iron and fire. That
act of aggression not only did not spare Palestinian
civilians, especially children and women, it also
attacked nurses, journalists and humanitarian workers,
such as volunteer nurse Razan Al-Najjar, a 21-year-old
woman whose only sin was saving the injured. In her
last interview, talking about the steadfastness of the
Palestinian people, she said:
“I am here in the field. I have been volunteering
since the beginning of the demonstrations for the
right of return. The very first day I provided first
aid to 170 casualties. It is my duty as a young person
and a nurse to defend my homeland. I am working to
save the lives of Palestinian youth who came out to
uphold their homeland. I have the strength, courage
and determination to save an entire people.”
The Palestinian voice is the voice of right. It is
striving only for freedom, independence and a life
of dignity. It calls only for the implementation of
international law and the resolutions of international
legitimacy that the Assembly has adopted unanimously
as a natural right for all human beings.
Israel has not only abandoned its responsibilities
and obligations as an occupying Power in accordance
with international law, it has systematically violated
them. In a premeditated way, it has harmed and targeted
2/24

21/12/2017

Palestinian civilians and denied them their most basic
rights in a flagrant violation of international law. That
leaves the international community duty-bound to
meet its obligations and commitments in order to give
international protection to the Palestinian civilians
living under occupation. The draft resolution we are
voting on today therefore implies that the international
community will fulfil its responsibility for providing
protection to civilians during an armed conflict.
It is my honour today to introduce draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.23, on behalf of the Group of Arab States
and in my capacity as its Chair for this month. The
draft resolution urges that international protection be
provided to Palestinian civilians in a text that calls
for all parties to respect international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. It stresses
the importance of taking appropriate steps in order to
ensure civilians’ safety, well-being and protection. It
calls for those responsible for all violations to be held
accountable. It also denounces any action that could
incite violence or endanger civilians’ lives. It calls for
the utmost restraint and calm on the part of all parties,
as well as the need to take significant immediate teps
to stabilize the situation on the ground. It also calls
for immediate steps to be taken to end the siege that
Israel has now imposed on the Gaza Strip for 11 years,
so as to ensure unimpeded humanitarian assistance and
Palestinians’ right of freedom of movement.
The draft resolution calls on the Secretary-General
to address the current situation on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territory and to present a written
report as soon as possible and no later than 60 days
from its adoption, including his proposals on ways and
means to ensure the safety and protection of Palestinian
civilians under occupation and to set up an international
protection mechanism.
In the light of the latest developments and
the inability of the Security Council to meet its
responsibilities, the international community is called
on to take on its full responsibilities, redouble its efforts
to protect the Palestinian people and continue to work
to end the Arab-Israeli conflict in the Middle East, on
the basis of the principle of land for peace. That would
enable the Palestinian people to set up an independent
State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, in line with
the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
17-45867

21/12/2017

A/ES-10/PV.38

On behalf of the Group of Arab States and all
the sponsors, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our deep gratitude for the great efforts that our
sister State of Kuwait made to submit draft resolution
S/2018/516 to the Security Council and mobilize support
for it. We thank all the Member States that voted in
favour of the draft resolution and salute them for their
principled position on this issue. Let me also thank all
delegations that have joined us in sponsoring the draft
resolution before the Assembly today and supporting
the principles it contains, in a reflection of their
steadfast positions on the rule of law and the Charter
of the United Nations. We call on all peace-loving
States, all States that genuinely want peace, to stand
firm on the side of the rule of law and to support this
draft resolution and vote in favour of it — in favour of
what is right and of achieving peace and stability in the
Middle East and the entire world.

The nature of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23 clearly
demonstrates that politics is driving the day. It is totally
one-sided. It makes not one mention of Hamas, which
routinely initiates violence in Gaza. Such one-sided
resolutions at the United Nations do nothing to advance
peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Everyone
recognizes that. But advancing peace is not the goal
of this draft resolution. I suspect that even my Turkish
friends know that its adoption will change nothing, but
what they believe is that it looks good for the people
back home to think that they are doing something. That
is pure politics.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America to
introduce draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24.

If we were being honest, we would acknowledge
that there are no perfect actors on either side of this
conflict. It does no one any good to pretend that all the
blame lies on one side. I wish that everyone supporting
this one-sided draft resolution would put as much
energy into encouraging President Abbas to come to
the negotiating table as they do into falsely implying to
their people back home that they are doing something.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): There are
many terrible things happening in the world today,
many things that demand our urgent attention. As we
speak, protests are taking place in Nicaragua. More
than 146 peaceful Nicaraguans have been killed by
their own Government in the past two months, but
we are not talking about Nicaragua today. The people
of Iran have been protesting their Government for
months. Thousands of peaceful Iranian protesters
have been arrested, and more than 25 are dead, but we
are not talking about Iran, either. The world’s worst
humanitarian crisis is going on right now in Yemen,
where millions are at risk for starvation. In Burma,
almost a million innocent people have been driven from
their homes in a campaign of ethnic cleansing. But we
are not talking about Yemen or Burma.
Instead, the General Assembly is devoting its
valuable time today to the situation in Gaza. Gaza is
an important international matter, but what makes
it different from or more urgent than the conflicts
in Nicaragua, Iran, Yemen, Burma and many other
desperate places? We have not gathered here to discuss
any of those urgent issues, although the United States
would welcome that. What makes Gaza different for
some is that attacking Israel is their favourite political
sport. That is why we are here today.

The fact is that this draft resolution makes peace
less possible. It feeds a narrative to the desperate people
of Gaza that their leaders are not responsible for their
predicament. It stokes hatred. It sacrifices honesty,
accuracy, compromise and reconciliation in favour of
the advancement of a narrow political agenda.

Israel withdrew completely from Gaza in 2005,
and Hamas has been the de facto Government there
since 2007. This strip of land along the Mediterranean
coast has enormous potential. And yet after 11 years of
Hamas rule, Gaza has electricity for only a few hours
a day. It has enormous unemployment and poverty. It
is a haven for terrorist activity. At what point will the
United Nations actually hold accountable those who are
in charge of Gaza and running it into the ground?
Instead, this draft resolution holds Hamas completely
unaccountable for most of the recent unrest and blames
everything on Israel. But the facts tell a different story.
It is Hamas and its allies that have fired more than 100
rockets into Israel in the past month, hoping to kill
as many civilians and cause as much destruction as
possible. It is Hamas that has used Palestinian civilians
as human shields at the boundary fence, seeking to
incite violence and overrun the border. It is Hamas that
refuses to cooperate with the Palestinian Authority to
unite in the pursuit of peace. It is Hamas that calls for
the destruction of the State of Israel within any borders.
And yet the draft resolution before us not only fails to

17-458673/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

blame Hamas for those actions, it fails to even mention
Hamas. That is the dangerous and counterproductive
decision the General Assembly is about to take.
But there is still a chance for this organ to try
to right that wrong. We still have the opportunity to
salvage something honest from the discussion. The
United States is offering a draft amendment (A/ES10/L.24) to the draft resolution that provides a small
step in the direction of balance. Our amendment rightly
condemns Hamas’ indiscriminate firing of rockets into
Israeli civilian communities. It accurately condemns
the diversion of aid and resources from civilian needs
into military infrastructure, including terror tunnels
used to attack Israeli citizens. It justly expresses our
grave concerns about damage done to border crossings
that is hindering the delivery of desperately needed
food and fuel to the people of Gaza. It is a modest
amendment that reflects the minimum truth of what is
going on in Gaza. It is the least that any self-respecting
international organization, or nation, can do for the
cause of peace.
To those who are unsure about how to vote, I ask:
What part of our amendment is objectionable? Is it
objectionable to condemn Hamas for firing rockets at
civilians? Is it objectionable to condemn the diversion of
resources from civilians to military uses, or to express
concern about the destruction of border crossings that
deliver life-saving supplies?
Today’s choice for the General Assembly is simple.
It is the choice between using our time here to advance
peace and security or to stoke hatred and conflict. The
vote will tell us much about which countries are serious
about accuracy and reconciliation, and which countries
are bound by their political agendas. For the sake of
peace, and for the sake of the institution, I urge my
colleagues to support the United States amendment.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting
in response to the urgent request to resume the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
address the severe protection crisis that continues to be
faced by the Palestinian people under Israeli occupation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and particularly at this time in the
besieged and blockaded Gaza Strip. We appreciate the
seriousness with which that request has been expressed
4/24

21/12/2017

at the initiative of the Group of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and are deeply
grateful to all the countries supporting that principled
effort, including by sponsoring draft resolution A/ES10/L.23, which is now before the Assembly.
That initiative represents a genuine effort to address
the recent escalation of violence and the worsening
conditions on the ground, and it is firmly based on the
belief that by upholding shared responsibilities, in line
with the Charter, international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, we can contribute to the efforts
to defuse tensions, de-escalate the situation, prevent
further violence and protect civilian lives.
Our decision to approach the Assembly was
prompted by the Security Council’s failure to act, due
to the veto cast on 1 June by a permanent member
(see S/PV.8274). That prevented the adoption of draft
resolution S/2018/516, submitted by Kuwait and
supported by a majority of Council members with a
view to advancing the consideration of measures to
guarantee the safety, well-being and protection of the
Palestinian civilian population under Israeli occupation.
On the heels of that regrettable vote in the Security
Council, last week we sombrely marked the fiftyfirst anniversary of Israel’s occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories in 1967. We were reminded again
of the decades of failed attempts to bring an end to
that occupation, realize the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination
and freedom, and establish a just peace based on the
long-standing international consensus enshrined in the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
That illegal, belligerent military occupation is the
primary source and root cause of the recurring and
emergent crisis we face, and it is the stark backdrop for
our continued appeals to the international community
for assistance and intervention. As the occupation
intensifies in its brutality — witnessed every single
day in the oppression, intimidation and humiliation
of Palestinian men, women and children by the Israeli
occupying forces and extremist settlers — and as the
dangerous political impasse persists, the importance
of protecting our people under that occupation remains
urgent and unquestionable.
While we clearly would have preferred to see
the Security Council take on its duties, the negative
outcome has only emboldened Israel’s impunity, further
endangering Palestinian lives. We have therefore been
17-45867

21/12/2017

compelled to continue our efforts in the United Nations
system to secure protection for our people. We cannot
remain silent in the face of the violent crimes and
human rights violations that are being systematically
perpetrated against our people. No one could. We will
continue to do everything possible to protect our people.
That is the right of all people, and the Palestinian people
should not be the exception.
Faced with the occupying forces’ recent killing
of 129 Palestinian civilians, including 16 children,
and injury of more than 13,600, mainly as a result of
lethal assaults against peaceful civilian protesters in
Gaza; with the inhumane oppression and collective
punishment of 2 million Palestinians under Israel’s
blockade of Gaza, which has resulted in humanitarian
devastation and brought the situation there to the
brink of collapse; and with our people’s incessant,
cruel repression and displacement and the destructive
settlement colonization of our land in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem — as we are witnessing
currently in Khan Al-Ahmar and Abu Al-Helu, where
Palestinian Bedouin families, more than half of whom
are children, are facing the mass demolition of their
homes and properties, including schools, and the forced
transfer of the entire community — an outcry and
outrage do not suffice.
To condemn, regret or express concern is not
enough. We need action and the protection of our
civilian population. Why would that offend anyone? We
are only asking for a simple thing. We want our civilian
population to be protected. Is that a crime?
It is our duty to address all aspects of this crisis
and its grave injustice, and to alleviate the suffering of
our people in any way we can, as we have repeatedly
committed to doing through all available, peaceful
and legal means. We ask for the Assembly’s invaluable
solidarity and support in this endeavour. The General
Assembly has always stood with oppressed peoples
suffering and struggling to end colonialism, and
we trust that it will continue to be on the side of the
Palestinian people and their desire to live in freedom
and dignity in their homeland, after we end the Israeli
occupation of the land of our State and can enjoy our
independence and thereby save a two-State solution,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of our State.
As has been said, the draft resolution before
the Assembly is intended to help to de-escalate the
volatile situation, to prevent violence against civilians

A/ES-10/PV.38

and promote the consideration of measures to protect
Palestinian civilians. That process begins with a
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report in
that regard, including recommendations regarding an
international protection mechanism. In the meantime,
the Secretary-General and the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process are
urged to continue engaging with concerned partners
in the efforts to address urgent humanitarian and
economic development needs, in particular in Gaza,
which we strongly encourage all to support.
The draft resolution is rooted in international
law and United Nations resolutions on the Palestine
question and on the protection of civilians. The concept
of the protection of civilians was invented in the
West, and mainly in Europe. It is a Western concept.
The West fights everywhere to see civilians protected
everywhere. It should not exclude the Palestinian people
from enjoying protection as well.
The draft resolution addresses all the relevant
dimensions of the current crisis, including violence
on both sides, with an unequivocal condemnation
of all acts of violence against civilians. We say that,
but some think only of one party and totally ignore
the Palestinian people, as if they had no rights or
were not part of humankind. That is unacceptable. It
is one-sided and not balanced. The draft resolution is
balanced and was reached after extensive negotiations
during the process of negotiating in good faith the
Security Council draft resolution and the follow-up
consultations and outreach, which sought the support of
all delegations. We therefore firmly reject the bad-faith
attempt to insert a draft amendment (A/ES-10/L.24)
that would radically unbalance the text and shift the
Assembly’s focus away from the core objective of
protecting civilians and upholding international law.
We call on all delegations to reject the politicization
of this serious issue. Introducing this amendment at
the last minute and attempting to abuse the innocent,
principled position held by many is tantamount to
allowing everyone to submit amendments. If our
motives are genuine and we negotiate in good faith, we
submit our amendments early in the ballgame, negotiate
in good faith and express the desire and willingness to
be on board because we want the draft resolution to
be adopted.
I do not think that the very sophisticated diplomats
in this Hall will buy these last-minute games and

17-458675/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

21/12/2017

gimmicks that try to make it seem that someone truly
wants to be balanced. As someone has said in this Hall,
there are no Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts in this business.
All the representatives are very sophisticated diplomats.
They know the real thing and know the games and the
gimmicks. We trust them fully to do the right thing and
to recognize those who try at the last minute, for the
sake of expediency, to fool the Assembly by introducing
amendments that are in bad faith because they are not
genuine. If they were, the representatives submitting
them would have engaged from the beginning in the
Security Council, and we would be in a different place
from the one we are in today.

co-submitted draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23, on which
the Assembly will now take action.

The reality is that the draft resolution is a responsible
yet very modest effort, especially considering the
severity, extent and protracted nature of the protection
crisis and nightmare being endured by Palestinians
young and old under Israel’s occupation and the more
than 70 years of the Nakba.

The draft resolution does not seek to target
anyone. It seeks collective responsibility in support of
international law, including all the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. It is about
choosing the side of a credible peace process. It is about
keeping the hopes for peaceful coexistence alive.

We appeal for the support of all delegations,
consistent with long-standing, principled positions on
the Palestine question and the historic efforts of the
international community to ensure the application of
international law to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and to advance the achievement of a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution. We also urge all
concerned States to engage in the efforts to remedy the
prevailing crisis, including by supporting the United
Nations agencies on the ground that are working day
and night to meet humanitarian needs, particularly the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, and by sharing relevant
proposals with the Secretary-General in support of the
fulfilment of his mandate.

This is the right time to send a convincing signal to
the Palestinian people that their legitimate aspirations
have been heard and that the international community
does care about their suffering. This is the right time for
the General Assembly to restore the credibility of the
United Nations by assuming its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations and by showing that the
acquis on the Palestinian issue is more than just words.

We urge that everything possible be done to
uphold the collective obligation to protect civilians in
all circumstances, including Palestinian civilians, and
to avert further destabilization of the situation with a
view to salvaging the prospects for peace, to which we
remain committed and for which we have not yet lost
all hope.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We requested that
this emergency special session be reconvened today
because the Security Council failed to adopt draft
resolution S/2018/516, which called for the protection of
Palestinian civilians, owing to the veto of our American
friends. That is the reason why Turkey, in its capacity
as Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
6/24

Let us be clear about what the draft resolution
before us is and is not. It is a call to all States Members
of the United Nations to alleviate human suffering, a
call to seek peaceful means to deter and prevent attacks
on civilians. It sides with international law. It is about
supporting de-escalation on the ground and deterring
further attacks on civilians. It is a call to the SecretaryGeneral to come up with recommendations on how to
protect civilians from further attacks. It is a call to all
the parties to end the loss of life.

Despite persistent international protests, the
Palestinians are still deprived of their inalienable
rights. Their legitimate aspirations to statehood are still
not fulfilled. They are faced with efforts to erode the
established parameters for a lasting peace. Now, to top
it all, their right to peaceful protest is being blatantly
violated. As we gather here today, we have a common
duty to prevent any further erosion of international
law. We must show that we are united in upholding the
principles of international law and the letter and spirit
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our expectation with respect to the draft resolution
before us is clear and I shall repeat it. We request the
Secretary-General to submit a report containing his
proposals on ways and means of ensuring the protection
of civilians, including recommendations regarding
an international protection mechanism to prevent and
deter attacks on Palestinian civilians. This represents
only a modest step in the right direction after weeks of
violence and huge loss of life.
17-45867

21/12/2017

Asking for United Nations action is choosing
multilateralism over unilateralism. That is what the
draft resolution is about. Unilateral decisions will not
bring peace; only a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement can do that. The parameters are well known
to all of us. A negotiated settlement for two States that
will lead to the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, remains the only way to lay the
foundations for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
between two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by
side. If peace is what we all want, there is no alternative
to that.
We see that one country has introduced a draft
amendment (A/ES-10/L.24) in order to create
confusion among the membership. The draft resolution
before us today has been carefully drafted through
several rounds of negotiations in the Security Council.
The Council’s failure to act on this vital matter is the
reason we are here today. Members will recall that
the amendments that became a draft resolution of the
Council (S/2018/520) on 1 June were also rejected (see
S/PV.8274). I therefore ask the Assembly to do the same
and refrain from supporting the consideration of this or
any other amendment.
As we vote on the draft resolution, we must stand
on the right side of history and act for the peace and
dignity of all.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I am honoured to stand here
today, and to stand up here to represent Israel at every
United Nations forum and in every United Nations
hall. I am honoured because I would rather speak in
this Hall every single day in defence of my people than
give even one eulogy for one Israeli killed by Hamas.
That is why I am here today to stand up for a basic
right afforded to every country in the world, the right
to defend its citizens.
The General Assembly has convened two meetings
of the tenth emergency session in the past six months,
both related to Israel. The first was about Jerusalem (see
A/ES-10/PV.37). It was the international community’s
attempt to take away the right to determine our own
capital. Today’s meeting is about our right to defend our
people. It is the international community’s attempt to
take away our basic right to defend ourselves.
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23, which is before the
Assembly today, does not protect innocent Palestinians.
It does not protect Israelis. It does not condemn or even

A/ES-10/PV.38

mention Hamas, the terror group directly responsible
for the violence in our region. By supporting the draft
resolution, members are colluding with a terrorist
organization. By supporting this draft resolution, the
Assembly is empowering Hamas.
Over the past two months, we have heard from
some of the world’s worst offenders about the so-called
Palestinian Great March of Return. Ismail Haniya, the
head of Hamas, President Erdoğan of Turkey and others
have expressed their support for such attacks against
Israel. In fact, the draft resolution was introduced just
now by Turkey and Algeria, not exactly two champions
of human rights. The draft resolution is nothing more
than a twisted stamp of approval for terrorism. It
seems that certain leaders will call for a meeting of
the emergency special session branding Israel as a
scapegoat in order to satisfy the political basis for an
upcoming election.
The name of the riots tells members of the Assembly
everything that they need to know. The rioters are not
marching with the intention of returning to Gaza or
even to Judea and Samaria. What does it mean when
they say “return”? They want to seize Tel Aviv, Haifa
and Jerusalem and replace the Jewish State. We take
them at their word, and we pledge to ensure that they
do not succeed.
The so-called Great March of Return was not a
march at all. It was a violent assault on Israel by Hamas.
The Palestinians claimed that it was a peaceful protest.
Members heard that. Let me therefore ask: when
someone plants explosives on the fence that separates
Gaza and Israel, is that peaceful? When someone throws
Molotov cocktails or fires weapons, is that peaceful?
When Hamas launches hundreds of rockets at Israeli
civilians, is that peaceful? When one Hamas mortar
shells hits a kindergarten, is that a peaceful protest?
Hamas even uses children’s toys as weapons. It has
turned kites into bombs and sent them over the fence,
igniting more than 400 fires in Israel. Some 4,400 acres
of Israeli agricultural fields were set aflame.
Members should ask themselves how they would
react if 40,000 rioters calling for their destruction tried
to storm their borders. They should think about their
country and their borders for a moment. What if the
United Nations then called for an emergency special
meeting to condemn their country for defending itself?
What would they do and say if they were standing here
in my place? Just imagine what would have happened

17-458677/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

had the 40,000 rioters in Gaza succeeded in breaching
the fence. The world would have witnessed numerous
Israeli and Palestinian casualties.
Last month, Hamas claimed responsibility for
85 per cent of those killed during a day of rioting. Some
members of the Security Council stood in solidarity
with those confirmed terrorists. It is not I but the
Hamas leaders who say that. They actually attempted
to adopt a draft resolution (S/2018/516) blaming Israel
for the crimes of Hamas. It was not adopted, thanks
to the United States and other brave countries that did
not support it. However, because it is about Israel, it is
still being discussed within the General Assembly. It
is about time to expose the falsehoods of the situation
in Gaza and draw the clearest possible demarcation
between right and wrong. Anyone supporting draft
resolution A/ES-20/L.23 is supporting Hamas.
Let us set the record straight concerning the facts.
First, the Palestinian rioters were neither unarmed or
defenceless. Secondly, the true root cause of the violent
riots of recent weeks was the terrorism orchestrated
by Hamas. It was Hamas that decided when to attack,
when to retreat and when to send its own people straight
into harm’s way and even to their deaths. Thirdly, it is
Hamas that is recognized as a terrorist organization by
Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the European Union,
Japan, the United Kingdom, Egypt and the United
States. Lastly, and let me make this very clear, the only
country facing a double standard on the world stage and
here in the General Assembly is Israel.
The General Assembly today seeks to join the socalled Human Rights Council in Geneva in adopting a
grossly biased draft resolution condemning Israel. That
is the same Council that has one permanent agenda
item for condemning Israel and just one other item for
every other conflict in the world.
The hypocrisy of the General Assembly should
come as no surprise. Last year alone, the Assembly
adopted 20 resolutions condemning Israel. There have
been 10 emergency special sessions of the General
Assembly since the founding of the United Nations.
Five of the 10 were on Israel. The current tenth session
concerns Israel. It was first convened in April 1997 and
it has been open for more than 20 years. This session
has been reconvened 18 times, including today. It is not
just a mockery of the United Nations, it is abuse and
misuse of the United Nations.
8/24

21/12/2017

Just for comparison’s sake, the devastation in
Syria, which has claimed 500,000 lives and displaced
7 million people, has never resulted in an emergency
special session of the General Assembly. This type of
worldwide assault is reserved only for Israel. It is not
criticism. It is not a difference in opinion on policy. It
is anti-Semitism.
Israel has gone to great lengths to improve the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Despite the fact that we
fully withdrew from Gaza in 2005, Israel facilitates the
transfer of hundreds of tons of goods into Gaza every
single day. It is Hamas that destroyed the crossing
enabling the entry of those goods. It is Hamas that steals
international aid, the money that Member States give to
Gaza. It is Hamas that in 2017 spent $260 million on
terrorism. Yet it is Hamas that is not even mentioned in
today’s draft resolution.
I ask everyone, including the Ambassador of
Turkey, why it was not possible to include Hamas
in the draft resolution. I ask the Ambassadors of
Algeria, Bangladesh and Venezuela to read the draft
resolution. Do they support terrorism? Do they support
suicide bombers?
Hamas was not alone in generating the conflict.
Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian President, has refused
to pay Palestinian Authority employees in Gaza for
months. While Israel works with the United Nations
and others to promote development projects in Gaza,
Abbas and the Palestinian Authority hold progress
back. Israel wants to help the residents of Gaza, but
humanitarian gestures must go both ways. We will not
rest until Avera Mangistu, Hisham Al-Sayed and the
bodies of Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin are returned
safely to Israel.
The situation along the fence with Gaza is very
clear. Israel is a democracy defending itself. Hamas
is a terrorist organization attacking Israelis and
Palestinians. If the United Nations adopts this draft
resolution, it will therefore have signed in writing its
unequivocal support for terrorism against Israel.
Let us not pretend. If the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) were to attack Stockholm tomorrow,
ISIS would be held responsible for the attack. If
Al-Qaida assaulted Paris, the United Nations would
issue the strongest condemnation of Al-Qaida. Only
when Hamas attacks Israel does the United Nations seek
to blame Israel. The moral majority in this Hall should
not tolerate a different standard for Israeli victims of
17-45867

21/12/2017

A/ES-10/PV.38

terror. I have a simple message for those who support
the draft resolution today. They are the ammunition for
Hamas’s guns and the warheads for Hamas’s missiles.

repeated warnings in that regard that compel us to act
responsibly and urgently under international law and in
accordance with our humanitarian obligations.

We will continue to do everything in our power to
save innocent lives on both sides of the fence, but let us
make no mistake. Israel will never compromise when
it comes to the safety of our citizens and defending
our country. A vote for this draft resolution is a vote
for Hamas.

The OIC therefore once again calls for measures
to be taken based on international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law, to ensure
desperately needed international protection for the
Palestinian people. As Israel persists in breaching
international law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law, and in continuing its flagrant
violations of United Nations resolutions, silence in the
face of such crimes and human suffering is inexcusable.
We must act now to alleviate the immense suffering of
the Palestinian people and bring an end to the illegal
occupation and historic injustice.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I am honoured to
address the General Assembly today in my capacity as
the Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) group at the United Nations.
We thank you, Sir, for convening this tenth
emergency special session. Bangladesh is currently
the Chair of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the
OIC, and in May hosted the forty-fifth session of
the Council in Dhaka. Once again the question of
Palestine was among the central issues addressed, and
the Organization’s core positions — which are firmly
rooted in international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and our principled, long-standing solidarity
with the Palestinian people and their just cause — were
clearly reaffirmed.
The OIC remains extremely alarmed about the
grave situation endured by the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of the ongoing
illegal and repressive policies and practices of Israel,
the occupying Power. In recent weeks, we have
witnessed anguishing scenes of human suffering,
especially in the Gaza Strip, as Israeli occupying forces
have continued a violent onslaught against unarmed
Palestinian civilians peacefully protesting against
the Israeli occupation and blockade while calling for
respect for their inalienable human rights. We condemn
such deliberate, systematic and unlawful use of force
against civilians, which has resulted in the killing of
at least 129 Palestinians, including 16 children, and
caused injury to more than 13,600 civilians, many of
whom have been permanently disabled.
The crisis has further traumatized the Palestinian
people and further exacerbated the already dire
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, where poverty, food
insecurity and unemployment have reached extreme
levels and the health, sanitation and energy sectors
are near collapse, creating a completely unsustainable,
inhumane and explosive situation. We have heard

We deeply regret the failure of the recent initiative
in the Security Council (see S/PV.8274) calling for
action in this regard, owing to the veto cast by a
permanent member of the Council. Such an outcome
has not only undermined serious efforts to address
the crisis in a manner that would de-escalate the high
tensions and protect defenceless civilians, it has also
further encouraged Israel, the occupying Power, to
continue its aggressions against the Palestinian people
with total impunity.
We have recently witnessed once again the
continuing brutality of the Israeli occupying forces,
without fear of accountability, killing an additional four
Palestinians, including one child, and injuring at least
600 other civilians, including women and children, in
Gaza. That is in addition to the killing of a Palestinian
youth in the West Bank and to the advancement of
further settlement colonization measures, especially in
and around occupied East Jerusalem, and to attempts
to forcibly displace Palestinian civilians, including
hundreds of vulnerable Bedouin families from Khan
Al-Ahmar. That is a shocking reflection of just the past
week and of only some of the countless violations and
crimes perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian
civilian population under its occupation.
In the light of the grave situation and in accordance
with the decisions by the OIC Council of Foreign
Ministers and the seventh extraordinary Islamic
Summit Conference, the OIC and the Group of Arab
States have embarked on a joint initiative, together with
other countries, in sponsoring draft resolution A/ES10/L.23, now before the Assembly. We appeal urgently
to all delegations for their principled support. With

17-458679/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

21/12/2017

its call to the Secretary-General to act, this initiative
constitutes a serious effort, albeit a first step, towards
ensuring much-needed protection for the Palestinian
civilian population in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

and approximately 14,000 civilians have been injured
by the occupying forces. The States members of the
Movement reiterate their categorical condemnation
of the killing of Palestinian civilians by the Israeli
occupying forces.

We urge support for this draft resolution as an
immediate contribution to deterring violence against
all civilians, de-escalating the dangerous tensions and
ensuring calm and restraint, while alleviating the dire
humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip and protecting
and saving civilian lives. It is imperative that we act to
achieve those pressing objectives, which are also vital to
creating an environment conducive to the advancement
of our decades-long efforts to achieve a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution pursuant to the
relevant United Nations resolutions, and to realize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
the right to live in freedom, security and dignity in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

It should also be noted that the killing of more
than 60 of those Palestinians, including children, took
place on 14 May, the very day of the provocative and
unilateral move of the Embassy of the United States of
America in Israel from Tel Aviv to the city of Jerusalem,
in violation of the Security Council resolutions on that
matter. As we have reaffirmed on other occasions, such
provocative and unilateral actions will only increase
tensions, with potentially far-reaching repercussions.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is with a great sense
of responsibility that the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela speaks on behalf of the 120 States members
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) at
this emergency special session to address the question
of Palestine, a subject to which we have historically
attached particular importance.
First of all, NAM reaffirms once again its unfailing
solidarity with the Palestinian people and unwavering
support for their just cause. The situation on the
ground in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, is alarming. Recent acts of violence
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, have
only intensified the tensions, suffering and despair,
especially in Gaza, increasing the need to take action
to save civilian lives through measures to ensure their
protection and alleviate the dire humanitarian crisis
produced by the Israeli blockade, which has devastated
Gaza and must be immediately and completely lifted.
Since 30 March, Palestinian civilians, in the
exercise of the their right to peaceful protest, have been
participating in the Great March of Return, a peaceful
civilian protest against Israel’s illegal occupation,
oppression and dispossession of the Palestinian people,
which has lasted for more than 50 years. Tragically, in
the course of those peaceful protests, more than 125
Palestinians have been killed, including 15 children,
10/24

That atrocious massacre was the result of the
criminal brutality of the occupation forces of the
occupying Power, which used disproportionate force
against Palestinian civilians with live ammunition, in
violation of international law. The NAM Coordinating
Bureau condemns Israel’s excessive and disproportionate
use of force on civilians and reiterates its support
for an independent and transparent investigation of
those killings, as well as for international action to
ensure accountability and prevent Israel from going
unpunished for those atrocities.
The current situation is clearly unsustainable. The
tragic events in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, are strong evidence of the
need for the international community to intensify its
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects, in conformity
with international law. The only way to end the
prolonged conflict is through peaceful measures based
on a two-State solution within the pre-1967 borders,
aimed at establishing a sovereign and independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
NAM reiterates its deep concern about the lack of
accountability for all violations committed by Israel,
which fosters impunity and destabilizes the situation
on the ground while diminishing the prospects for
peace. We therefore continue to call for international
action, in particular by the Security Council, to ensure
accountability and a halt to violations committed
by the occupying Power. Israel must comply with its
obligations and responsibilities under international
law. The international community must also ensure
the protection of Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip
and throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
17-45867

21/12/2017

including East Jerusalem, so as to resolve the dire state
of insecurity of the occupied population and prevent
the loss of additional innocent lives, in conformity with
humanitarian law and human rights law and pursuant to
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that connection, the States members of the
Movement want to note that they deeply regret the
recent exercise of the right to veto by the delegation of
the United States of America on Security Council draft
resolution S/2018/516, introduced by the delegation of
the State of Kuwait, the goal of which was to address
the recent escalation of violence and the urgent need
to protect the Palestinian civilian population in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, in particular in the Gaza Strip. We are
therefore concerned about the inability of the Security
Council to fulfil its mandate on this important issue
thanks to the fact that the particular interests of a
permanent member have been allowed to .
At the same time, NAM reiterates that Israel’s
killing and maiming of Palestinian civilians cannot be
tolerated or justified under any circumstances, and that
the occupying Power must fully abide by its obligations
under international law. We therefore call for immediate
steps to end Israel’s closure of the Gaza Strip and its
restrictions on it, for ensuring the sustained opening
of crossing points for the normal movement and access
of persons and goods. The Israeli blockade, which
continues to impose unprecedented humanitarian,
social and economic suffering on more than 2 million
Palestinian children, women and men, must end now.
In that regard, we stress once again that the crisis in
Gaza must be comprehensively addressed in accordance
with international law, humanitarian law, human rights
law and the relevant resolutions, bearing in mind the
overall situation of the ongoing foreign illegitimate
and belligerent occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, that Israel has perpetrated
since 1967, as well as in the context of the unequivocal
call for an end to an occupation that has lasted for more
than half a century.
NAM respectfully calls on all members of the
General Assembly to support the draft resolution
presented by the Group of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which is in line
with the responsibilities of the international community
under the Charter of the United Nations; international
law, including humanitarian law and human rights law;

A/ES-10/PV.38

and relevant resolutions, as well as the collective duty
to protect civilians, including children, in situations
of armed conflict. The text addresses important
issues related to the current crisis, including the
violence against civilians, and encourages the serious
consideration of measures to ensure the safety, wellbeing and protection of the Palestinian civilian
population, beginning with a request to the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report containing, among other
things, his proposals on ways and means towards
that end, as well as recommendations regarding an
international protection mechanism.
Moreover, NAM reaffirms the validity of all
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council on
the question of Palestine and the status of Jerusalem,
which are legally binding on all States Members of
the United Nations and must therefore be fully and
effectively implemented. Respect for those resolutions,
in particular resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and
2334 (2016), is essential for improving the situation
and advancing the prospects for peace. The Security
Council must also abide by its obligations under the
Charter and act to uphold its own resolutions and
maintain its credibility.
In the light of the commemoration this year of
the seventieth anniversary of the Nakba, the member
States of the Movement reaffirm their full solidarity
with the heroic Palestinian people and their unwavering
support for their just cause, in their legitimate struggle
for justice, dignity, peace and the exercise of their
inalienable rights, including to self-determination and
freedom in their independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and for achieving a just
solution to the plight of the Palestine refugees based
on resolution 194 (III). Today it is more necessary
than ever to put an end to the prolonged tragedy and
suffering of the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement calls for
intensified work to mobilize international efforts, in
the framework of a collective process, in order to end
without delay the Israeli occupation that began in 1967
as well as to attain a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace to the question of Palestine on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
while stressing that a peaceful solution to the protracted
conflict is essential to making peace and stability in the
Middle East and at a global scale a reality.

17-4586711/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Ukraine align themselves with this statement.
We are deeply alarmed about the sharp escalation of
violence we have witnessed recently in Gaza, resulting
in a high number of Palestinians killed or injured. We
underline the pressing need for a political solution
on the basis of internationally agreed parameters,
leading to a two-State solution. The Security Council
has a responsibility for the peace process. All credible
efforts to restart the peace process must be supported.
We underscore the absolute urgency of addressing
the gravity of the humanitarian situation in Gaza
and express our firm support to the efforts of United
Nations Special Coordinator Mladenov in that regard.
Israel must respect the right to peaceful protests
and ensure the use of proportionate measures when
protecting its legitimate security interests. We urge
all parties to take immediate steps to de-escalate the
situation and to act with the utmost restraint in order
to avoid further loss of life. Israeli security forces
must refrain from the excessive use of force against
unarmed civilians. The lethal use of force should be
exercised with maximum restraint and only as a last
resort to protect life. The use of force taken must be
proportionate at all times.
Those leading the protests in Gaza, including
Hamas and other groups, have a responsibility to
avoid provocations and ensure that they remain strictly
non-violent. We condemn the firing of rockets from
Gaza into Israel.
We underscore the European Union’s clear,
consolidated position on Jerusalem as a final-status
issue and that we will continue to respect the
international consensus on Jerusalem embodied in
Security Council resolution 478 (1980), among others,
including on the diplomatic representations, until the
final status of Jerusalem is resolved.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Seventy years ago the United Nations
made two promises to the world. The first created a
free, independent and sovereign State of Israel. That
promise was kept, and we can now look at Israel’s seat
12/24

21/12/2017

and regard it as a full Member of the Organization.
The second was to establish a free, independent and
sovereign State of Palestine. Regrettably, that promise
has not been kept.
We are talking about a promise that has remained
unfulfilled for more than 70 years, because the creation
of the State of Palestine has not been permitted. We are
talking about more than 50 years of Israeli occupation
and the continued growth of illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory. And we are talking
about more than 10 years of an inhumane blockade
against Gaza.
Against that backdrop, I want to make a
fundamental clarification in order to understand one
of the reasons that brings us together today. While
there are two parties to the incorrectly termed IsraelPalestine conflict, I want to make it clear that it is not
a conflict but rather a situation of illegal occupation
in which there is an occupying Power and an occupied
territory. It is a situation in which the two parties are
not on an equal footing. Israel is the occupying Power
and the other side, Palestine, is the occupied people and
territory. That is to say, Israel is the oppressor State and
Palestine the oppressed people.
There is a historical and undeniable inequality.
One of the parties continues to use force to occupy
the territory of the other. The Palestinian population
is living under the siege of the occupying Power of
Israel and its defence forces, and that occupation
unquestionably poses a huge obstacle to the protection
of the lives of civilians, Israelis as well as Palestinians.
One of the parties has built checkpoints in the
occupied Palestinian territories, forcing that population
to live in fear on a daily basis. One of the parties, the
occupying Power, has built an annexationist wall along
the length of the West Bank as part of its colonial and
expansionist policies — a wall that, by the way, was
declared illegal in 2004 by the International Court
of Justice. One of the parties is responsible for the
construction of the illegal settlements in the territory of
the other. One of the parties is responsible for preventing
the return of more than 6 million Palestinian refugees
to their homes. Let me to repeat that. One of the parties
is responsible for preventing the return of more than
6 million Palestinian refugees to their homes. One of
the parties is responsible for detaining hundreds of
Palestinian children.
17-45867

21/12/2017

One of the parties is also responsible for Gaza
being besieged and blocked by air and sea, and for its
insufficient access to basic services such as drinking
water and electricity. One of the parties is responsible
for the illegal occupation of territories that do not belong
to it. It is also responsible for the confiscation of fertile
land and water, the demolition of Palestinian homes
and the transfer of settlers to illegal settlements built
in Palestinian territories. One of the parties imposes a
collective punishment on the other.
About two years ago, my country was elected by
this great Assembly to be a member of the Security
Council. We assumed that responsibility in the belief
that by being part of the Council we would contribute to
the right of the Palestinian people to live in peace in the
territories that belong to them historically and without
any fear. Unfortunately, we have been unable to even
come close to that aspiration. On the contrary, during
our time on the Council, the situation of the Palestinian
people has deteriorated. The Israeli Government has
increased its policies against the Palestinian people. In
other words, I declare to the Assembly that the Security
Council has failed in trying to resolve the situation of
Palestine.
There is an underlying reason, which is the fact that
Israel indirectly enjoys the right of veto through one of
the permanent members of the Council. In the past two
years, two instances have left us deeply concerned. One
of them was the unilateral decision of the United States
Government to establish its Embassy in the occupied
city of Jerusalem. When the Security Council tried to
condemn that illegal decision, it was hindered by the
use of the veto by the United States. To that we add
what happened on Friday, 1 June (see S/PV.8274), when
the United States of America again vetoed a Council
draft resolution (S/2018/516). Its main purpose was to
provide protection to the Palestinian people, who at the
time were being massacred by the Israeli occupation
forces. Regrettably, it was also vetoed by the United
States.
Unfortunately, historically, the role of the United
States of America and its policies in favouring unjust
systems that violate human rights is nothing new. In that
connection, I would like to quote from an article by the
prominent United States linguist and philosopher Noam
Chomsky in which he refers precisely to the support the
United States gives to Israel, the occupying Power. He
makes a very interesting comparison between United
States support for Israel and the support of the United

A/ES-10/PV.38

States for the apartheid regime in South Africa. He
states:
(spoke in English)
“However, there is one comparison to South
Africa that is realistic — and significant. In
1958, South Africa’s Foreign Minister informed
the United States Ambassador that it didn’t much
matter if South Africa became a pariah State.
The United Nations may harshly condemn South
Africa, he said, but, as the Ambassador put it,
‘what mattered perhaps more than all other votes
put together was that of [the] United States in view
of its predominant position of leadership in [the]
Western world.’ For 40 years, ever since it chose
expansion over security, Israel has made essentially
the same judgment.”
(spoke in Spanish)
In other words, it does not matter that the rest of the
Security Council members are in favour of something. It
does not matter what the General Assembly has decided
through the 20 resolutions that the representative
of Israel mentioned, or the five emergency special
sessions convened in the Assembly, because in reality
what is important is the support — the political
and diplomatic cover and economic and military
support — of the United States in maintaining the
system of the occupation of Palestinian territories, a
system that violates and threatens international law.
Today we would like to again express our firm
commitment to all international efforts that may lead
to a peaceful resolution of the situation of occupation
that the Palestinian people are enduring. In that regard,
we join initiatives such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative that
provide guarantees for a just and lasting peace so that
both peoples can live within recognized and secure
borders.
We reaffirm our belief that the only long-term
solution to the Palestinian occupation situation is
a two-State solution whereby a free, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State is ultimately consolidated
within its pre-1967 international borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Lastly, I would like to mention that my delegation
is honoured to be a sponsor of draft resolution A/ES10/L.23, which we will vote on today. We know that

17-4586713/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

one delegation likes to make lists of who is in favour
and who is against. But we also must recall that history
makes lists, and just as important as history is that our
own consciences make lists too.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for reconvening this important tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly
to consider the issue of the protection of Palestinian
civilians, especially children. South Africa believes
that today’s debate and action on draft resolution A/ES10/L.23 is urgent and timely. The deteriorating situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, cannot be allowed to continue and remains a
blight on the conscience of the international community.
It is unacceptable that the Security Council has
once again failed to act in response to the escalating
violence in Gaza and to protect the civilian population
of the occupied Palestinian territories against the illegal
and disproportionate use of force by the Israel Defense
Forces. The General Assembly must therefore now take
on the moral and legal obligation to act effectively to
protect the people living in Palestine and the other
occupied territories and assume its responsibilities by
taking urgent measures to remedy the situation.
Over the past few weeks, we have witnessed a violent
act of aggression carried out by the Israeli armed forces
along the Gaza border, leading to the death of dozens
of civilians who were taking part in a peaceful protest
against the inauguration of the United States Embassy
in Jerusalem. The inability of the Security Council
to agree on action to protect civilians in Gaza should
not absolve the entire United Nations membership as a
whole from that responsibility. The General Assembly,
as the most representative organ of the United Nations,
should act as the moral conscience of the international
community and should not shrink from acting when the
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security has been unable to act, as has been
the case.
We therefore believe that it is imperative that the
Assembly vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us today. South Africa believes that the draft resolution
rightly condemns the escalation of violence as well as
the loss of civilian lives, including casualties among
children, caused by the Israeli forces. Furthermore, the
draft resolution is based on international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, as well as the relevant Security Council
14/24

21/12/2017

and General Assembly resolutions on the question of
Palestine. The draft resolution makes reference to the
protection of civilians, including children, in armed
conflict, as well as the protection of humanitarian
personnel and journalists. We also fully support the
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing proposals on ways and means to that end,
as well as to make recommendations regarding an
international protection mechanism.
South Africa reiterates that the only way to bring
about genuine and everlasting peace between Israel
and Palestine is by engaging in comprehensive and
unconditional negotiations to deal with all final-status
issues, including the issue of Jerusalem, the unrelenting
expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories of Palestine, the lifting of the illegal Gaza
blockade and the ongoing occupation of the Palestinian
territory. It is clear that peace and security throughout
the Middle East will not be attained without peace
between Israel and Palestine.
We reaffirm that the central responsibility for
attaining peace lies primarily in the hands of the
Palestinian and Israeli people. As part of the international
community, we should support and encourage the
parties in that endeavour. The international legal
framework for those negotiations has been set. They
include the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, to name just
a few.
In conclusion, while the parties and the international
community dither, the humanitarian situation,
particularly in Gaza, is further deteriorating. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) represents one
of the concrete steps that the Organization has taken
to alleviate the suffering of the people on the ground.
We therefore appeal to the international community
to support UNRWA. That will ensure that the Agency
continues to provide its services, especially in the
light of the severe and recurring financial shortfalls
that continue to affect its programmes. We would
like to emphasize that funding for UNRWA should be
sustainable, predictable and sufficient.
The President: I now call on the observer of the
observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The delegation of
the Holy See would like to express its appreciation
17-45867

21/12/2017

to the States Members of the United Nations for their
commitment to protecting the Palestinian civilian
population and all civilian populations, averting
new rounds of violence and promoting dialogue and
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians on the
peace process.
The Holy See would like to echo the concern that
Pope Francis has voiced in the face of the escalation of
tensions in the Holy Land and in the Middle East, and his
great sorrow for the victims and wounded in closeness
to all who suffer. As we have repeatedly experienced,
war begets war and violence begets violence, and the
spiral of violence deviates even further from the path of
peace, dialogue and negotiation. The fact is that peace is
a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human
rights by all. Every human being has the right to enjoy
peace and see it restored in the shortest possible time.
The Holy See recently had occasion to point out
that the Fourth Geneva Convention puts the protection
of civilians at the heart of international humanitarian
law. The 1977 Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Conventions significantly improved the legal protection
covering civilians and the wounded. It is therefore a
humanitarian imperative to avoid targeting civilians
and civilian infrastructure as a tactic of conflict,
as well as the politicization and militarization of
humanitarian aid.
The Holy See therefore calls once again for the
courage to say yes to encounters and no to conflict;
yes to dialogue and no to violence; yes to negotiations
and no to hostilities; yes to respect for agreements
and no to acts of provocation; and yes to sincerity
and no to duplicity. All of that takes courage, strength
and tenacity. The Holy See would like to renew its
appeal for wisdom and prudence to prevail in order to
prevent new additional elements of tension in a global
panorama that is already convulsed and marked by
many cruel conflicts.
There can be no doubt that the Holy City of
Jerusalem is a place of great religious significance, not
only for the inhabitants of the Holy Land but also for
the worshippers of the three monotheistic Abrahamic
religions all over the world. For that reason, the Holy
See reiterates what it already expressed during the 37th
plenary meeting of the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly, held on 21 December 2017,
that it is

A/ES-10/PV.38

“the obligation of all nations to respect the historical
status quo of the holy city, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions”
and
“that only an internationally guaranteed status can
preserve its unique character and be an assurance
of dialogue and reconciliation for peace in the
region” (A/ES-10/PV.37, p.17).
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.23, entitled “Protection of the
Palestinian civilian population”.
In connection with the draft resolution, the General
Assembly has before it a draft amendment, circulated
in document A/ES-10/L.24. In accordance with rule 90
of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first take
a decision on the draft amendment.
I call on the representative of Algeria on a point
of order.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): On behalf of all the
sponsors of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23, under rule
74 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, I
would like to put forward a no-action motion regarding
draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24.
Since the draft amendment, submitted by the
delegation of the United States of America, has not
been presented to all Member States for consideration
in discussion, we believe that its introduction today at
the General Assembly is not relevant to our meeting
and might divert the General Assembly from the main
purpose, which is the adoption of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.23, which calls for the protection of
Palestinian civilians, among other things. In addition,
we believe that all issues are covered in our draft
resolution. Moreover, as it stands, the draft amendment
would undermine the ongoing efforts for reconciliation
between all Palestinians, and therefore hamper any
prospects for the already remote possibility of a
resumption of the peace process.
I insist, on behalf of all the sponsors, that the goal
of the draft resolution is solely the protection of the
Palestinian civilians under occupation and the practical
measures that the Secretary-General would propose
to the General Assembly to that end. I therefore

17-4586715/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

21/12/2017

ask the whole membership to vote in favour of this
no-action motion.

call on all Member States to oppose this motion and
vote no.

The President: The representative of Algeria
has moved, within the terms of rule 74 of the rules of
procedure, that no action be taken on draft amendment
A/ES-10/L.24. Rule 74 reads as follows:

The fact that some Member States believe that
condemning Hamas does not even deserve a vote
is astounding. Denying a vote on the United States
draft amendment would be the height of this organ’s
hypocrisy. The General Assembly would be taking
direct action to silence the United States. Nothing in our
draft amendment is controversial. It condemns Hamas
for launching rockets, diverting resources to build
military infrastructure and obstructing humanitarian
aid. Those are issues on which we should be united in
condemning Hamas. This motion suggests that these
issues are not even worthy of a vote in the General
Assembly. What are members afraid of in voting on the
draft amendment?

“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition to
the proposer of the motion, two representatives may
speak in favour of, and two against, the motion,
after which the motion shall be immediately put to
the vote.”
In accordance with rule 74 of the rules of procedure, I
now call on the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We have asked for the floor in support of the
no-action motion put forward by the representative of
Algeria under rule 74 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly on the draft amendment contained
in document A/ES-10/L.24.
The draft amendment proposed by the delegation
of the United States is unacceptable and inappropriate,
as it affects the balance and distorts the essence and
objective of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23, entitled
“Protection of the Palestinian civilian population”.
I repeat: “Protection of the Palestinian civilian
population”. Moreover, it is contrary to the goal of the
resumption of the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly, which is to ensure the protection of
the Palestinian civilian population from the aggressor,
the occupying Power of Palestinian territory. The
delegation of Cuba therefore supports the no-action
motion presented by the representative of Algeria on
the draft amendment introduced by the representative
of the United States. We call on the entire membership
to vote in favour of the motion.
(spoke in English)
I will repeat it in English. We call on the entire
membership to vote in favour of the no-action motion.
The President: In accordance with rule 74 of the
rules of procedure, I now call on the representative of
the United States.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This
attempt to obstruct a vote on a draft amendment (A/ES10/L.24) proposed by the United States is shameful. I
16/24

Those who vote to stop action on the United States
draft amendment are voting against condemning
Hamas. They cannot claim to be against the actions of
Hamas and still deny a vote on the draft amendment.
Furthermore, the United States recalls the basic
principle that the General Assembly should consider a
legitimate and relevant matter proposed by a Member
State. On that basis, the vote on the United States draft
amendment should go forward.
I urge all Member States to vote no on this
no-action motion. Our draft amendment takes a biased
and unbalanced draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.23) and
pushes it in the right direction. Most of all, the draft
amendment recognizes the reality of the situation on
the ground and the reality of the actions of Hamas that
have been counterproductive to peace. The United
States again calls on all Member States to oppose the
no-action motion.
The President: In accordance with rule 74 of the
rules of procedure, I now call on the representative
of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): The delegation
of Bangladesh is taking the floor to support the
no-action motion proposed by the delegation of Algeria
with regard to draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24. The
objective and purpose of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23
is to provide, in accordance with the provisions of
international law, essential protection to the Palestinian
civilian population living under Israel’s occupation.
We cannot accept a draft amendment that in any way
attempts to excuse the killing of peaceful Palestinian
17-45867

21/12/2017

protesters and the violation of their rights and diverges
from the objective of ensuring their protection.
The draft resolution is a balanced text that is fully
grounded in international law and comprehensively
addresses the situation on the ground and all violations
against civilians. Attempts to undermine the balance
of the text and to shift responsibilities and change its
focus cannot be considered genuine efforts to improve
the text. We reject that measure and therefore support
the no-action motion, and urge all members to vote in
favour of it.
The President: In accordance with rule 74 of the
rules of procedure, I now call on the representative
of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Canada is taking the floor
to express its disappointment that a no-action motion
has been presented on draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24
to draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23, on the protection
of the Palestinian civilian population. As a matter of
principle, Canada believes that draft resolutions put
before the General Assembly deserve to be examined
on their merits, as do any draft amendments to them.
We understand and respect the fact that Member States
have differing views on the draft amendment, and
they have every right to express those views through a
vote. However, what we cannot accept is the attempt to
prevent legitimate debate. Canada will vote against the
no-action motion. We ask all Member States, no matter
what their views may be on the draft amendment itself,
to vote against it as well on principle.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
motion submitted by the representative of Algeria that
no action be taken on the draft amendment contained in
document A/ES-10/L.24.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Chad, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt,
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,

A/ES-10/PV.38

Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guyana,
Kenya, Malawi, Nepal, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Uganda
The motion was rejected by 78 votes to 59, with
26 abstentions.
The President: Since the motion for no action has
not been adopted, in accordance with rule 90 of its rules
of procedure, the Assembly shall now proceed to take a
decision on draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

17-4586717/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Chad, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guyana, India,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malawi, Mexico, Nepal, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam
18/24

21/12/2017

Draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24 was rejected by 58
votes to 62, with 42 abstentions.
The President: May I remind the delegations that
rule 84 of the rules of procedure reads as follows:
“Decisions of the General Assembly on
amendments to proposals relating to important
questions, and on parts of such proposals put to
the vote separately, shall be made by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting.”
The draft amendment contained in document A/ES10/L.24 is not adopted.
I call on the representative of the United States on
a point of order.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Under rule
71 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
the United States calls a point of order.
The required majority for the adoption of draft
amendment A/ES-10/L.24 is a simple majority of those
present and voting. Because the draft amendment
received a simple majority of those present and voting,
I request that you, Mr. President, rule that the draft
amendment was adopted. The amendment was adopted.
The President: I will suspend the meeting for
five minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 5.10 p.m. and
resumed at 5.15 p.m.
The President: I announced the outcome of the
voting on the basis of rule 84 of the rules of procedure,
which states that
“Decisions of the General Assembly on
amendments to proposals relating to important
questions, and on parts of such proposals put to
the vote separately, shall be made by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting”.
The delegation of the United States has appealed against
the ruling of the President. Pursuant to rule 71 of the
rules of procedure, the appeal shall be immediately
put to the vote and the President’s ruling shall stand
unless overruled by a majority of the members present
and voting.
I give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The United
States appeals your ruling, Mr. President, under rule
17-45867

21/12/2017

71. The United States requests that the appeal be put
to a vote, and we thank you, Sir, for that. The United
States requests that all delegations vote in favour of this
appeal of the President’s ruling.
The President: As I announced, the delegation of
the United States has appealed against the ruling of the
President. Pursuant to rule 71 of the rules of procedure,
the appeal shall be immediately put to the vote and the
President’s ruling shall stand unless overruled by a
majority of the members present and voting.
I shall therefore put the appeal made by the
delegation of the United States to the vote.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname,

A/ES-10/PV.38

Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Bhutan, Botswana, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile,
Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guyana,
India, Kenya, Malawi, Panama, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Uganda, Vanuatu, Viet Nam
The appeal against the President’s ruling was
rejected by 72 votes to 66, with 26 abstentions.
The
President:
therefore stands.

The

President’s

ruling

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.23.
The draft resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in document A/ES10/L.23, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, the Sudan, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The President: We shall now begin the voting
process. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia

17-4586719/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Solomon Islands,
Togo, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Liberia,
Lithuania, Malawi, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore,
Slovakia, South Sudan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu

21/12/2017

remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): My country voted in
favour of resolution ES-10/20 because we believe it is
of the utmost importance for the General Assembly
to support the protection of civilians as a matter
of principle and to underline the pressing need for a
political solution.
However, we condemn in the strongest terms
the attacks by Hamas on civilian targets in Israel,
in contravention of international humanitarian law,
and would have preferred a text that clearly reflects
its responsibility. That is why we voted in favour of
the United States draft amendment A/ES-10/L.24. We
urgently call on all parties to take steps immediately to
de-escalate the situation and show the utmost restraint
in order to avoid any further loss of life.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Norway voted in favour of
resolution ES-10/20 because it accords with our longstanding commitment to achieving a negotiated twoState solution between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
It is important to us that the resolution calls for full
respect by all parties for international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including
regarding the protection of civilians. Furthermore,
it condemns all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror. It also deplores both the use of
any excessive, disproportionate or indiscriminate use of
force by Israeli forces against Palestinian civilians and
the firing of rockets from Gaza against Israeli civilian
areas. Despite that, however, the resolution does not
sufficiently reflect the complexities of the situation on
the ground. It has three main shortcomings.

Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.23 was adopted by
120 votes to 8, with 45 abstentions (resolution ES10/20).

First, Hamas and other non-State militant groups in
Gaza were omitted from the text. Hamas bears a major
responsibility for the current instability and regression
of development in Gaza. Islamic Jihad and other militant
factions are further aggravating an already-tense and
dangerous situation by using indiscriminate military
force against civilians. The continued activities by those
militant groups in building military installations and
tunnels run counter to the interest and well-being of the
people of Gaza. That should have been reflected in the
resolution, and that is why we supported the proposal
of the United States.

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, I would like to

Secondly, Israel’s right to protect its border and
defend its territory was also omitted. Norway supports

20/24

17-45867

21/12/2017

A/ES-10/PV.38

Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself and stresses that
the use of force must always be proportionate, limited
and necessary as a last resort. That is why we conveyed
that it is unacceptable to use live ammunition against
unarmed protesters in Gaza.

We are also concerned about the fact that the
resolution’s request for a report on civilian protection
options is expressed vaguely and that the possibility
of an international mechanism may raise unrealistic
expectations.

Thirdly, the protection mechanism referred to in
paragraphs 8, 9 and 15 of the resolution remains vague
and creates unrealistic expectations, although the
resolution provides the Secretary-General sufficient
discretion to suggest the content and direction of such
a mechanism. Those three shortcomings, however, do
not outweigh the constructive messages in the resolution.

For those reasons, Australia voted against the
resolution. However, we are steadfast in our vision for
peace. Australia remains committed to a two-State
solution and a future in which Israel and a Palestinian
State exist side by side in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders.

Improving the situation for the people of Gaza
remains a top priority for us as the Chair of the donor
group for Palestine, or the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians. Gaza must remain an integrated part of
Palestine, but to ensure its full integration, the situation
must improve politically and economically. The
Palestinian Authority must return to Gaza, access and
movement restrictions should be lifted and economic
measures affecting the population in Gaza should
be halted.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia expresses its
deep regret and sadness at the loss of life and injury
that occurred during the protests in Gaza. Australia
remains extremely concerned about the situation in
the Gaza Strip, particularly the humanitarian outlook.
We encourage Member States to provide certainty and
predictability for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to enable
it to continue to deliver services in the Gaza Strip.
Australia agrees with aspects of resolution ES10/20. We support the right to peaceful protest and
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law. We agree that the firing of rockets from
Gaza towards civilian areas of Israel is reprehensible
and completely unacceptable. However, the resolution
fails to refer to some significant matters.
It is a significant concern that the resolution fails to
mention Hamas by name or to address concerns about
the role of Hamas in the Gaza protests. The failure to
adopt the draft amendment (A/ES-10/L.24) referring to
the role of Hamas reflects the one-sided nature of the
current resolution. The resolution also fails to mention
Israel’s legitimate security concerns and its need to
protect its own population.

Mrs. Chatardova (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic endorses the statement by the observer of the
European Union delivered before the voting.
We decided to abstain in the voting on resolution
ES-10/20, on the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population, because, in our view, it does not contribute
to the much-needed de-escalation of the situation on
the ground. Its one-sided approach will add to the
perception of inequity, injustice and an atmosphere
of mistrust between both parties. Such an unbalanced
message, which fails to reflect the complexity of the
situation in Gaza or mention the destructive role of
Hamas, cannot bring the Israelis and Palestinians
closer to the negotiating table. In that vein, the Czech
Republic fully supported the draft amendment (A/ES10/L.24) proposed by the United States.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution ES-10/20
because the international community should continue
to stand firm in support of Palestinian rights and reject
and condemn in the strongest terms all the brutal acts
committed by the Israeli army, the latest example of
which was the killing of more than 100 Palestinian
civilians and the wounding of thousands more in the
Gaza Strip, including the deliberate killing of Razan
Al-Najjar, a 25-year-old Palestinian paramedic who
was wearing a high-visibility medical jacket indicating
her status as a medical worker. No one, whatever the
circumstances or justifications, is allowed to target a
medic helping injured people. That is a war crime and a
crime against humanity that flies in the face of the basic
norms, rules, regulations and principles of international
humanitarian law. It is a flagrant violation of the
principles of morality and humanity. The international
community must condemn that barbaric crime in the
strongest possible terms and ensure international
protection for the Palestinians.

17-4586721/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

The Israeli occupation lies at the centre of all the
crises and conflicts in the Middle East and beyond.
In order to address the situation, the occupying Power
should no longer be allowed to commit all its crimes
while enjoying total impunity. It must be compelled
to comply with all its obligations. The blockade
of the Gaza Strip, which has turned it into world’s
largest prison, should be lifted. The occupation of all
occupied territories must come to an end. And the
Palestinians should be supported in establishing their
own independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital. Our meetings today indeed represent the
long-standing support of the international community
for the full realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
By proposing a new paragraph to the resolution
(A/ES-10/L.24), the United States once again indicated
that, with regard to the Israeli regime, it is committed
neither to international law, morality or humanity.
Rather, it is committed only to Israel and to supporting
all of Israel’s actions unconditionally.
In conclusion, I would like to put on record that our
support for the resolution is without prejudice to our
long-standing and constant national position on issues
related to the question of Palestine.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): New Zealand
voted in favour of resolution ES-10/20, since we are
deeply concerned about the significant numbers of
civilian deaths and causalities in Gaza, particularly
among children and health workers. However, New
Zealand is disappointed that the resolution did not
explicitly condemn the actions of Hamas. Its actions
are unacceptable, and it must be held to account. We
urge all parties to avoid confrontation and to exercise
maximum restraint.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
While Mexico abstained in the voting on resolution
ES-10/20, we would like to emphasize the importance
of ensuring the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population. In that regard, we support the request
for the Secretary-General to present a report on the
possible ways and means for ensuring the protection
of Palestinian civilians, including recommendations
regarding an international protection mechanism.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom supports a two-State solution. However, we
were not able to vote in favour of resolution ES-10/20
because we considered that it was unbalanced and
22/24

21/12/2017

contained elements that were too vague to be viable.
We therefore abstained in the voting.
I want to put on record that we did not agree with
the procedural decision, partly owing to rule 85 and
past practice. However, I also want to put on record that
a majority of States members of the General Assembly
voted for the draft amendment contained in document
A/ES-10/L.24, which condemns Hamas activity. That is
an important precedent for the future.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina shares the concern of the international
community about the escalating violence in the Middle
East, particularly as a result of the recent serious
developments in the Gaza Strip. It is therefore imperative
that international law, particularly international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, be fully
respected and that all the parties refrain from taking
steps that threaten the lives of Palestinian and Israeli
civilians. All attacks on innocent civilians deserve clear
condemnation. In that context, Argentina reiterates its
firm condemnation of acts that in recent months have
caused the deaths of civilians in the Middle East, in
particular in the Gaza Stri, and its desire to take urgent
measures to de-escalate the violence and put an end to
the suffering of the civilian population. In that regard,
all the stakeholders involved should take the necessary
measures so that humanitarian assistance can reach
those most in need in the Gaza Strip, especially
children, women and the elderly.
Resolution ES-10/20, which we have just adopted,
reflects many of Argentina’s concerns. The fact that my
country abstained in the voting should not be interpreted
as disregard for the violations of international law.
On the contrary, we reiterate our appeal to Israel
to fully respect the Geneva Conventions and the
other international norms relevant to the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as the General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions on the protection
of civilians. The resolution also strongly condemns
the attacks against the civilian population. As I have
already said, my country resolutely supports such
condemnation. However, it should remain clear that
any attacks against innocent civilians should also be
condemned wherever they occur.
However, my delegation thinks that the language
in the resolution concerning rocket attacks by Hamas
from the Gaza Strip against Israeli civilian targets is
17-45867

21/12/2017

not sufficiently strong or forceful. It also differentiates
between Palestinian and Israeli civilians.
Those are the reasons that my delegation abstained
in the voting on the resolution. Regrettably, our concerns
were not taken into account in the text. In the current
circumstances, the lack of prospects for a negotiated
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a concern
shared by the majority of the international community,
as has been expressed on various occasions both in the
General Assembly and in other United Nations bodies.
Argentina reiterates that a negotiated solution that
envisages the establishment of two States living in peace
and security within safe and internationally recognized
borders is the only path to realizing the legitimate
aspirations of the Israelis and the Palestinians. All of
us here should renew our commitment so that the peace
talks can resume as soon as possible and thereby put
an end to the conflict, which has sadly lasted for so
many decades.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): As a party to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols on the body of legal norms
that govern the protection of victims of international
and non-international armed conflicts, Guatemala
believes them to be the cornerstone of international
humanitarian law. The Geneva Conventions and
their protocols establish clear rules with regard to
ways to resolve disputes and minimize their effects.
In accordance with article 1 of the Conventions, we
therefore respect international humanitarian law in
all circumstances.
Guatemala shares the concern of the international
community about the intensification of the violence
against innocent civilians, including terrorist acts and
all acts of provocation, incitement and destruction.
We are concerned about the serious situation in the
Gaza Strip. However, we believe that resolution ES10/20 does not provide a comprehensive resolution of
the crisis. It is not balanced with regard to Israel and
does not set out the conditions necessary for initiating
credible negotiations so as to achieve a broad, just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. Guatemala
therefore abstained in the voting today.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): This vote comes at a
critical time for the people of Gaza, who continue to
suffer a dire humanitarian crisis, and for Israeli citizens,
who recently found themselves once again seeking
shelter from rockets and mortars. Canada deplores and

A/ES-10/PV.38

is gravely concerned about the violence in the Gaza
Strip, which has led to a tragic loss of life and many
wounded, including civilians, members of the media,
first responders and children.
Canada agrees that all parties must respect
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Canada is concerned that resolution
ES-10/20 does not explicitly refer to the role played by
Hamas in the recent violence in Gaza or call on Hamas
to cease its violent activity and provocative actions
against Israel. That is why we supported the proposed
amendment (A/ES-10/L.24) put forward by the United
States, which would have made that explicit.
Hamas has been oppressing Palestinians. Hamas
and other terrorist groups have been inciting violence
unaided. That should be clear in resolution ES-10/20.
The resolution explicitly names Israel while failing to
explicitly name any other groups involved. In line with
its long-standing position, Canada hoped that such a
resolution would more accurately reflect the situation
on the ground and support the conditions necessary for
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, including the creation of a Palestinian State, living
side by side in peace and security with Israel.
For those reasons, Canada abstained in the voting
on resolution ES-10/20. Canada stands ready to assist
and work closely with its international partners to
address this situation and work towards improving the
lives of Gazans.
Ms. Sigurdardottir (Iceland): Iceland continues to
be deeply concerned over the situation on the border
between Israel and Gaza and regrets the loss of life. The
protection of civilians is a cornerstone of international
humanitarian law. We urge political leaders on both
sides to exercise restraint and avoid further violence
and casualties.
While we would like to stress that Israel has the
right to defend itself under attack and secure its borders
against violent incursion, the exercise of that right
must be proportionate. The use of live ammunition
and the number of fatal casualties raises serious
questions on the proportionality of the response. We
continue to support an independent and transparent
investigation into recent incidents. At the same time,
we urge Palestinian leaders not to inflame the situation
further. Any demonstration must be peaceful. Those
who intentionally place civilians in harm’s way are in
breach of international law.

17-4586723/24

A/ES-10/PV.38

On that basis, we decided to support resolution
ES-10/20, although we would have preferred a text that
sought a better balance with regard to the concerns
just raised. We therefore also supported the proposed
draft amendment (A/ES-10/L.24) put forward by the
United States.
Iceland is committed to a two-State solution where
Israel and a Palestinian State exist side by side in peace
and security. That objective will not be reached if Israel
continues its settlement policies and its blockade of
Gaza, and if Hamas continues to use its position in Gaza
to fan the flames of radicalism. It is urgent to ensure
that a peace process is put back on track. Otherwise, we
run the risk of the violence continuing and conditions
deteriorating even further.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): My delegation would like
to make the following points to explain our decision to
abstain in the voting on resolution ES-10/20.
In our view, the resolution does not sufficiently
reflect the complex situation on the ground. Singapore
is deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Gaza, including the civilian casualties arising from

24/24

21/12/2017

violence along the Israel-Gaza border. Singapore
maintains its principled position on the primacy of
the protection of civilians during times of conflict
and the necessity for all sides to exercise restraint and
reduce tensions.
At the same time, we acknowledge Israel’s right
to self-defence and to protect its civilian population.
We urge all parties involved to exercise restraint and
to do their utmost to protect civilians on both sides of
the border, while taking urgent steps to de-escalate the
situation. All have the responsibility to bring an end to
the violence and restore calm.
Singapore also reaffirms its position in support of a
negotiated two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
In accordance with the terms of paragraph 17 of
resolution ES-10/20, the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is adjourned.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

17-45867
