30

Genernl Assembly-Twenty-l!eeond Session

Reaffirming that the possibility and advisability of
proclaiming a charter of development underlying international co-operation in the interests of economic, social
and cultural development deserve further consideration,
Reaffirming also that it is necessary to look ahead
to the next decade so that concerted international action will be taken for the accelerated social and economic
development of the developing countries in the light
of the experience gained during the present United
Nations Development Decade and with due regard to
safeguarding their economic interests,
Stressing the importance of intensifying the preparatory work for the next decade with a view to having,
before the end of the present decade, a clear and comprehensive picture of the specific goals and targets to
be attained by the international community in a common endeavour towards the accelerated economic and
social development of the developing countries,
Taking into account the fact that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development will consider at
its second session the major problems of trade and development which will have an important bearing on the
prep!').rations for the next decade,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the
preparation of the survey requested of him in General
Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) and to submit the
survey to the Assembly at its twenty-third session
through the Economic and Social Council at its fortyfifth session ;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation w:ith the Committee for Development Planning
and the organizations in the United Nations system,
and on the basis of the results of the second session
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to incorporate suggestions on the appropriate
means of harmonizing measures that could be considered by international organizations, on the one hand,
and br developing and developed countries, on the
other, m the preliminary framework of an international
development strategy being prepared by him in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2218 B (XXI)
for submission to the Assembly at its twenty-third session, with due regard to safeguarding the economic
interests of the developing countries ;

3. Urges Member States to consider taking appropriate steps to intensify national and international efforts to formulate and implement a dynamic international policy for the economic and social development
of the developing countries to be pursued during the
next decade ;
4. Stresses. the ~mport~nce of enlisting the support
of _wo~ld publtc opinion m favour of the policies and
obJechves to be pursued during the next decade and,
towards this end, the desirability for national and internation~l publjc informat~on media to take the necessary
steps m seeking the active co-operation and support of
the general public in the fulfilment of these objectives;

5. Decides to consider at its twenty-third session the
appropriate procedures to be followed for proclaiming
the 1970's as a second United Nations Development
D~c~de and for approving a programme of action
w1thm the framework of an international development
strategy for that decade.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

2306 (XXII). International Education Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Secretary-General's appraisal in his •
report entitled "United Nations Development Decade
at mid-point",30 and in particular his emphasis on the
development of human resources as the greatest po-tential resource of any country,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1274 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 on the development
and utilization of human resources,
Recognizing the urgent need for a more effective
mobili~ation of efforts in education and training as an
essential element of a suCC'essful strategy of international development,
Rec?gnizing further the fundamental importance of
educ~t1on as a means of widening man's horizons, impro~mg mutual understanding and strengthening- international peace,
Convinced that an international education year on
the basis of appropriate planning would serve through?ut the world to mobilize energies and inspire initiatives
m education and training,
1. Decides to observe an International Education
Y~ar and provisionally designates the year 1970 for
this. purpose, subject to review at the twenty-fourth
sess10n of the (;eneral Assembly, in the light of the
preparatory work ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural
~rganiza!ion and other interested specialized agencies
m preparing a programme of activities to be undertaken
or initiated by Member States, by the United N8.tions
and _by the spec~alized agencies, particularly the United
~attons Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza!t0n, and by. o~~er interested intergovernmental bodies,
m order to 1mt1ate those world-wide activities in education ~hich constitute the purpose of the International
Educat10n Year;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a J?rogres~ report to the General Assembly at its twentyth1r_d session, through the Economic and Social Council
at ~ts forty-fifth . session, so that the Assembly may
dect~e, on the basis of those preparations, on the proclamation of the International Education Year.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.
2317 (XXII). The role of the Economic Commission for Europe in the development of
international economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Ref~ng to t~e declaration adopted by the commemorative meetmg of the Economic Commission for
Europe to celebrate the Commission's twentieth anniversary,31 in which representatives of the Governments
partici~ating in the _wor~ of the Commission expressed
the. belief that the s1t~at~on now presenting itself in the
reg10n of that Comm1ss1on called for active work and
joint efforts in developing further the co-operation
~ithin the Commission's framework which was in the
mterests of all nations,
so Ibid., Thirty-!'inth Session, Annexes, agenda item 2, document E/4071. This report was subsequently issued in English
as a United Nations publication (Sales No.: 65.1.26).
81 Official Records of the Economk and Social C1111ncil
Forty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/4329), para. 'UIJ'.
