88

General Assembly-Thirty-third Seseion

plementation of General Assembly resolution 3129
(XXVIII);
2. Takes note of the report of the Group of Experts, its approval, as adopted, by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
and its transmission to the General Assembly with an
invitation to adopt the draft principles;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit the
report to Governments for their study and comments
regarding the principles and to report thereon, taking
into account also other significant information, with a
view to enabling the General Assembly to take a decision at its thirty-fourth session.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/88.

Measures to be taken for the benefit of
the Sudano-Sahelian region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/170 of 19 December
1977,
Aware of the seriousness of desertification in the
Sudano-Sahelian region and of the urgency of implementing in that region the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification,36 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification, held at Nairobi from 29
August to 9 September 1977,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on the work of its sixth session,37 particularly
the parts of that report on measures to be taken for
the benefit of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Bearing in mind section II of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1978/37 of 21 July 1978,
Stressing the need for bodies of the United Nations
system, other international agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support
the efforts of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian
region to combat desertification, particularly by planning and implementing projects and strengthening subregional and regional structures,
Recalling its resolution 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973, in which it defined the functions of the
United Nations Sahelian Office,
Recalling further that it is of vital importance that
the United Nations Sahelian Office should continue
to maintain close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel
with a view to the full implementation of the programmes drawn up by the Committee and its member
States,
1. Endorses decision 6/11 B of 24 May 1978 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme38 and decision 25/10 of 27 June
1978 of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme;39
36 A/CONF.74/36,
37 Official Records

chap. I.
of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25).
38 Ibid., annex I.
89 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.l), chap. XX.

2. Decides to designate the United Nations Sahelian Office, in addition to its current functions, as the
arm of the United Nations to be responsible for assisting, on behalf of the United Nations Environment
Programme, the efforts of the fifteen countries of the
Sudano-Sahelian region situated south of the Sahara
and north of the equator4° to implement the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification;
3. Authorizes, to that end, the organizational enlargement of the United Nations Sahelian Office and
its regional office at Ouagadougou, without prejudice
to the work undertaken in implementation of the
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region in conformity with the functions
of the United Nations Sahelian Office as defined
in paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 3054
(XXVIII), this process, in accordance with paragraph
1 above, to be the joint responsibility of the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Environment Programme;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system concerned to co-operate fully with the United
Nations Sahelian Office in its efforts to ensure the
complete effectiveness of assistance provided to the
fifteen countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region for the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to submit to the
General Assembly an annual report on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/89.

Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/169 and 32/172 of 19
December 1977 containing its decisions on the report
of the United Nations Conference on Desertification,
held at Nairobi from 29 August to 9 September 1977,41
Having considered:
(a)
The report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on the work
of its sixth session, 42 containing, inter alia, a chapter
and decisions on matters arising out of the United
Nations Conference on Desertification,
( b) The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the resolutions adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Desertification,43
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the study of additional measures and means of
financing for the implementation of the Plan of Action
4 0 Cape Verde, Chad, Ethiopia, Gambia, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda,
United Republic of Cameroon and Upper Volta.
41 A/CONF.74/36.
4 2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25).
43 A/33/259.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

44

to Combat Desertification and on the establishment
and operation of a special account for financing the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification,45

Aware of the urgency for implementing the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification46 in view of the acute
seriousness of the problem in a large number of countries affected by desertification,

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the efforts made to undertake the
preliminary arrangements for implementing the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification and of the leading
role played by the United Nations Environment Programme, in consultation and close co-operation with
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Meteorological Organization,
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and
other agencies concerned, in the preliminary arrangements undertaken within a short time for the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
Conference on Desertification and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification;
3. Takes note also of the establishment of the
Consultative Group for Desertification Control and
urges the Group to expedite its work to assist the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme in the mobilization of resources for the
formulation and implementation of projects and programmes within the framework of the Plan of Action
to Combat Desertification, and in ensuring proper
co-ordination of activities carried out with resources
mobilized by the Group;
4. Reaffirms its decision to establish in principle
a special account within the United Nations for the
financing of the national, subregional and regional
projects within the framework of the implementation
of the Plan of Action;
5. Invites the donor countries and international
financial institutions to participate actively in the work
of the Consultative Group for Desertification Control;
. 6. (!alls upon donor countries, as well as upon the
mternat10nal and multilateral financial organizations,
to increase their financial and technical assistance to
the developing countries engaged in combating desertification, in particular to the least developed among
them, in response to their requests for the financing of
concrete projects;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit the
views of Governments on the additional measures and
means of financing for the implementation of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification and to report on
the :esults to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
44 A/33/260.
411 A/33/117.
46 A/CONF.74/36,

chap. I.

33/90.

89

Mexico Declaration of the World Food
Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-Vll) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17
December 1974, by which it established the World
Food Council to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism
to provide over-all integrated and continuing attention to the successful co-ordination and follow-up of
policies concerning food production, nutrition, food
security, food trade and food aid, as well as other
related matters, by all organizations of the United
Nations system,
Further recalling its resolution 32/52 of 8 December 1977, in which it decided to review, at its thirtythird session, the implementation of the Programme
of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communique of the World Food
Council,47
Having considered the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its fourth session, held at
Mexico City from 12 to 15 June 1978, 48
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/69 of 4 August 1978,
l. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the
Government and people of Mexico for the excellent
facilities and generous hospitality provided for the
World Food Council at its fourth session;
2. Takes note of the report of the World Food
Council;
3. Adopts the Mexico Declaration of the World
Food Council49 concerning the world food situation
and implementation of the Manila Communique of the
World Food Council: Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition;
. 4. 1?xpresses its deep concern at the slow progress
m solv1~g the fundamental food problems facing the
developmg countries, in particular the food priority
countnes ~nd other developing countries with large
food deficits and whose food production situation is
still deteriorating;
5. Endorses the important recommendations and
decisions in the Mexico Declaration concerning urgent
necessa~y a~tion and modalities for increasing food
production m the developing countries, improving
huI?a_n nutrition and reducing hunger and malnutrition,
ass1stmg the countries of the Sahelian zone of Africa
improving food security, increasing and improving
food aid and improving the contribution of trade to
the solution of food problems;
. 6. Urges Governments_ and international organizations to co-operate fully with the World Food Council
47 Official Records of the General Assembly Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/32/19), part o~e para. 1.
48 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. '19 (A/33/19
and Corr.I).
49 Ibid., part one, para. 1.
