UNITEDNATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 29 SEPTEMBER 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2087)

..., ..,.. ..... . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . .

Page
1

Statement by the President ....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security
Council resolution 431 (1978) (S/12827) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Ofjicial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Councii, numbered in accordance with a system
‘adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions aHd Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

2087th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
Resident: Mr. Ilja HULINSKq

(Czechoslovakia).

&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
dam of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisiona agenda (S/Agenda/2087)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant
to paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
431(1978) (S/12827)

29 September

1978, at 3.30 p.m.

swana, the Sudan and Zambia. in which they request to be ,
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Houngavou
(Benin], Mr, Tlou (Botswana), Mr. Sahloul (Sudan) and
Mr. Mwale (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Russian): I
should like also to inform members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 26 September from the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, which
reads as follows:

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p. m.
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): On
behalf of the Council I should like to welcome the presence
at the Council table today of His Excellency the Honourable Donald C. Jamieson, Secretary of State for External
Affairs of Canada, His Excellency Mr. Louis de Guiringaud,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, His Excellency
Mr. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Vice-Chancellor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany,
His Excellency Mr. A. B. Vajpayee, Minister for External
Affairs of India, His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, His Excellency Major-General
Henry Adefope, Commissioner for External Affairs of
Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. David Owen, Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, and His Excellency Mr. Cyrus Vance, Secretary
of State of the United States of America.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 431 (1978)
(S/12827)
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received the letters from the representatives of Benin, Bot-

“It is understood that the Security Council is expected
to take up the question of Namibia in the near future.
“I wish to convey to you the desire of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to participate in this debate,
without the right to vote. For this purpose, the Council
will be represented by a delegation headed by myself as
President of the Council and including the three VicePresidents of the Council: Mr. R. Jaipal (India), Mr. F.
Cuevas Cancino (Mexico) and Mr. F. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria).“1
4. I have also received a letter dated 27 September from
the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation
with Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, which reads as follows:
“In accordance with the decision taken by the Special
Committee on the Situation with Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples at its meeting on
6 September 1978, I have the honour to request the
permission of the Security Council to participate, on
behalf of the Special Committee, in the Council’s
consideration of the question of Namibia.“i
5. On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
1 0.lrotedin Englishby the speulrer.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplemetits of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
‘adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

2087th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 29 September 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Ilja HULINSKP

(Czechoslovakia).

present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2087)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General
to paragraph 2 of Security
431(1978) (S/12827)

submitted pursuant
Council resolution

Themeeting was called to order at 4.20 p. m.
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpreiution from Russian): On
behalf of the Council I should like to welcome
the presence
at the Council table today of His Excellency the Honourable Donald C. Jamieson, Secretary of State for External
Affairs of Canada, His Excellency Mr. Louis de Guiringaud,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, His Excellency
Mr. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Vice-Chancellor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany,
His Excellency Mr. A. B. Vajpayee, Minister for External
Affairs of India, His Excellendy Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, His Excellency Major-General
Henry Adefope, Commissioner for External Affairs of
Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. David Owen, Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, and His Excellency Mr. Cyrus Vance, Secretary
of State of the United States of America.
Adoption of the agenda.
Theagenda was adopted.
Thesituation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
Paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 431 (1978)
(s/12827)
2* The PRESIDENT (interpretation
porn Russian): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
receivedthe letters from the ripresentatives of Benin, Bot-

swana, the Sudan and Zambia. in which they request to be ,
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Houngavou
(Benin), Mr. Lou (Botswana),Mr. Sahloul (Sudan} and
Mr. Mwale (Zumbia) took the placesreservedfor them at
the sideof the Councilchamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
shouldlike also to inform membersof the Council that I
have received a letter dated 26 September from the
Presidentof the United NationsCouncilfor Namibia,which
readsasfollows:
“It is understoodthat the Security Councilis expected
to take up the questionof Namibiain the nearfuture.
“I wish to convey to you the desireof the United
NationsCouncilfor Namibiato participatein this debate,
without the right to vote. For this purpose,the Council
will be representedby a delegationheadedby myself a.~
Presidentof the Council and includingthe three VicePresidentsof the Council: Mr, R. Jaipal (India), Mr. F.
CuevasCan&o (Mexico) and Mr. F. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria).“’
4. I have alsoreceiveda letter dated 27 Septemberfrom
the Chairmanof the SpecialCommitteeon the Situation
with Regardto the Implementationof the Declarationon
the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countries and
Peoples,whichreadsasfollows:
“In accordancewith the decisiontaken by the Special
Committee on the Situation with Regardto the Implementation of the Declarationon the Grantingof Independenceto ColonialCountriesandPeoplesat its meetingon
6 September 1978, I have the honour to request the
permissionof the Security Council to participate, On
behalf of the Special Committee, in the Council’s
considerationof the questionof Namibia.“’
5. On previous occasionsthe Security Council has
extended invitations to representativesof other United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of
matters on its agenda.In accordancewith past practice in
1 Quoted

in English

by the spt%alic~.

this matter, I propose that the Council should extend
invitations, pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the delegation of the Council and to the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

tius, Nigeria, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America which is before the Council in document S/12865.
Members also have before them document S/12827, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
431 (1978) concerning the situation in Namibia. In addition, members will find before them the following other
documents S/12836, S/12839, S/12841, S/12853, S/12854
and S/12868.

At the invitation of the President, Miss Konie (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

9. I have been informed that the Secretary-General wishes
to make a statement, and I now calI on him.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salim (Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples) took the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received a
letter dated 28 September from the representatives of
Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria, which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that the Council should
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr, Sam Nuioma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), during the
course of the Council’s consideration of ‘The situation in
Namibia’.“’ [S/12866.]
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Councilagrees
to the request.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Nujoma (President
of the South West Africa People’s Organization) took a
place at the Counciltable.
7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):I have
also received a letter dated 28 September from the
representativesof Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria, which
readsasfollows:
“We, the undersignedmembersof the Security Council,
have the honour to request that the Council should
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisionalrules
of procedure to Mr. Edem Kddjo, Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, during
the course of the Council’s consideration of ‘The situation in Namibia’.“’ (S/12872.]
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Edem Kodjo
(Administrative Secretary-Generalof the Organization of
African lrnity) took the place reservedfor him at the side
of the Council chamber.

10. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Before proceeding to
my statement on Namibia, I wish to express my shock and
grief at the unexpected loss which we have sustained in the
sudden death of Pope John Paul I. We have lost a spiritual
leader of great promise and stature. Even in the short time
that Pope John Paul was Pontiff, he made a strong
impression upon people everywhere. His directness, his
simplicity and his radiant personality gave evidence of his
determination to use his great spiritual office for the vital
causes of humanity. I wish on this occasion to express my
sincerecondolencesto the PermanentObserverof the Holy
Sfe.
d
110 It is now one month sinceI submitted to the Security
Council my report [S/12827/ on the implementation of
the proposal of the Five. During that time, exhaustive
studiesof my report have beenundertaken by the parties
concerned and I and my staff have conducted intensive
consultationswith them. Thesehave revealeda number of
concernsregardingwhich I believe it would be usefulif I
gave an explanation of the way in which the Special
Representativewould carry out his mandate. My recommendationsare based on the tasks which the proposal
containedin documentS/12636 of 10 April 1978explicitly
mandatedthe United Nations Transition AssistanceGroup
(UNTAG) to perform. Were we to follow any other course,
thesetaskscould not becredibly performed.
12. Concernhas beenexpressedby somemembersof the
Security Council over the cost of this exercise.I recognize
that this is a particularly heavy burden for Membersto bear
and of courseI shall try to ensurethat the mandatewill be
carried out in the most economical manner possible.All
Memberswill recognize,however, that the most important
considerationis the ability of UNTAG successfullyto carry
out the tasksassignedto it in the proposal. In the absence
of a credible United Nationspresence,incidentsmight take
place, intentionally or otherwise, that might lead to a
resumption of hostilities. Clearly this would vitiate the
wholepurposeof UNTAG, which is to ensurethat elections
will take placefreely and fairly in conditions of peace.
13. I shouldalsolike to make someobservationsabout the
build-up of the military component of UNTAG. WhenmY
Special Representative,accompanied by advisers,visited
Namibia, his military adviser, Major-General Philipp, was
givenaccessto the military installationsin the country and
he was able to hold detailed discussionswith the South
African military on the local conditions in relation to the
taskswhich the UNTAG military component will have to
take up in order to fulfil the mandate. The part of mY

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
should like to draw the attention of membersof the
Council to the draft resolution sponsored by Canada,
France, Gabon, the Federal Republic of Germany, Mauri2

report on this subject is, of course, an estimate, It is an
estimate based upon reliable professional judgement and
experience in the light of the tasks to be performed and of
previous United Nations experience as well as the rules and
regulations governing the deployment of United Nations
personnel. The military component of UNTAG will be built
up gradually and will be introduced, for practical as well as
other reasons, by stages. The figure of 7,500 men-which
includes 2,300 for logistics-would
be the authorized upper
limit of the military component, and it is obvious that its
actual size at any given time will depend upon the
development of the general situation, which I shall keep
under constant review, undertaking such consultations as
may be necessary. Such factors as the co-operation
extended by the parties, the maintenance of cease-fire and
the security situation will obviously be very important in
this regard. I am also studying means by which at least
some of the logistic functions of the military component
can be carried out by civilian agencies.

document S/12636, primary responsibility for maintaining
law and order in Namibia during the transition period shall
rest with the existing police. However, the Special Representative is also given explicit responsibilities:
(a) To satisfy himself that the Administrator-General
ensures the good conduct of the police force;
(b) To satisfy himself that the Administrator-General
takes the necessary action to ensure the suitability of the
police for continued employment during the transition
period;
(c) To make arrangements when appropriate for United
Nations personnel to accompany the police forces in the
discharge of their duties.
18. It was therefore necessary to have designated personnel at the disposal of the Special Representative to ensure
that these monitoring responsibilities would be satisfactorily performed. Moreover, I concluded that, for
reasons of safety and effectiveness, these tasks would best
be performed by civilian personnel who were professionally
qualified. Concern has also been expressed as to whether
the number of United Nations personnel to monitor the
police is appropriate to the tasks they are expected to
perform. I shall of course keep this question under
continuous review.

14. I should also like to make some observations about the
procedure by which such United Nations military components are constituted. Although I and my staff have
obviously made very informal and preliminary moves to
prepare for the task which may be assigned to us by the
Security Council, I wish to stress here that no commitments
concerning military contingents have been made. Nor could
such commitments be made in view of the statement in my
report to the Council that “the contingents will be selected
in consultation with the Security Council and with the
parties concerned, bearing in mind the accepted principle of
equitable geographical representation” [ibid., pura.24J. I
wish to emphasize here that in the past this process of
consultation has been successfully undertaken, thereby
ensuring the co-operation of all parties, without which such
an enterprise cannot be successful.

19. A number of considerations have been raised regarding
the timing of elections and the date of independence for
Namibia. As indicated in my report, a majority of the
political parties is of th c opinion that it is essential to
maintain the orderly phases of the preparatory stages and
to allow sufficient time for e1~~:tora.lcampaigning in order
to ensure free and fair elections. Surely, the objective is not
simply the holding of elections by a certain date, but the
holding of elections which are manifestly free and fair.

15. The objective of the United Nations under Security
Council resolution 431 (1978) is the supervision and
control of the entire electoral process. My Special Representative has also to satisfy himself that conditions are
established which will allow free and fair elections and an
impartial electoral process.

20. It is essential that all aspects of the electoral process
should be beyond reproach and, equally important, that
this should be apparent. Various parties have expressed
concern over the process of registration for elections, and a
number of complaints about the existing registration have
been brought to my notice. The proposal makes clear that
at each stage of the entire electoral process the Special
Representative must satisfy himself as to the fairness and
appropriateness of all measures affecting the political
process at all levels of administration before such measures
take effect.

16. But before the electoral process can begin, it is
necessary that conditions should be such that they will
facilitate it. According to the proposal set out in document
S/12636, a general cessation of hostile acts will take place
immediately after the Security Council has passed a
resolution approving my report, In this connexion, I note
that the South West Africa People’s Organization and South
Africa have each indicated their willingness to observe a
cease-fire provided the other does the same. As I have
stated in my report, and as is clearly envisaged in
Paragraphs 4 and 12 of the proposal, the co-operation of all
concerned is essential to the success of UNTAG. I welcome
the assurances I have received from the neighbouring States,
and I intend to instruct my Special Representative, as soon
as
report is adopted, to explore with them practical
ways to facilitate his task.

21. Clearly, therefore, the Special Representative, on
arrival in the Territory, will look afresh at all the processes
and measures, including the registration of voters, in order
to satisfy himself that these are fair and appropriate.
Accordingly, the Special Representative will review the
registration process, and I can assure all parties that no
registration process will receive his approval until he is fully
satisfied as to its fairness. In accordance with paragraph 10
of document S/12636, the Special Representative will take
steps to guarantee against the possibility of intimidation or
interference with the electoral process from whatever
quarter.

mY

17. In paragraphs 29 and 30 of my report I intended to
indicate how the Special Representative would fulfil his
responsibilities concerning the existing police. According to
3

1’22. In conclusion, I should like to emphasize once again
,’ that the implementation of my report will depend on-the
co-operation and understanding of all the parties concerned, and of course of all members of the Security
Council. In this connexion, I am glad to note that the five
Western Governments have given me full assurancesof their
continued good offices to facilitate the implementation of
the report. To this end, my Special Representative will also
conduct such further consultations as are deemed necessary. I also trust that the clarifications which I have just
.$$ven
[‘;y,
”I...* will serveto meet the concerns of all the parties.
23, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): 1
thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
24. It is my understanding that members of the Council
are ready to proceed to the vote. I shall therefore put the
draft resolution contained in document S/12865 to the
vote.

28. The Federal Republic of Germany, together with the
other four Western members of the Security CouncilCanada, France, the United Kingdom and the United
States-has assumed the difficult role of mediator between
South Africa and the other parties involved. The peaceful
settlement of the Namibia conflict is also in South Africa’s
own interest, for Namibia can become a model for the
solution of conflicts by peaceful means. We want to make it
a model of peace for southern Africa.
29. Consequently, we ask the Government of the Republic
of South Africa: Does not an internationally recognized
settlement for Namibia .also offer South Africa a chance to
improve its position in the world? Is it really in South
Africa’s interest now to challenge the entire international
community? Does South Africa really want to jeopardize
at the last minute the efforts of the five Western members
of the Security Council to achieve peace? Can South Africa
overlook the constructive endeavours of the African
Governments concerned ‘and does it want to put at stake
the chance of enabling people of all races to live together in
lasting peace and on the basis of equality? Does it want to
risk a bloody racial war with the endless suffering this
would inflict upon the people?

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bolivia, Canada, France, Gabon, Germany,
Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Venezuela.
Against: None.
Abstaining:

proposal until the electoral process had been conducted in
Namibia under unilateral South African control, without
the participation of the United Nations. Such elections
could not gain international recognition, Obviously, there
are even forces which are endeavouring to thwart the
implementation of the settlement proposal of the United
Nations after this intended electoral manoeuvre.

Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist

Republics.
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions.2
One member (China) did not participate in the voting,

30. We appeal to the new Government of South Africa to
face these questions. It is called upon, and it has a chance
once again, to bring about a historic change.

25. Mr. GENSCHER (Federal Republic of Germany):3 At
this moment we are conscious of an event which has filled
us with a deep senseof shock. I speak of the sudden death
of His Holiness Pope John Paul I. In the short time of his
pontificate, his humanity, rooted in his deep faith, wasable
to impress the whole world. He gave a sign of hope to all
mankind, and in our grief we are also caBed upon to live up
to this hope.

31. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
will hold the door open for a solution based on reason. We
are ready for any contacts necessaryin order to bring about
further clarification of the situation.
32. By means of purposeful co-operation with all concerned, we want, together with Canada, France, the United
Kingdom and the United States, to complete the settlement
proposal. It is our sincere wish that those now entrusted
with the leadership of South Africa will see their historic
responsibility and not hesitate to take the hand offered to
them. We cannot believe that the Government of South
Africa will now leave a road on which it has gone a long
way with us and thus decide against a peaceful settlement
under international control that is within easy reach. No
one in the Republic of South Africa should overlook the
consequencessuch a step would be bound to have.

26. In adopting resolution 431 (1978) we took a decisive
step towards an internationally acceptable settlement of the
Namibia question. Today’s decision should initiate the
actual process of transition to independence under United
Nations supervision. The epoch-making decision by which
the Security Council made the settlement proposal set forth
in document S/12636 a guideline for the process of
transition in Namibia is still valid today. The Federal
Republic of Germany continues to adhere to this proposal,
which wasbrought about with its active co-operation.
27. Yet, the former Prime Minister of the Republic of
South Africa has said no to the much hoped for early
implementation of this proposal. If his statement of 20
September 1978 (S/12853, annex/ were to be put into
effect, it would block the implementation of the settlement

33. The Federal Republic of Germany adheres to the
settlement proposal. We therefore also endorse the Secretary-General’s report which is before us. On behalf of the
Federal Government, I thank the Secretary-General. I
expressour sincere appreciation of the efficient work which
his Special Representative, Mr. Ahtisaari, and his team have
accomplished in such a short time. The report, together
with the clarifications provided by the Secretary-General, is
in line with the settlement proposal. The Federal Govern-

2 See resolution 435 (1978).
3 Mr. Genscher spoke in German. The English version of his
statement
was supplied by the delegation.

4

merit will contribute to the implementation of the resolution which has just been adopted so that it can become a
reality. We shall never accept this resolution being ignored
by anyone.

solution would now rest exclusively with the Republic of
South Africa.
40. As long as free elections under United Nations
supervision are not held, the South African Government
cannot say it is acting in accordance with the will of the
People of Namibia, To discover what this will is, is the
essenceof the settlement proposal. As members will recall,
as recently as 22 September last, representatives of the
Catholic, the Evangelical Lutheran and the Anglican
Churches in Namibia together declared:

34. We expect the South African Government to judge the
necessary size of the military component of UNTAG
soberly and objectively. No one can disregard the fact that
Namibia is as large as the Federal Republic of Germany,
France and Belgium together. Is it really so unreasonable
that, in the interest of the security of the people and of
secure boundaries, a maximum figure of 7,500 wasenvisaged? After all, it is a question of avoiding bloodshed.

“It is with deep consternation and sadness that we
heard the South African decision to hold elections in
Namibia in such a way that a participation of the United
Nations and severalmajor Namibian parties is extremely
unlikely. As we have repeatedly warned in the past, such
actions provide no solution, but on the contrary only
aggravate existing problems and tensions, and might lead
to a rapid escalation of force and violence,”

35. The Secretary-General’s comments will undoubtedly
‘make it easier to come to an understanding on this point.
Nobody, not even the South African side, denies that the
number of personnel obtainable within the authorized
framework will be the minimum required by the Special
Representative to fulfil his individual tasks. All tasks
assigned to UNTAG have been listed individually and in
concrete terms in the settlement proposal and therefore
also approved by South Africa itself.

No one should throw such a warning to the winds.
41. The world public is gravely concerned that the success
of an international effort to achieve peace, which already
seemed within easy reach, might be prejudiced, even after
almost all major differences have been overcome. We appeal
to all concerned not to gamble away the historic chance of
opening up to a people the way to self-determination in
peace and freedom, A peaceful settlement must be saved.

36. The determination of the size of the United Nations
force has from the very beginning been left to the
Secretary-General’s discretion. This determination has
meanwhile been made by the mission of his Special
Representative.
37. What is important is that the tasks set for UNTAG are
the determining factor. South Africa has been thoroughly
consulted on these tasks and has accepted them. We are
quite aware that psychological problems may arise regarding the proportional relationship between the military and
civilian components of UNTAG. It is quite compatible with
the Secretary-General’s report and the tasks of the Secretariat to discuss these questions in a co-operative spirit and
to look for agreed ways of easing them.

42. We take exception to those who accusethe Secretary
General of partiality. He himself reaffirmed before the
world on 30 March 1977:
“Throughout its history of involvement in peacekeeping and procedures of transition to independence,
the United Nations record of competence, objectivity and
impartiality is well proven. Any task assigned to the
United Nations in this regard would be performed in full
co-operation with all concerned.”

38. A desire for consultations on the composition of the
United Nations force is understandable and justified. Thus,
as early as 15 September 1978, the Secretary-General
received the representative of South Africa to discuss this
point. His promise of consultations will be kept. The South
African concerns regarding the police function of UNTAG
have also been convincingly dispelled by the SecretaryGeneral’s clarification.

43. UNTAG will be under the control of the Security
Council. The Special Representative has performed the first
part of his mandate in such an impartial way that even the
Democratic Turnhalle Alliance in their statement of 15
September 1978 qualified their concern by stating: “we
cannot say that the United Nations will exhibit partiality,
and the example of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Ahtisaari, during his recent visit points to
impartiality”.

39. The essence of the settlement proposal is free elections. TO ensure equality of opportunity, we consider an
adequate preparatory period for all to be indispensable.
This must be taken into account in fixing the election date.
In Various quarters concern has rightly been voiced about
the Premature registration of voters-rightly because it is a
deviation from the settlement proposal. The SecretaryGeneral’s clarification that no voter registration processwill
receiveUnited Nations approval until the Special Representative is fully satisfied as to its fairness removes all doubt.
Therefore, president Nujoma’s letter of 8 September 1978
to the Secretary-General [see ,!$/12841] means unqualified
acceptanceby SWAP0 of the settlement proposal and the
Secretary-General’s report. Consequently, the responsibility
for a further delay in reaching an internationally acceptable

44. I declare in this forum that the Federal Republic of
Germany will be a fair and helpful partner to a free and
independent Namibia, a partner whose aim is to contribute
with all its energy and on the basis of equality to the
development of the country, to the well-being of its people,
and to social justice.
45. Before this body I once again appeal to all who bear
responsibility: Clear the way for people of all races to live
side by side in peace and on the basis of equality in
Namibia; create a model for the peaceful settlement of
conflicts in the world; open up the path to international
5

any possiblechallenge,for a certain number of conditions
to be met guaranteeingthe equity and regularity of the
electora process. The timetable provided for in our
proposal to bring about the necessary conditions must
therefore be followed evenif that entails the postponement
by a few months of the date initially scheduledfor
independence.

co-operation in Namibia; see to it that a cease-tire becomes
effective immediately; prevent racial war; decide in favour
of peace.
46. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (inferpretation .from
French): Mr. President, I should like first to convey to you
my pleasure at seeing the Security Council presided over by
the representative of Czechoslovakia.
In the difficult
circumstances which surround this debate, the Council can
only be glad to have the benefit of your experience and
talent. Rest assuredthat the French delegationwill not fail
to give you its co-operation and support. I shouldalsolike
to expressmy appreciation to the representativeof China,
who so masterfully fulfilled his task for the month of
August.
47. I should not wish to enter the debatetoday without
expressingthe emotion with which my Government and I
received this morning the news of the suddendeath of His
Holiness Pope John Paul I. All Christians, all peoples
devoted to peace and reconciliation amongmen, will regret
the untimely death of this leader of the Catholic Church
whoseenlightenmentandleadershiphad already favourably
impressed the international community as a whole. I
request the Observer of the Holy Seeto accept my very
sincerecondolences.
48. On 27 July [2082nd meeting], at this sametable, I
stressedthat in adopting the settlement proposalof the five
Western countries the Security Council had adopted a
decisionhistoric for Namibia and for southern Africa asa
whole.
49. In application of resolution 431 (197&), the Secretary-General then appointed his Special Representative,
who went to Namibia, where, in co-operationwith the local
authorities, he was able to study the implementation,of a
particularly complex endeavour. Today the Security
Council is consideringthe recommendationsthat resulted
from that mission. I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative and their assistantsfor the
excellent work they have done.
50. The French delegation, together with its four Western
partners, has studied the report of the Secretary-General
with
the greatest attention. We think the proposals it
contains faithfully reflect the spirit of our settlementpIan
and do not differ from its essentialprovisions. We have
therefore given it our unreservedsupport. I wishto add that
the explanatory statement made to the Council by’ the
Secretary-Generalin our view provides a satisfactory,reply
to the various concerns that have been expressedby the
interested parties. Further, we deplore the fact that South
Africa, having accepted the proposal of the Five shortly
after its presentation today refusesto implementit.
51. I wish to make a few remarks here about the
arguments advanced by the South African Government.It
waswith surprisethat I noted that someof thosearguments
seemedto question the key provision of our proposal,‘that
is, the organization in Namibia of free elections under
United Nations control.

53, I wish now to refer to the question of contingents.No
one doubts that in order to comply with its responsibilities
the United Nations must have the necessarymeans,
particularly civilian and military personnel.Asprovided for
in the proposal of the Five, it is the Secretary-General
himself who has determined the size of the contingents
taking into account the tasks that must be accomplished.
We trust his judgement. Furthermore I note that, in bis
Introduction, Mr. Waldheim emphasizedthat the figure of
7,500 men for the military component of UNTAG constituted the authorized upper limit and that the actual
number would depend upon the development of the
situation as he himself assessed
it through the necessary
consultations. I believe these clarifications can allay any
doubtsthere may have been.
54. At a more generallevel, we know that somefear that
the United Nations may not be capable of fulfilling its
mandate with objectivity. The history of the Organization
proves such apprehensionswrong. In fact, wheneverthe
United Nations has played a role in the accessionof a
Territory to independence,it has acted with impartiality. In
the caseof Namibia, this rule of conduct mustbe strictly
observed. The Security Council, which will exercise
supreme authority over UNTAG, will seeto that most
carefully. In view of thesevarious elements,the Republicof
South Africa, short of seekingshelter behind a fallacious
pretext, can no longer turn its back on an internationally
acceptablesolution. That solution has been supportedby
the majority of the Namibian parties, Including SWAPO,
The front-line States, aswell as other African States,have
supportedit continuously. The international community as
a whole yearnsfor it.
55. The decisionsthat were adopted in Pretoria on 20
September have opened up a seriouscrisis that risks the
dangerousrekindling of tension in a region of the world
whereequilibrium is fragile. If the Republic of South Africa
maintainsits intention unilaterally to drganizeelectionsin
Namibia, it will find itself in an impassebecausethe
legitimacy of the assemblythat would result from suchan
electoral processwould inevitably be challengedfrom all
sides.
56. In the letter he addressedto the SecretaryGeneralon
27 September[see S/12868], the South African Minister
for Foreign Affairs affirms that he doesnot wish to close
any doors. Wetake note of that and enjoin SouthAfrica to
abandonwithout further delay a short-sightedpolicy that
condemnsit to a tragic isolation.
57. The Security Council hasnow adopted the SecretaryGeneral’sreport, after having heard his additional explanations. South Africa is once again faced with a choice
decisive for Namibia’sfuture and also its own future. I
formally appeal to the South African Government not to

52. Let us take up the question of the date. Before
proceeding to elections, it is imperative, in order to avoid
6

impose an internal settlement that is doomed in advance
and to decide to co-operate with the United Nations in
order to enable Namibia to take its place in the community
of independent nations. I ask it most formally to refrain
from a choice that would disastrously isolate it from the
rest of the international community.

66. The five Governments,in their efforts, could not have
carried matters this far had it not been for the willingness
on the part of all concernedto negotiateseriouslyand to
makesubstantialconcessions.
67. Having comethis far, the five Governmentswill persist
in their efforts. South Africa must recognize that the
international community is committed to seeingthat the
Programmecontainedin the Secretary-General’s
report will
be implemented.

58. Mr. VANCE (United States of America): Mr. President, first I should like to congratulate you on the able and
effective manner in which YOU haveled the deliberationsof
the Councilduring the month of September.

68. Unilateral action by South Africa, suchasits decision
to conduct electionsin Namibia,cannotbe recognizedand
will not result in a political processwhich has any
internationallegitimacy.

59. When the Council last met to discussthe situation in
Namibia,on 27 July [208&d meeting], my Government
amlthe other four membersof the contact group described
our satisfaction with the positive turn of events, which
seemed
to bring us much closer to a peacefulsettlementof
this long-standingproblem. During the intervening period,
wehaveseentheseefforts to achieve a peacefulsettlement
in Namibiamove through the hopeful stageof the visit of
the Secretary-General’ssurvey mission, only to come up
againstthe decision of the Government of South Africa
itself to sponsorelections in Namibia, In so deciding,it
reversedits earlier willingness to co-operate with the
international community in bringing Namibia to independence on the basis of Security Council resolution
385(1976).

69. The Government of South Africa and the internal
Namibianpolitical partiesmustbe underno illusions.The ,
international community cannot and will not accept the
outcome of the election which the South African authorities have now scheduledto beginon 4 Decemberasa free
and fair statementof the desiresof the Namibianpeople.
The only way in which Namibiacan achieveindependence
in a manner fully acceptableto the international community is on the basisof the full andfaithful observanceof
the proposalendorsedby the Security Councilin resolution
431 (1978).

60. We are deeply concerned. Although it is not my
purposeto analyse the reasonsfor South Africa’s present
position,this latest occurrenceis but the most seriousin a
long seriesof obstacleswe have faced in developingthe
proposalwhich is the subject of the Secretary-General’s
report.
61. I should like to make clear the position of my
Governmentin the light of thesedevelopments.

70. It would be tragic indeed if South Africa were to
deprive the people of Namibiaof this uniqueopportunity
for a peaceful transition to independence.Surely the
Government of South Africa and all of the Namibian
political parties must realize the troubles which such a
courseof action would causefor the peopleof Namibia,of
South Africa and of the whole region. We intend to
continue our efforts to persuadeSouth Africa to co-operate
with the United Nations.
71. It is therefore a time for persistenceand vigorous
effort in persuadingSouth Africa that its bestinterestsand
the bestInterestsof the Namibianpeoplelie in co-operating
with the United Nations in the implementationof the
resolutionwe have adopted,andnot in permitting a return
to the past spiral of violenceand isolation.From SWAP0
and from the other Namibianpolitical partieswe look for
continued co-operationand fidelity to the proposalwhich
the Secretary-General’sreport implements.We call on
South Africa to re-think its position.

62. First, we give our unreserved support to the Secretary-General’sreport and his clarifying explanatory statement madethis afternoon. They constitute a practical plan
which is consistent with the proposal which has been
workedout by the five Governmentswith all of the parties
concerned.
63. Secondly,it will be essentialthat UNTAG, when it is
established,
shouldfunction with efficiency, with impartiality and with fidelity towards the over-all objective of the
early independence of Namibia through free and fair
elections.Assumingall obstaclesto implementationof this
proposal can quickly be overcome, these elections in
Namibiawould take placeby the end of April 1979.

72. Mr. OWEI! (United Kingdom): Mr. President,I would
fnst congratulateyou on your conductof the presidencyin
our proceedingshere in the Security Council during the
current month,
73. This is the first opportunity that I havehadto express
my personalsadnessand that of my Government at the
news of the death of His HolinessPope John PaulI. He
started his tenure of that very important office with great
simplicity, andI think mostpeoplein the world felt that he
was going to make a major contribution to peace and
harmony among nations. We all feel-those of every
different religion and faith, and even those without
religious faith-that the world has lost a man of great
potential.

64. Thirdly, in voting for the resolutionand in confirming
our support of the Secretary-General,we believe it equally
important that he should be accorded flexibility in the
implementationof the report to ensurethat it will meetthe
problemsand challengeswhich are certain to be facedonce
HNTAG is deployed.
65. I urge that all the parties should bear in mind the
following points regardingthe objectivesof this resolution
andthe deploymentof UNTAG.
7

Secretary-General is, in my view, right to maintain the
timetable for the procedures set out in the Five’s proposal
and to recognize that this is the key to a free and fair
election, rather than adhering rigidly to a date which was
based on the hope that the negotiations would proceed
more rapidly than they did. As in the case of Rhodesia,
about six months, in my judgement, is the minimum period
needed for organizing elections, since the external national.
ists have to return to their country and start to campaign,
The internal nationalists will always want early elections
because they see themselves stealing a march on their
opponents. As politicians, we all know that everybody tries
to do this, but as politicians who want fair and free elections
we know we must devise rules and regulations which are
fair to all parties. Fair elections must give everyone an
opportunity. Only if all are given a fair chance can the
international community accept the transition procedure
and endorse the subsequent independent Government. As
in Rhodesia, we are seeing some who have resisted majority
rule for years eventually forced to recognize its inevitability
but even then trying to manipulate the result. Some are
trying, under the guise of elections, to so arrange the
timing, the supervision and the form of the elections that
the party most sympathetic to their cause will win. Thisis
not democracy. For the international community to
collude in such an arrangement would be to destroy
people’s faith in democratic processes.

74. The Secretary-General’s
Special Representative,
accompanied by his military adviser, has now had the most
detailed discussions with all the parties in Namibia about
how to implement the proposals for a settlement which the
Council had before it on the occasion of the preViOuS
debate. There has been from all sides well-justified praise
for Mr. Ahtisaari and the working relationship which he
established with the Administrator-General.
It iS their
ability to work together that will be crucial for the
transitional period in Namibia.
75. The figure for the size of UNTAG in the SecretaryGeneral’s report has caused concern to some South African
politicians, but, apart from the Democratic Turnhalle
Alliance, there is little real evidence of concern among the
people of Namibia. The figure reflects the detailed assessment of the tasks of UNTAG which was made by
Major-General Philipp after discussion with all concerned,
including the South African military commanders actually
in Namibia. Theirs was a technical, professional and
military discussion, The Secretary-General has now made it
clear that he will conduct such further consultations as may
be necessary to the implementation of his report. So the
South African Government can be assured that its complaints have been listened to and that the AdministratorGeneral will be consulted as the force builds up.
76. The Secretary-General has made it clear that the figure
of 7,500 is an estimate and that it is the maximum
authorized upper limit within which he will work. The
eventual size and the building up of the military component
of UNTAG will depend on the actual security requirement.

79. I believe that the people of Namibia recognize that
their genuine concerns have been met by the United
Nations proposals, which we have now endorsed, and by
what the Secretary-General has said this afternoon, and I
hope many of them will read the Secretary-General’s
careful statement with great attention. The five Western
Governments have promised their continued help and
support to facilitate the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Our five Governments are ready to talk to
the new South African Government and help to persuade it
that this arrangement is in everyone’s interests-the interests of the people of South Africa and the interests of
everyone in southern Africa, the rest of Africa and the
world as a whole.

77. We all know that the composition of the force is also a
serious and sensitive issue. The Secretary-General has made
it clear that the composition of UNTAG will be based on
consultations with ail the parties. He has started this
consultation but has made no commitments to anyone, as I
know myself. My Government has offered some 80
specialized communications experts from the British Army,
but it is for the Secretary-General to decide if he requires
them and he has not told us yet whether he does or not.
Always in the past an acceptable composition has come out
of consultations among the parties in all United Nations
peace-keeping operations, and anyone worried about the
Secretary-General’s ability to square divergent viewpoints
should look at the skilful way in which the United Nations
has been able to provide effective and acceptable peacekeeping forces in areas as diverse as the Middle East, Cyprus
and Lebanon. I have no doubt that the question of
composition will be settled satisfactorily.

80. We shall approach this task of persuasion over the next
few weeks in a constructive spirit, but the South African
Government must face up to the question of whether it
genuinely wants an internationally acceptable solution for
Namibia or is really seeking pretexts for imposing the
internal solution. There may be those who over the last 18
months have negotiated in the belief that we would never
reach agreement, that the Western Five and the African
countries would never persuade SWAP0 to forgo the armed
struggle and submit its case to the electors of Namibia. It is
to its credit that it has accepted this. Some in South Africa
may have voiced support for the principle of free and fair
elections and independence in the belief that negotiations
would break down and that they would never have to carry
out the undertakings they had given. If there are SUCh
people-and I hope there are not-then I believe that their
reaction to the comprehensive clarifications which the
Secretary-General has given today will show whether their
concerns were genuine or merely excuses to enable them to
avoid the unpalatable fact of a free choice for all the people
of Namibia.

78. The procedure suggested in regard to the registration
of voters is sensible and, I believe, with the explanations we
have heard, satisfactory to all parties. We all wish to see
Namibia proceed rapidly to independence. That is what the
international community has been working for for many
years, and when we first presented our proposals from the
Five we hoped that it would happen seven months later,
Whkh wxdd have been at the end of this year. Unformnately, as everyone knows, the negotiations took longer
than we had hoped, and the timetable has inevitably
slipped, as indeed it has done in the case of the negotiations
in regard to Rhodesia and independence for Zimbabwe. The
8

81. My Government’s approach, if the Security Council
needs to meet at the end of October, will be governed by
the attitude displayed by the new South African Govemment over the next few weeks. We are issuing no threats,
but they should not underestimate the gravity of the
situation that could arise if there were no solution in sight
and we met here in the Council again. No one in South
Africa should mistake the determination that underlies the
reasonable and constructive attitude that we have shown
for the last 18 months and will show over the next few
weeks, The choice is now for South Africa, The rest of
Africa and the world, in adopting this resolution, have
shown which way they wish to go.

here today. South Africa also indicated that it would
unilaterally organize elections in the Territory for the
alleged purpose of ascertainingthe views of the local
inhabitants.As I madeclearin my statementin the General
Assembly, to follow such a courseof action would be
extremely short-sighted,and the consequences
of such
disregardof the views of the international community
could bevery serious.

82. Mr. JAMIESON (Canada): Mr. President, I want to
join my colleaguesin complimenting you on the most
efficient and splendid mannerin which you have presided
over our deliberationsin thesedifficult days.

83. Let me say also that it was with grief and sorrowthat
we learnedtoday of the passingof His HolinessPopeJohn
PaulI. The world had been unanimousin welcoming the
beginningof a pontificate which promisedto be characterized by wisdom, opennessand humility. Permit me to
offer the PermanentObserverof the Holy Seeour profound
andvery sincerecondolences.
84. As one of the five countries which endeavouredsome
18 monthsago to find a practical, peaceful solution to the
long-standingNamibia problem, Canada was naturally
pleasedto give its unequivocal support to the resolution
that the Security Council hasjust adopted. As alreadymade
clearin my statement before the General Assemblya few
days ago,4 Canada firmly believes that the SecretaryGeneral’sreport is fully in line with the proposalsubmitted
to the Council by the five Western members,as are the
clarifications given to the Council today. We further
considerthat the establishmentof UNTAG, ascalledfor in
the resolution just adopted, should allow a truly peaceful
andeffective political processto take placein the Territory
and the attainment at as early a date as possibleof full,
internationally recognizedindependence.

87. Therefore I renewmy call upon both the Government
of South Africa andthosein Namibiawho are inclined to
support this mistakencourseof action to reconsidertheir
decision My Westerncolleagues
and I haveevery intention
of doing our best to sort out the difficulties which mustbe
overcome.What would be sheerfolly would be to put aside
the positive results of a long negotiating process and
proceedblindly into a renewedperiod of confrontation. I
am confident that therestill existssufficient goodwillon all
sidesto attain our objectives.
88. My country haslong beenassociated
with the efforts
of the United Nations to help maintain or bring about
peacein the troubled areasof the world. Weare proud of
our record and of the fact that the performanceof United
Nations contingentshasalwaysbeen above reproach and
has indeed beenin all circumstances
a factor of stability
and impartiality. Canada, as an active partner in the
negotiationsleadingto the adoptionof this resolution,is,
of course,preparedto considercarefully how we might
co-operatemost effectively with the Secretary-Generalin
our joint efforts to bring peace and independenceto
Namibia.
89. Mr. VAJPAYEE (India): The Security Councilis now
entering a crucial phasein the implementationof its
resolution385 (1976)which seeksto securethe withdrawal
from Namibia of the illegal administrationand military
presenceof South Africa. It alsoseeksto bring about the
genuine independenceof Namibia and to establishits
territorial integrity and sovereigntyon the basisof free
electionsunder the supervisionand control of the United
Nations.
90. The presenthistoricalstagehasbeenset by two main
forces. First, the liberation struggleled by SWAP0 and
supportedby the peopleof Namibiahasgonefrom strength
to strength and met with significantsuccess,
and that no
doubt compelledthe Pretoriaregimeto acceptthe termsof
resolution385 (1976). Secondly,the groupof five Western
membersof the Security Council usedtheir considerable
collective weight to negotiate with South Africa the
practical arrangementsfor its peaceful withdrawal from
Namibiaon the basisof resolution385 (1976).

85. I must congratulate the Secretary-Generaland his
Special Representative, Mr. Ahtisaari, on their laudable
efforts in producing a comprehensive,professionallysound
plan of action for the implementation of resolution
431(1978). My gratitude also goes to the African States
whichhave done so much to make it possibleto adopt this
momentousdecision. I alsonote with the greatestappreciation the assurances
of full co-operationgiven by SWAPO.
86. If we are not able today to rejoice more at our
accomplishments-andnone can deny that they have been
considerable
recalling the situation that existed a year and a
half ago-it is, as everyone knows, becausewe are at this
momentuncertain as to whether the co-operation of one
majorparty will be forthcoming. The Governmentof South
Africa has let it be known that it could not agreeto the
%cretary-General’sreport in the form in which it was
communicatedto Pretoria prior to its formal presentation

91. The Secretary-Generalhas formulated a comprehensive plan in furtheranceof the proposalsmadeby the five
Westernmembersand I shouldlike to placeon record my
Government’s appreciation of the work done by the
Secretary-General
andhis SpecialRepresentative.
92. It is important to note that SWAP0 hasacceptedthe
Secretary-General’splan, subject to certain comments,
concerningthe cease-fireandthe control andsupervisionof
electionsby the United Nations. My delegationsupports

4 official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Plenary Meetings, 9th meeting.

9

the suggestions of SWAP0 which are designed to ensure
that elections will be free and fair and held in conditions of
peace and security.
93. It is regrettable that South Africa has not yet accepted
the Secretary-General’s plan and agreed to co-operate with
the Security Council. Naturally South African co-operation
is essential for the successful and peaceful implementation
of the Secretary-General’s plan,, South Africa’s rejection of
the plan is bound to provoke the nationalist forces to
intensify the armed struggle for liberation, for they will be
left with no honourable alternative.
94. In approving the Secretary-General’s plan, the Security
Council is clearly expecting the group of five Western
members to resume its contacts with South Africa with a
view to bringing it round to accepting the approved plan. If
South Africa fails to do so within the next fortnight, the
Council will be obliged to apply such measures as may be
necessary under Chapter VII of the Charter to help South
Africa to see the wisdom of co-operating with the Council
in the implementation of resolution 385 (1976).

accordancewith resolution 385 (1976). Consideringthe
nature of his task, the atmosphereof thinly-veiled hostility
and unfamiliar surroundingsin which his team hashad to
operate, one cannot but warmly congratulate the Secretary-Generalfor being able to present to us a documentso
succinct in its mastery of the mandateand so completely
tailored to the proposalsin its comprehensionof the range
of problemsthat are to be solvedin Namibia.
99. After years of fruitless rhetoric on the Namibian
question, on 27 October 1966 the GeneralAssemblytook
the historic decisionto terminate South Africa’s Mandate
over Namibia and assumedirect responsibility over the
Territory (resolution 2145 (XXI)]. In taking that decision,
which transformed Namibia into the “ward of the United
Nations”, the Assembly declared, and correctly too, that
South Africa had failed to ensurethe moral and material
well-being, as well as the security, of the indigenous
inhabitants and had, in fact, completely falsified and
distorted its trusteeshipMandate.
100. This was the first studied and impartial observation
which inspired and propelled the justified concertedinternational pressureon the Pretoria regimeto withdraw from
the Territory. It waslogical for the United Nationsto seek
to establishits physical presencethere. But we all know
how the United Nationsmissionthere wassabotaged.

95. There is no doubt that we must condemn any
unilateral action that may be taken by South Africa in
Namibia either to hold elections without United Nations
supervision and control or to grant false independence.
Namibia has the status of an international Territory, the
only one of its kind, and we are all obliged in good
conscience and under international law to redeem the
pledge of true independence for the people of Namibia.

101. Undaunted, an overwhelmingmajority of the international community never relented in their demandsthat
pressureshould be brought to bear on South Africa to
divest itself of the political and administrative control of
Namibia.SomeStatesand interestssoughtto explain away
their backslidingin the international endeavourto pressure
South Africa’ into doing what wasjust and honourablein
the matter by questioningthe legalauthority of the General
Assembly’sdecisionregardingwithdrawal of South Africa’s
Mandate. The prevarications in that respect were finally
silencedon 21 June 1971. On that day, as representatives
will all recall, the International Court of Justice, by 13
votes to 2, handed down the verdict “that the continued
presenceof South Africa in Namibia being illegal, South
Africa is under obligation”-moral obligation-“to withdraw
its administrationfrom Namibiaimmediately and thus put
an endto its occupation of the Territory”.s

96. Mr. ADEFOPE (Nigeria): Mr. President, in this my
first statement as representative of Nigeria on the Security
Council, permit me on behalf of my delegation to join the
speakers who have preceded me in extending warmest
congratulations to you on your assumption of the high
office of the presidency of the Council for this month.
There is no doubt in my mind that during your tenure the
Council wiU continue to benefit from your outstanding
qualities.
97. It is indeed gratifying to my delegation that you are
presiding over this momentous meeting of the Council
when the question, and I dare say the problem, of Namibia
is on our agenda. The supportive and innovative role of
your country and its contributions within the context of
the United Nations in promoting the cause of freedom,
independence and natural justice are well known. It is
therefore my hope and expectation that there will be
greater co-operation and collaboration in this area and
other related fields between our two Governments and
peoples as we jointly continue to strive to attain greater
heights and new and rewarding horizons for the benefit of
our two Governments and peoples.

102. While the Security Council, for its part, had adopted
a number of resolutionsdesignedbarely to keep alive the
momentumof pressureagainstthe racist occupying rigime,
it eventually showed its commitment on Namibia by
adopting resolution385 (1976), to which I referred earlier,
from which the Western plan has supposedlydrawn its
inspiration and which SWAPO,in its magnanimous
spirit of
compromiseand its quest for the peaceful option, was
preparedto acceptand hasaccepted,

98. I also wish to take advantage of this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for the comprehensive and
helpful
report
submitted
pursuant
to resolution
432 (1978). That resolution which, inter alia, entrusted the
Secretary-Generalwith the mandate to dispatch a team to
Namibia for the purposeof working out the modalitiesfor
the attainment of democratic andearly independencein the
Territory, was pivoted on the Western plan and was in

103. South Africa’s responseto all this has been intransigenceand a contemptuousdisregardfor the collective will
of the entire international community. Of course, the
South African Government could show, and has shown,
5 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence Of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, 1.C.J.
Reports 1971, Q. 58.

10

~. -~such utter defiance primarily because its friends in the
Western bloc have proved their lack of political will to
confront the issues at stake in a meaningful manner that
would lead to the expected just and final solution.

~..

~-

the racist administration unleashed the most vicious cam.
pa&n of harassment, intimidation, calumny, mass arrests
and other related atrocities against known sympathizers of
SWAP0 in a desperate last-ditch attempt to smother the
plan.

104. Nigeria eventually accepted the Western plan for
Namibian independence, in spite of some obvious flaws, out
of pragmatic necessity to bring an early end to the
nightmare which South African rule has proved to be for
Namlbians for decades.

109. Having exhausted everything in its arsenal of trickery
and mischief-making to sabotage the plan, the racist regime
perhaps saw in the Secretary-General’s report one more
chance to create fresh obstacles in the path of the
implementation of the plan. It is little wonder, therefore,
that some of its spokesmen have stridently suggested that
the Secretary-General’s report is at variance with the intent,
spirit and thrust of the Western plan. In the view of my
delegation, such squirming and double-talk serve to portray
and underscore anew how degenerate and lacking in honour
the South African mind is. To that extent, Vorster’s parting
snub, in the view of my delegation, constitutes yet another
calculated and provocative insult to the Security Council
and the most contemptuous defiance to date of the general
will of civilized humanity.

105. During discussions of the Western plan, when we
demanded more precise information on several points, some
members of the Security Council were even more concerned about South Africa’s so-called goodwill in the
matter than about any other factor-and this in the face of
the unspeakable record of its administration in the Territory and in southern Africa as a whole. But we worked
faithfully to harness considerable international support for
the plan. We also went out of our way to advise SWAP0 to
make unprecedented concessions that even, as I said earlier,
went beyond the scope of resolution 385 (1976).

110. With the indulgence of members of the Council, I
have gone into the background in the hope that as the
result of my so doing we shall all place in perspective what
Nigeria and other countries with considerable goodwill for
Namibia have done within the Council and outside its
confines to facilitate the implementation of the Western
plan during the past 17 months of painstaking negotiations.
My delegation has noted that the Pretoria regime has
persistently continued to pretend to ignore the Council in
its pronouncements regarding the qualified acceptance of
the proposals.

106. Consequently, SWAP0 agreed that a residual South
African force of 1,500 should be allowed to remain in
Namibia even though resolution 385 (1976) called for the
total withdrawal of all racist troops, SWAP0 further bent
over backwards to accept a rather innocuous resolution on
Walvis Bay. It conceded that Vorster’s Fascist security
agents, who are notorious for their brutality and callousness, which do not have to be recalled here, should
continue to exercise primary responsibility for law and
order during the crucial transitional period. On the other
hand, although the Pretoria regime announced its apparent
acceptance of the peace plan on 25 April 1978, it
simultaneously began its equivocation and double-talk in
the interpretation of certain provisions in the plan, That
served only to reinforce our scepticism concerning the good
faith of Pretoria in the matter.

111. However, it will be dangerous for the Council to
allow itself to be distracted from its primary objective in
Namibia at this time. We must bear in mind at all times that
the main task of UNTAG is to ensure effective, orderly and
efficient supervision and control by the United Nations
Special Representative of the transition process in all its
ramifications. These include security measures and a watchful eye on the maintenance of law and order as well as the
crucial organization and conduct of the electoral process in
the Territory.

107. The racists were naturally disappointed when
SWAP0 did not reject the plan. We have learned that some
adventurer in the Cabinet, on his own, ordered the
launching of that unjustifiable and unprovoked attack on
Namibian refugee camps at Kassinga, some 150 miles deep
inside Angola. Thus, within a matter of days of South
Africa’s cunning, hypocritical
and so-called qualified
acceptance of the plan, while the President of SWAPO,
Mr. Sam Nujoma, had stayed behind in New York to
attempt to seek further clarifications on some of the
hazy-1 must emphasize, deliberately hazy-areas of the
Western proposals, the South African forces embarked on
Yet another of their wild adventures, visiting death and
destruction on hapless, dispossessed Namibian refugees.
Considering the nature and scope of the attack, the large
scale use of aerial bombardment and paratroop units, it is
Patently clear that the genocidal raid on Kassinga was
Prepared weeks in advance as an alternative line of action in
an integrated diabolical plan, the sole purpose of which was
completely to destroy the peace plan.

112. In this connexion, I wish to place on record my
Government’s grave concern over the threats and insistence
by the racist occupation regime of Pretoria that it will
unilaterally continue with the registration of voters in
Namibia. This is completely unacceptable to my delegation
as it is in flagrant contradiction of the Western plan, as well
as resolution 431 (1978). The registration exercise, which
has been initiated and carried out by an illegal regime
outside the purview of the United Nations Special Representative and which undoubtedly seeks to impose a fait
accompli on Namibia and the international community, is,
in the circumstances, ipso facto null and void and therefore
of no legal effect or consequence.
113. Members of the Council will no doubt endorse the
view that the electoral process in Namibia can commence
only after the United Nations presence in the Territory has
been firmly established and not before. And against the
background of the record of several instances of breach of

108. When SWAP0 refused to take the bait of the
treacherous Kassinga raid and thereby allow itself to be
provoked into withdrawing support for the plan, cohorts of
11

faith on the part of the South African racists, no one can
reasonably expect SWAPO, the nationalist movement which
South Africa regards as an implacable enemy, to accept a
so-called voters’ list compiled by agents of the COwtrY
which is committed to its physical and political liquidation.
Saying merely that such a list will not be impartial is an
understatement. Indeed, it would be closer to the truth to
regard any such voters’ list as an unreliable and worthless
document ffiled with fictitious and non-existent voters. It
would therefore be political suicide for SWAP0 to put any
faith in such a list.
114. I should like now to address myself to the question
of the cease-fire. My delegation is convinced of the
imperative need for the conclusion of a binding cease-fire
agreement between the two real parties to the conflict-that
is, SWAP0 and the South African Government. TO avoid
any kind of doubt, we should prefer that such an
instrument, when concluded, should not only be authenticated by the Secretary-Geneml, but also deposited with
him. I emphasize that point because, after having gone this
far, we should make that extra little effort to ensure that
there will be no unconscionable mistakes to bedevil alI our
past endeavours, or postpone any further the achievement
by the Namibians of their legitimate yearnings and aspira”
tions to live as free peoples in their God-given land.
115. My delegation is pleased to note that the Western
Five have been firm in accepting unequivocally that the
Secretary-General’s report is not only in conformity with
but, more important, a correct reflection of the proposals
they earlier advanced and diligently shaped. We are also
more than gratified to learn that the Secretary-General has
been given the assurance by the five Western members that
they will not, after the adoption of today’s resolution, wash
their hands of this matter, but will continue to employ
their best endeavours, individually and collectively, to
ensure that, if necessary, continual pressure will be brought
to bear on South Africa not only to accept the Council’s
decisions in this matter but also to facilitate the work of
the Secretary-General, his SpeciaI Representative and other
staff in the collective pursuit of the sacred obligations of
the United Nations towards the birth of a free, independent
State of Namibia. My delegation both hopes and expects
that in the coming weeks, between this series of meetings
and the next one, scheduled for late October, we shall
collectively be on our guard and not allow or encourage any
attitudes or actions that might lead to purposeless drift or
steer us into the doldrums. I should like to cmphaske
further that the quintessential honour, prestige and power
of the United States and its allies in the context of their
combined diplomatic and political leverage must not lead to
a situation whose results could only negate the efforts of 18
months of negotiations. The presence of the Foreign
Ministers of the five Western Powers affords us some hope.
116. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Nigeria has
single-mindedly worked in good faith and in close concert
with SWAPO, our sister African front-line States and the
five Western member States of the Security Council to
bring to fruition the common noble and inevitable objective: the attainment of genuine independence for Namibia,
and peace, freedom and dignity for its people. We hope and
trust that this good faith is well placed.

117. Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber AL-SABAH
(Kuwait):6 I should like to express my deep sorrow a&J
offer my condolences to the world as a whole and mo
Christian world in particular on the passing of His Holiuesa
Pope John Paul I.
118. I take this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and on the excellent manner in which you are conducting
our proceedings.
119. The Council has just adopted a historic resolution
which constitutes an epoch-making event. The world has
the right to heave a sigh of relief. This event marks the end
of South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia and heralds
a new phase for the indigenous people of Namibia, who
have suffered for years from the most oppressive form of
foreign rule and from its concommitant consequences of
privation and apartheid and from indescribable tribulations.
With the adoption of this resolution, we are inclined to
forget the past, with all the darkness of evil, and concentrate on the new process of transition and change which it
is hoped will restore to the people of Namibia their
fundamental political, civil and human rights.
120. My country has always supported SWAP0 in its
struggle for the attainment of the independence of the
Territory and recognized it as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people. Namibia is close to
independence primarily because of the sacrifice of its
people in their tenacious fight for the achievement of
self-determination. We praise their indomitable spirit as well
as appreciating their sacrifice. We should also like to praise
the people and the Governments of the front-line States
which have displayed a plausible degree of resilience,
patience, stoicism and statesmanship throughout these
years in which they have suffered immensely. But their
commitment to the principle of an independent Namibia
has submerged their grievances. My delegation would like to
place on record its appreciation of the role of the fine
Western members of the Security Council, which never lost
hope in the face of unexpected challenges, Their determination and perseverance against eccentric odds may bring
about the long-cherished results.
121. My delegation has studied very carefully the explanatory statement of the Secretary-General. We find it shfactory. It answers almost all the questions raised in the
course of consultations over this issue. We are happy with
the role of the United Nations presence in Namibia ‘I’he
objective of the United Nations under resolution
431 (1978) is the supervision and control of the entire
electoral process. This is a fundamental point and mY
delegation attaches maximum importance to the role of the
United Nations in the election process. My delegation alsO
notes with satisfaction the role of the Special Represntative as defined in the Secretary-General’s explanatcrY
statement [para. 21 above]. We are against any attempt to
subordinate the Special Representative to the Admiuiatrator-General, who is bound to follow the line of South
Africa. We are also happy with the Secretary-General’s
6 Sheikh Al-Sabah spoke in Arabic. The English version of his
statement was supplied by the delegation.

12

explanation about the registration of voters. This was an
issue that had touched off justified apprehension. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to express its
sincere admiration and thanks to the Secretary-General and
his staff for the efforts they have been making for the
purpose of implementing resolution 431 (1978). The Secretary-General’s report contained in document S/12827
meets with our approval. It is our fervent hope that the
Secretary-General will proceed with his proposed plan of
action without further delay.

Council and suppress
hopesthat are raisedfor a genuinely
independentNamibia.
12.5. The PRESIDENT(interpretation from Russian):The
next speakerisMr. SamNujoma,Presidentof SWAPO.
126. Mr. NUJOMA: Mr. President,I shouldlike, on behalf
of my delegationand in the nameof the NamibianpeopIe,
to join the Security Council andmillionsthe world over in
expressingour grief and sorrow at the untimely death of
His HolinessPope John PaulI. We expressour heartfelt
condolencesand sympathy to the Catholic community of
the world, to the Governmentand the people of Italy and
to the Vatican.

122. The behaviour of the Government of South Africa is
at best discouraging and at worst destructive. We know that
the approval of the report of the Secretary-General is not
sufficieht to enable him to go ahead with the plan of action
just adopted. South Africa, which is illegally in Namibia,
has the physical power to prevent UNTAG from reaching
the Territory or, even if UNTAG is admitted, has the same
power to prevent freedom of movement necessary for the
discharge of its functions. It is therefore important for the
success of the plan of action to compel South Africa to
co-operate in the present undertaking;

127. It is for the secondtime in aboutthree monthsthat I
addressthe Councilon the questionof Namibia.
128. On 27 July, the Council adopted two important
resolutionson Namibia.In resolution432 (197X), it upheld
the principle of the national unity and territorial integrity
of Namibiaby reaffirming that WalvisBay wasan integral
part of Namibia and decided to remain seized of the
questionuntil WalvisBay wascompletelyreintegratedinto
Namibia.In resolution431 (1978), the Council,inter a&,
requestedthe Secretary-Generalto submit at the earliest
possibledate a report containinghisrecommendations
with
regard to the implementationof the Westernproposalin
accordancewith its resolution385 (1976).

123. But this co-operation is as yet not secured, and our
fear of South Africa’s defection is reinforced by the recent
letters of its Foreign Minister, who claimed that his
Government had a continuing responsibility in regard to the
security of the people of Namibia and would leave only at
their request. He also claimed (S/128.53, annex] that the
people of Namibia were confronted, in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, with a military component which, in his
own words, “virtually amounts to an operational peacekeeping force or an occupation force”. He was not content
merely to describe the United Nations military component
as an occupation force. He went even further and openly
defied the Secretary-General by saying “it is not for the
Secretary-General or the United Nations or any other entity
to delay the process leading to self-determination and
independence”.

129. It is generalknowledgethat the Secretary-General
has, on the basisof the recommendations
of his Special
Representative,fulfiled this mandate.Consequently,he
submittedhis report, containedin documentS/12827.
130. The membersof the Councilwill havenoticed that I
addressed a letter to the Secretary-General, dated
8 September, contained in document S/12841. In that
letter we expressedour views on various aspectsof the
report which presentedsomedifficultiesfor us.At the same
time, we alsonoted thoseaspectswhich concurredwith our
position.Havingweighedall theseaspectsof the report, and
on the basisof our trust and confidencein the SecretaryGeneral, we acceptedthe report, while leaving it to the
Secretary-Generalto ensurethat our difficulties would be
overcome.

124. We cannot rule out the possibility of unilateral
declaration of independence of Namibia by South Africa
under circumstances that make Namibia anything but a
genuinely independent State, Any reluctance to confront
the endeavours of South Africa in creating another Transkei
amounts to a betrayal of United Nations resolutions, the
Charter and the Security Council commitment to strive for
the implementation of its resolution 385 (1976). The
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Owen, drew the attention of
the General Assembly to this possibility in his statement on
Wednesday..’ We admit that this possibility is not ruled out.
However, we believe that, if South Africa persists in its
defiance of the Security Council, one course remains open
to the Council, namely, to take action under Chapter VII of
the Charter. Such action has long been overdue, considering
South Africa’s long record of defiance and inhuman
behaviour, which has placed it beyond the pale of the law.
The credibility of the Security Council is at stake, and
failure to take action to implement the proposed plan based
on the Secretary-General’s report can only stultify the

131. We have taken note of the statementof the Secretary-Generalmadeat the beginningof this meeting,and we
are assuredthat our concernsand preoccupationswill be
duly attendedto duringthe transitionperiod.
132. In acceptingthe report, SWAP0 further pledgedits
full co-operationwith the Secretary-General
andhis Special
Representativeas well as with the entire United Nations
staff in the decolonizationprocessof Namibianow being
authorizedby the Security Council.
133. I wish to reiterate without any hesitation that
throughout the last 18 monthsof diplomaticexerciseit has
been SWAPO’s demonstratedflexibility and a spirit of
compromisewhich have madeit possiblefor progressto be
made. We believe that it has been because of this
statesmanshipand willingnessto make necessaryconcessions
that we havereachedthe presentstage.

7 official Rkords of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Meetings, 10th meeting

plenary

13

134. However, the same cannot be said about the attitude
and actions of the illegal Fascist occupation rtgime. This
racist regime, which continues to occupy Namibia illegally
with a military force of about 60,000 men, armed
extensively with sophisticated weapons of NATO production, not only has remained intransigent and belligerent but
has stepped up repressive measures and acts of aggression
against the people of Namibia and the neighbouring States
of Angola and Zambia. The latest aggression is the ground
and air bombardment of the Zambian town of Sesheke,
which resulted in the killing or wounding more than 30
innocent Zambian civilians.

139. Another serious element is the fact that the so-called
Administrator-General went ahead with the unilateral proclamation of the so-called registration of voters in preparation for the so-called elections in December this year.
140. We have evidence that South African police and
soldiers and so-called field workers and organizers of the
so-called Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, who are supplied
with arms by the Pretoria regime, are being used to force
people to register.
141. In our letter to the Secretary-General we stated our
views with regard to the question of the registration of
voters. We concluded by stating:

135. SWAP0 and many of our friends pointed out and
cautioned that the Pretoria regime was neither sincere nor
prepared to negotiate seriously on a genuine settlement in
Namibia. It has deployed throughout a two-track strategy
of political character assassination, manipulation of mass
media, false pretensions and public relations gimmicks, all
aimed at presenting racist South Africa in a positive light
and suggesting that it has gone a long way in making
so-called concessions. But actually, inside Namibia, the
rdgime remains uncompromising and intransigent. This
attitude and these actions on the part of South Africa have
proved contrary to the letter and spirit even of the Western
proposal which they claim to have accepted, and they arc
certainly destructive of the efforts to achieve a negotiated
settlement.
136. During the last Security Council
situation in Namibia, I pointed out that:

“We would therefore insist that this question of
registration should be looked at afresh and we should
prefer that a new registration”-1
emphasize “a new
registration”-“of
voters be undertaken immediately
upon the beginning of the transition process.” /see

S/12841.]
142. Reports from SWAP0 sources and from recent
visitors to Namibia indicate clearly that massive legislative,
administrative and military preparations are being under.
taken in Namibia aimed at setting the stage for a unilateral
declaration of independence or internal settlement. There
should be no doubt in anybody’s mind that racist South
Africa’s rejection of the Secretary-General’s report has
created a new situation of confrontation between the
people of Namibia and South Africa on the one hand and
between South Africa and the United Nations on the other.

debate on the

“Even at this late stage, the regime is threatening to
withdraw from the whole exercise and put into operation
the second track of its strategy, the so-called internal
settlement. We wish to bring these points out in order to
caution that there is still much that remains to be
done. . . . It is misleading to say at this stage, when we are
just starting the serious business, that the diplomatic
process has already succeeded in Namibia.” (2082nd

143. Now more than ever before we have a new situation.
This situation poses a fundamental challenge to the
integrity and viability of the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, which is charged with the responsibility for peace and security in the world. Let the world
body, in particular members of the Council, face up to the
reality and seriousness of the situation which is in the
making now in Namibia.

meeting, para. 8.X]
I further stated on that occasion:

144. South Africa’s refusal to co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Security Council in the implementation of the resolutions and decisions which are meant to
bring about the early independence of Namibia through
elections under the supervision and control of the United
Nations now clearly constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security in terms of Chapter VII of the
Charter.

“The situation is still pregnant with many uncertainties,
imponderables and dangers.” [Ibid, para. 86.]
137. Now, where are we? For all practical purposes, the
diplomatic exercise which started about 18 months ago has
failed, as we predicted, In rejecting the report of the
Secretary-General, the Pretoria regime has turned its back
on a negotiated settlement under the aegis of the United
Nations and has thus opted for its long envisaged internal
settlement, which, in effect, will be a unilateral declaration
of independence.

145. What is important at this point is the responsibility
of Member States to honour the decisions and carry out the
commitments which they have pledged themselves to fulfil
by supporting and voting for the resolutions and decisions
of the United Nations,

138. While efforts towards a negotiated settlement were
going on, racist South Africa deployed a stream of
repressive measures and illegal acts, such as the unilateral
appointment of a so-called Administrator-General in August
1977, and the enactment and re-enactment of numerous
repressive measures and emergency regulations, for
example, AG 26 of April 1978 under which SWAP0
leaders, members and sympathizers have been arbitrarily
arrested, detained and imprisoned.

146. In this context I should like to address special words
to the five Western Governments represented on this
occasion by their honourable Ministers for Foreign Affairs.
1 would tell them that we have participated in the
diplomatic exercise they initiated on Namibia conscious cf
our historic responsibility to represent and speak for our
oppressed people in order to hasten the achievement cf

14

genuine independence in Namibia. We did so in the
conviction that the process of negotiation is an integral part
of the struggle. We did so also in the belief that, as the
major trading partners and as countries with special
relations with racist South Africa, they are best placed to
exert pressure on that country to co-operate at last with the
United Nations on the question of Namibia. But, instead,
SWAP0 rather than racist South Africa has been subjected
to massive pressure and blackmail. This has not only been
sinister and unfair, but it has provided the Pretoria regime
with support and encouragement to continue to defy and
rebuff the United Nations and to frustrate and suppress the
pofitical aspirations of the Namibian people.

South Africa’s once again, and especially at this juncture,
refus@ to comply and co-operate with the United Nations.
In this connexion, we listened carefully to the statements
just made by the honourable Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the five Western Powers, and we shall study them fully.
151. We have been patient for too long. We are patient,
but we cannot and we will not for ever remain patient to
the point Of committing national suicide. A Iuta continua.
152. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
am most grateful for’the words of appreciation addressed
through me to my country for its role in supporting the just
struggle of SWAPO.

147. Let is be recorded that we have reached this dead end
clearly and solely because of racist South Africa’s intransigence and non-compliance. Racist South Africa remains
committed to its own neo-colonialist designs on Namibia
and is therefore not prepared to co-operate with the United
Nations for a genuine transition in Namibia supervised and
controlled by the United Nations.

153. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Please allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Council for this month. I know that this is
not just an honour for you but also a most exacting burden.
You have already shown your qualities of leadership since
the very beginning of this month and in the difficult period
of intensive and extensive consultations preceding today’s
meeting. Please be assured, of my full co-operation in the
remaining days, or perhaps I should say hours, of your
term.

148. We believe it is worth pointing out that, even at this
late hour, SWAP0 has once again demonstrated its flexibility in giving yet another change to efforts towards a
negotiated settlement. However, we have serious doubts as
to how the Secretary-General will be able to implement his
report in the face of South Africa’s expressed rejection of
that report. But, according to the reasoning of some, there
may still be a chance to rescue what to us appears to be a
lost cause.

154. I should also like to thank the representative of the
People’s Republic of China for his patience and wise
counsel during the month of August, when he was President
of the Council. It was through his efforts that we were able
to thread our way through considerable difficulties with
success.

149. I would fail in my duty if I did not, on behalf of the
Central Committee of SWAP0 and, indeed, the oppressed
people of Namibia, express our appreciation and gratitude
to you personally, Mr. President. SWAP0 is indeed grateful
for the concrete material assistance and political and
diplomatic support your country has rendered to the
Namibian people. It is grateful also to the members of the
Council as well as to members of the African Group who,
through the current African members of the Council, made
it possible for us to appear here once again to give more
ample information on the interests and political aspirations
of the Namibian people, the fulfilment of whose yearning
for freedom and genuine independence is the single
objective of our struggle. I would also say that, as we
continue to pursue this objective, whether on this front or
the other fronts, we renew the assurance of our readiness to
continue to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative in our common endeavours to find a
basis for accelerating the total liberation of Namibia. In this
connexion, SWAP0 remains committed to free, fair and
democratic elections under the supervision and control of
the United Nations.

155. I must also add a word of particular thanks to our
esteemed Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, and his
staff, who worked so hard to prepare the way for a
settlement in Namibia. This is an occasion of historic
importance, It has been an arduous task even to reach the
present stage, If we have been successful in bringing
Namibia to the brink of independence, it is to an important
extent because we have had the help of the SecretaryGeneral. Today we have a settlement before us which can,
if implemented in the spirit of previous General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, lead to true independence
for Namibia. We owe a debt of thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts.
156. I should also like to pay a tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, who carried out the recent mission to Namibia with
great skill, tact and integrity. He was able to overcome
many, if not all, of the diff’icult problems encountered on
his m&ion and has made a significant contribution to the
preparation of a settlement.
157. I salute today the presence among us of the Foreign
Ministers of Nigeria, Kuwait, India, the Federal Republic of
Germany, France, Canada, the United States and the
United Kingdom, as well as my comrade and beloved
brother Mr, Sam Nujoma of SWAPO.

150. In conclusion, I should like to state honestly and
frankly that the business of the liberation struggle in
Namibia is to us a matter of life and death. The people of
Namibia will continue to resist foreign domination and
OPpression and will with the same determination oppose
anY neo-colonial solution imposed on them. We expect the
Security Council, and in particular the Western permanent
members, to contemplate and to reflect on the other
options which must be considered in the event of racist

158. This morning we heard the sad news regarding the
sudden demise of His Holiness Pope John Paul I. TO all my
Catholic colleagues involved in the work of the Security
15

164. It should be observed, of course, that the continuing
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa is what gives
rise to such acts; for actions by SWAP0 are nothing more
than resistance to the repression and brutality which will be
the normal order of things as long as South Africa
continues to occupy Namibia.

Council and to the Observer Mission of the Holy See I
extend my country’s heartfelt sympathy and condolences.
With the passing of Pope John Paul I the world has lost a
dynamic, democratic and progressive man of peace.
159. We are not here today to engage again in the debates
of the past. Our task, rather, is to examine the possibilities
for independence in Namibia in the light of the recent
report of the Secretary-General, At the beginning of
August, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
went to Namibia with a large staff to conduct a preliminary
survey of the situation there. The Secretary-General was
charged by the Council with the task of submitting a report
containing his recommendations for the implementation of
proposals designed to secure Narnibian independence, and
for their implementation ‘in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 385 (1976). On his return from Namibia, the
Special Representative reported to the Secretary-General on
the situation there.

165. None the less, SWAP0 has shown that it is willing to
give a public undertaking to cease hostilities on the
condition that such an undertaking is reciprocated. It has
offered, and is offering now, to sign a cease-fire agreement
with South Africa and to deposit that agreement with the
Secretary-General. Whatever may prove to be the best
modalities for arranging such an agreement, this is certainly
the best suggestion which has been put forward so far. 1
strongly support the proposal -that South Africa and
SWAP0 sign a cease-fire agreement immediately6 That
appears to me to provide the best basis for launching the
United Nations operations described in the report of the
Secretary-General.

160. The Secretary-General’s report is to an important
extent a reflection of the assessment resulting from the
August mission to Namibia. In my view, that assessment
suggests that the way may be open for moving ahead with
plans for ensuring Namibisn independence. However, it is
also clear from the report that, if we do so, we must
proceed with extreme caution.

166. Secondly, the whole operation must proceed according to the schedule originally established. The mechanics of
arranging elections in so vast a country require a great deal
of time. Independence can come only after proper procedures have been observed. Therefore the elections must
be prepared, and the date of independence set accordingly.
It cannot be the other way around. Thus the date originally
set for the independence of Namibia, 31 December of this
year, cannot be met. As the Secretary-General observed in
his report :

161. When the Secretary-General’s report was presented
on 29 August, some members were suggesting that we
should immediately authorize the Secretary-General to
proceed with the implementation
of the plan before us.
This seemed to many of us too hasty, for the report
indicated that there were questions which still needed
clarification and obstacles which needed to be cleared. I am
happy to say that the more cautious view prevailed and that
we were able to undertake a series of consultations for the
purpose of examining problems which needed discussion.
The Secretary-General has been very active in these various
consultations, and I should like to thank him for his
patience in discussing with us our doubts and concerns. I
warmly welcome and fully ‘accept his explanatory
statement.

“The delay in reaching agreement among the parties
now makes completion by this date impossible.”
[Sf 1282 7, para. 1 Z /

Consequently, elections for the Constituent Assembly will
have to be held in the spring of next year at the earliest.
The Constituent Assembly should then itself set the date
for independence.
167. Thirdly, we now come to the difficult question of
registration, Namibia is moving towards its first national
elections. Registration, the establishment of electoral rolls,
is the key to any election; the process of registration
defines who may and who may not vote.

162. We are now in a position to seemore clearly what, in
the present circumstances, needs to be done in order to
ensure independence in Namibia through free elections
under United Nations supervision and control. Against the
background of the assessment provided in the report, the
recommendations of the Secretary-General should move us
in the right direction. However, it is also clear that the
proposals now in hand for a settlement of the Namibian
question will work only if certain conditions are met.

168. The elections projected for Namibia are to be held
under United Nations supervision and control, I interpret
that to mean, as do almost all members, that the United
Nations must control all stages of ‘the electoral process. This
would necessarily include the establishment of the electoral
rolls. However, in the spring of this year the AdministratorGeneral of Namibia, so-called, who was appointed by the
South African Government, launched a registration process
in Namibia in anticipation of the scheduled elections. This
was an act which took out of the hands of the United
Nations, without any consultation, a key part of the
electoral process for which it is responsible. The electoral
rolls which have been prepared by the South African
administration in Namibia may or may not be accurate. I
myself cannot know, although reports which we had in July
of intimidation and irregularity in registration were confirmed upon the return of the recent United Nations

163. First of ah, we can see that the plan for holding
elections in Namibia can be set in motion only if the parties
undertake to cease hostilities, The cessation of hostilities at
the moment appears to be something of a stumbling-block.
Both South African and SWAP0 forces are still engaged in
military activities. A few days ago, the South African
Foreign Minister dispatched a long letter to the SecretaryGeneral complaining of hostile acts on the part of SWAP0
(S/12835]. And it has been suggested that SWAP0 should
show
some sign that it is willing to end its military actions.
16

mission. What is clear, however, is that it must be for the
Special Representative to examine the rolls and to decide
whether he is or is not satisfied that they have been
properly drawn UP. If he is not satisfied, then there is no
question of using them. The registration procedure must
begin again under United Nations supervision and control.

is a matter of caution, In my view, it would be best if, in
startingUNTAG on its way, we recognizedat the sametime
that the road aheadwasa difficult one. Many thingscould
go wrong. ThereforeI shouldlike to suggest-thisis only a
suggestionandnot a formalproposal-ameansby which we
may ensurethat we shallexamineour progressat a crucial
stage.In my view, we must provide for a review of the
situation by the Security Council after the completion of
the registrationprocessin order to ensurethat things will
go smoothly, I would suggest,then, that the SecretaryGeneralshouldreport back to the Councilon the progress
towardselectionsimmediatelyafter the conclusionof the
registrationprocess,This will ensurethat Councilmembers
will be kept fully abreastof eventsin Namibiaand will be
ableto drawtheir own conclusions
aboutthe success
of our
efforts.

169. It is also important to note that all exiles who return
to the country must be allowed to register, regardless of the
length of their residence, that the rolls must be open to
effective challenge and that they must be published at least
two months before elections.
170.’ I would also add that I believe the proposals with
respect to the size of UNTAG must stand. There is no
question of reducing the size of the military component or
of the police units assigned to the civilian component.
These figures are for the United Nations to decide in the
light of its needs. Major-General Philipp has carried out a
careful survey of deployments in Namibia and has decided
that 7,500 men are necessary to carry out United Nations
functions in the transition period.

175. I shouldalsolike to draw attention to the fact that
Namibiawill still lack a governmentafter the electionsfor
the ConstituentAssembly.The drawingup and acceptance
of a constitution could well consumemuch time. We
should, therefore, be preparedto extend United Nations
operationsin Namibiato considerablymore than a year if
necessary;there should be no question of abandoning
Namibia after these elections,just becausea year has
elapsed.There are clearly many problemswhich still need
consideration.It is best that we shouldbe preparedfor
themnow.

171. There may, of course, be some question about
logistic support troops. If I understood the SecretaryGeneral’s statement correctly, that figure-7,500~includes
the 2,500 men for logistic support. In my civilian view, that
is quite a small number. It would necessitate, as indicated in
the report of the Secretary-General, contracting with
civilian agencies in Namibia for logistics and other func176. Lastly, I shouldlike to thank and congratulatethe
tions. This may be undesirable. Who are the civilian
five Westernmembersof the Councilfor their initiative and
contractors to be? How many non-United Nations per- their constructiveefforts over the past18months.I should
sonnel would be involved? Would not such contracting like to thank and congratulatealsothe Secretary-General
make the military component of UNTAG dangerously and his staff for their skill and patience.I haveno doubt
dependenton organizationswhich may in the final analysis that, in return, the WesternPowersin the Council apprebe influenced by the South African Government? I am ciate the spirit of co-operationextended to them at all
confident, however, that the Special Representativeand times, not only by the African members,including
Major-GeneralPhilipp will know how to deal with these Mauritius, and other non-alignedmembersbut alsoby my
delicatematters.
comradeand belovedbrother, Mr. SamNujomaof SWAPO,
who, I pray, will soonbe the Presidentof anindependent,
172. I welcomethe decision of the Secretary-Generalto
sovereignNamibia.A luta continua, Africa will not be
appoint Major-General Philipp commanderof the military
divided,
componentof UNTAG. However, asNamibiais an African
issue,I shouldlike to expressthe hope that his deputy will
177. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation from
be an African. UNTAG will, of course, be equitably
Chinese):On 27 July last when the Security Council was
balanced.In the nature of things, however, Africans will
consideringthe questionof Namibia[2082nd meeting], the
have to play a major role in the military component.It is
Chinesedelegationstatedin a comprehensive
way our basic
only large numbers of African troops that will convince position on the settlementof the Namibianquestion.In a
Namibiansthat the dangersof South African occupation nutshell, the ChineseGovernmentand peoplehave always
havepassed.
firmly supportedthe Namibianpeople in their efforts to
achieve genuine national independencefree from any
173. My delegation co-sponsoredand voted in favour of
outsideinterferenceand on the basisof territorial integrity
the draft resolution contained in document S/12865, in
and unity. Wehaveconsistentlyheldthat the South African
which it is proposedto initiate United Nationsoperations racistregimemustimmediately,totally andunconditionally
in Namibia. It has done so, however, only on the
withdraw all its military and police forces as well asits
understandingthat the conditions we have just set out will
administrationfrom Namibiaand terminate forthwith its
be met. Theseconditions are indispensablefor the success- illegaloccupationthere. WalvisBayis anintegral part of the
ful conclusionof the elections envisagedby the Security
Territory of Namibiaand shouldbe returned immediately
Council in resolution 385 (1976). If they are not met, we
to Namibia.
cannot be sure that the United Nations will have proper
control over the processof transition and the preparations 178. Under heavy blows from the Namibian people
for elections.
engagedin valiant struggle,the South African racistregime
is now headingfor its doom, yet it is still putting UP a
last-ditch fight. Recently, goingback on its own words, it

174. I shouldlike to call attention, in conclusion,to two
matterswhich deserveour attention at this stage.The first
17

perfidiously withdrew its earlier verbal promises and obdurately insists on going ahead with the gimmick of an
“internal settlement” in Namibia in an attempt to foster a
puppet regime through the phoney “elections” under its
single-handed manipulation, so as to maintain its illegal
occupation and colonial rule of Namibia. Furthermore, it
has stepped up its armed repression of the Namibian people
coupled with incessant incursion into the neighbouring
African States. At the same time, the super-Powers,
particularly that super-Power which flaunts the banner of
“supporting the national liberation movements”, casting a
covetous eye, is making active preparations for infiltration
and intervention, This shows that there do exist no small
obstacles on the road of the Namibian people’s struggle for
genuine national independence. In order to win complete
victory in their struggle, the Namibian people have to
heighten their vigilance, strengthen their unity and persist
in struggle, and thus foil the repeated sabotage and
trouble-making on the part of the South African racist
authorities and firmly guard against and exclude all forms
of super-Power meddling and interference.

resolutions, has been obliged today to reopen the Nami
file of tragedy, and that at a time when regional uncer
ty, threats and dangers loom over us.
182. It was on the very eve of our attainment of
common noble objective of leading Namibia to in
dence by peaceful means that South Africa saw fi
renounce its former commitments. In other words,
process which started after the adoption of resolutk
385 (1976) and 431 (1978) has been ruthlessly inter
and the hope which developed in the hearts of ma
been dissipated. Once again South Africa has con
uously rejected the path which would normally le
peaceful settlement of the Namibian probiem, and h
brought to nil all the efforts made by the five Westem
countries of the Security Council and many other Stata
well as by the Secretary-General and his colleagues, to
everything possible to ensure a peaceful and just solut
which would enable the Namibian people at last to exer
their inalienable right to self-determination and inde
dence in keeping with the principles and purposes of b
Charter of the United Nations.

179. While voting in favour of resolution 431 (1978), the
Chinese delegation made it clear that this did not signify
our approval or total endorsement of the “proposal” of the
Western Five “for a settlement of the Namibian situation”;
we also pointed out the serious deficiencies of the proposal.
We also made it clear that we had always held a different
position in principle with respect to the dispatch of United
Nations forces and that we had serious reservations on the
proposal of the Western Five concerning the dispatch of a
United Nations transition assistance group. In view of the
fact that the draft resolution contained in document
S/12865 mainly concerns the approval of the Secretary
General’s report and a decision to dispatch the group to
Namibia, we did not participate in the vote on the said
draft and will not be held responsible for the expenses
involved.

183. This brutally sudden volte-face by the authorities ilt
Pretoria is extremely disconcerting, as are also the U~JW
tified criticisms of the report of the Secretary-Ge
which is simply an outline of the various stageswhich
necessaryin order to establish a favourable climate
holding genuineelections and it is not in any way cant
to the Western proposal, as the authors have them
acknowledged. The use of unjustified criticism to nd
oneself of one’s responsibilitiesis a pretext which m
deceiveonly thosewho arewilling to be deceived.
184. My delegation feels that South Africa’s rejection&”
the report of the Secretary-Generalis a repetition of the
permanent challenge which that country presentsto
Security Council and international public opinion. It & ~1
stinging rebuff to the five Westernmembersof the Cound.
sponsorsof the plan which the Council endorsed.It is alw o
result of the morbid fear from which the white
minority regimesof Pretoria and Salisbury have su
sincethe accessionto independenceof the two progr
African States of Mozambique and Angola. That fe
led them to intensify their efforts to perpetuate indeti
their deplorable,designs,which go against the cou
history.

180. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French j:
Before taking up the question on the agenda I should like
to say that the delegation of Gabon learned with great
consternation of the demise of His Holiness Pope John
Paul I. This tragic event leads my delegation to address its
sincere condolences to the Permanent Observer of the Holy
See.
181. The international community still recalls that, on 27
October 1966, the General Assembly decided that henceforth Namibia would become the direct responsibility of
the United Nations /resolution 2145 (XXI)]. That decision,
like all those that followed or preceded it, has remained a
dead letter, that is to say, it was simply a pious wish,
because of the disregard, the arrogance, the contempt and
the indifference flaunted by Pretoria as regards the instructions of the Organization. That shows us that is is not by
threatening resolutions, platonic decisions, non-violence or
innocuous sanctions that the international community will
be able to prevail over that hated Pretoria regime which
does no credit to our century, to the Organization, to the
Council, to human rights-the
hobby horse of certain
States-nor to the Christian civilization to which the South
African leaders constantly refer. In any event, we have to
say that once again the Security Council, despite its earlier

185. But what is really disturbing the South Afric
racistsis that, in his report, the Secretary
try to move too quickly but provides fore
to ensure that the electoral campaign
suitableconditions of security, tranquillity,
equality for all Namibianswithout exce
supervisionand control of the United Nations. There Iz(r&o
doubt that, in such conditions, equal opportunities w&d
be given to all sectorsof Namibianopinion.
186. We can understand why the advocates of upartkm
switch positions so often and create so many obstacle%
cm
the path to peaceful negotiation in a simple attempt %a7
sabotagethe Western plan. They could thus speedup @X
so-called internal settlement, as has been done
Zimbabwe.Unmistakable signs-theintensification recen
18

of the South African military presence in Namibia, the
frequent violations of the air space of neighbouring
independent African countries, provocative manoeuvres,
arbitrary arrests and the massacre of African nationalists,
the unilateral establishment of electoral rolls, and so
on-prove this and show clearly that Pretoria has chosen the
path of an internal settlement in order to prevent SWAP0
from participating in the elections and impose on Namibia
the leaders of its choice. Thus Pretoria is blocking the
possibilities for an internationally
acceptable peaceful
settlement of the Namibian problem as provided for in the
plan of the five Western members of the Council and
causing the situation in that part of Africa to become
dangerously complicated.

terms with the sons of Africa if it wants them to consider it
a reliable country and a responsible negotiating partner. For
that, it must accept dialogue within the context of the
Western plan.
192. In conclusion, I would congratulate the SecretaryGeneral and his colleagues on the excellent report they have
submitted to us and welcome the President of SWAP0 and
the distinguished Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Canada,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, India, Kuwait,
Nigeria, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America, whose presence in the Security Council bears the
most eloquent testimony to the importance that their
respective countries attach to the search for a peaceful
solution to the distressing problem of Namibia.

187. The international community in general and the
Security Council in particular must oppose the delaying
tactics of Pretoria and react by specific action to show
quite clearly that they are no longer willing to accept such
humiliations from Pretoria because they are clearly challenges which we must take up.

193. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Before I state the
position of our delegation on the substance of the matter
before us, I should like to say that we join with all those
who have expressed here their sincere condolences on the
demise of the head of State of the Vatican, Pope John
Paul I, who did a great deal to help co-operation and peace
in Europe and beyond Europe.

188. Any decision taken by South Africa outside the
context described in the report of the Secretary-General
must therefore be regarded as unacceptable by the entire
international community. My delegation supported the
Western plan at the time and voted in favour of the report
of the Secretary-General, which it supports entirely, together with his explanatory statement. That is because we feel
that this is the key to any internationally acceptable
solution in Namibia.

194. I should also like to say at the beginning of my
statement, Mr. President, that I share the view of representatives that have spoken before me that you have shown
your great diplomatic abilities in your exercise of the
responsibilities of President of the Security Council during
the month of September, during which we have dealt with
some extremely serious and complicated matters.

189. Of course, the adoption of the Secretary-General’s
report implies that it will be implemented. In this connexion, my delegation would like to make a last appeal to
the leaders at Pretoria that they should no longer stubbomly persist in their mistaken ways, that they should no
longer follow the path of confrontation that they have
always chosen, and that at last they should face facts and
once again join in the efforts of the international community to find a just and acceptable solution to the thorny
Namibian problem.

195. I turn now to the matter before us. The position of
the Soviet Union on the question of Namibia is determined
by our position of principle which advocates the complete
elimination of all remnants of the system of colonial
oppression and infringement of the equality and independence of peoples, of all remnants of colonialism and racism.
196. At present, southern Africa is one of the main areas
of the struggle of the peoples for the final elimination of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations. The General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, the Chairman of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Comrade Leonid Ilyich
Brezhnev, in his message to the International Conference of
Solidarity with the Struggle of the African and Arab
Peoples against Imperialism and Reaction, recently held at
Addis Ababa, said the following:

190. My delegation would also appeal to the Western
countries to take more effective action vis-a-vis Pretoria,
applying the many different pressures that they can bring
to bear to try to make it follow the path of reason, which is
to have a free dialogue with the African nationalists who
have accepted the Secretary-General’s report in spite of its
inadequacies, which they have none the less not failed to
point out. In this regard, SWAP0 has shown a high sense of
responsibility and moderation and proved that, in spite of
its implacable struggle against the white racists at Pretoria,
it is willing to explore all avenues likely to bring Namibia to
independence.

“The Soviet people consistently support the elimination
of the last remnants of racism and colonialism in southern
Africa and call for the transfer of all power to the people
of Zimbabwe as represented by the Patriotic Front, for
the withdrawal of the armed forces of South Africa from
Namibia and the granting to that country of true
independence, and for the elimination of the system of
apartheid from the Republic of South Africa.”

191. The Western countries are in a position to bring
Pretoria back to the path of reason, and they are under
even more of an obligation to do so because they developed
the P~UI whose implementation is now eluding us. The
failure of that plan will be a severe blow to the credibility
not only of the Council but also of the sponsors of the
Plan. We hope nevertheless that South Africa will at last
understand that there is no alternative for it but to come to

197. For several decades, the racist rulers of Pretoria have
been illegally occupying the Territory of Namibia, flagrantly flouting international legal norms and standards and
ch&enging the many decisions of the United Nations on
19

the immediate granting of independence to that country.
The Pretoria circles have imposed and are pursuing in
Namibia a loathsome racist policy and are subjecting the
indigenous population to mass repression. They maintain in
Namibia a large occupying army, and now they are trying
to set up a puppet regime in order to keep that country in
chains, subject to their colonial domination,

203. Considering the recommendations in the Secretary
General’s report from that point of view, the Soviet
delegation believes that they are far from being the best
way of ensuring Namibia’s transition to national independence. We are convinced that keeping the administrative
machinery and some South African troops in Namibia for
the transitional period runs counter to former decisions of
the United Nations and is completely unjustified. On the
one hand, this creates artificial obstacles on the path to
independence for the Namibian people and, on the other, it
involves sending to Namibia a considerable number of
military contingents and civilian personnel of the United
Nations to help overcome these obstacles. There is no
doubt but that Namibia would be able to attain its
independence in a much more effective manner if the South
African administration and armed forces were from the
very outset completely removed from the country. The
responsibility for the fact that, instead of being allowed to
take this direct path, the people of Namibia are now being
invited to take another path-a path strewn with obstacles-lies with those States that have an opportunity to
exert the necessary pressure on the Pretoria regime but are
reluctant to do so and are thus delaying a solution to the
Namibian problem.

198. However, South Africa would not have been able to
persist for so long in failing to meet the demands of the
United Nations to withdraw from Namibia had it not been
encouraged in that policy by certain influential circles in
Western countries that are interested in continuing to
exploit the natural weal,th of Namibia and to maintain there
a military bridgehead of South Africa against the independent African States. The mining corporations in Namibia
which are controlled by Western monopolies ob.tain billions
of dollars in income as a result of their plundering of the
natural resources of the country and the brutal exploitation
of the African population. The lion’s share of those profits
ends up in the Western countries-that is, those that are
directly interested in maintaining and strengthening the
colonial system in Namibia.
199. The policy followed in Namibia by the racist regime
of South Africa creates, as has frequently been stressed in
United Nations decisions, a serious threat to peace and
security in that part of Africa and beyond it.

204. The Soviet delegation welcomes the participation of
the President of SWAPO, Comrade Nujoma, in the work of
the Security Council. The organization which he heads has
for many years now been leading the heroic struggle of the
Namibian people to reaffirm their inalienable right to
freedom and independence,

200. The colonial policy of the South African racists is
being firmly rebuffed by the people of Namibia, who do
not want to accept their enslaved position. Over the years,
through the persistent national liberation struggle, the
leader of that struggle, SWAP0 has won the trust ahd broad
support of the population of the country and beyond it,
and has become the recognized leader of the Namjbjan
people. The international authority of SWAP0 has gained
ground. It is now recognized by the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity as the one legitimate and
genuine representative of the Namibian people.

205. We should like to say that we understand SWAl’O’s
position, which has just been very clearly and convincingly
stated by its President. In the present circumstances
SWAPO, guided by the interests of ensuring the liberation
of the people as quickly as possible, has said that it is
willing to accept the Secretary-General’s recommendations,
as contained in his report and his additional explanatory
statement.
206. Taking into account SWAPO’s position and the
position of other African States, the Soviet delegation did
not oppose the adoption by the Security Council of the
resolution providing for the establishment of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group, involving military
contingents of Member States and civilian personnel. We
proceeded from the premise that the purpose of sending the
Group to Namibia was to ensure the immediate and
complete withdrawal of all South African troops and the
South African administration from Namibia and to grant
the people of Namibia real independence on the basis of the
preservation of the country’s unity and territorial integrity.

201. We feel that there is no doubt that SWAP0 now has
sufficient experience and sufficient qualified and trained
personnel to shoulder responsibility for resolving any
problems relating to the attainment of independence and
the government of the country. If the question of granting
Namibia self-determination and independence can brook no
further delay-and this is now recognized-that is the result
of the growing successof the national liberation struggle of
the Namibian people, headed by SWAPO.
202. We must immediately solve the problem of how to
ensure Namibia’s independence. The only reliable way to
do so is indicated in many United Nations resolutions
providing for a complete end to the occupation of Namibia
by the Pretoria regime, with immediate withdrawal of the
,administration, police and troops of South Africa.
Unswerving compliance with the sanctions introduced
against South Africa and the Security Council’s adoption of
further effective measures to ensure the complete international isolation and boycott of the racist regime of South
Africa should ensure that the United Nations decisions will
be carried out.

207. The Soviet delegation feels that it must also stress
that this United Nations operation involving the use of
armed forces should be carried out in strict conformity
with the Charter-that is, all matters relating to the
establishment, composition, command and function of the
Group and to the amount of time that it will be in Namibia
should be settled directly by the Security Council and
should be constantly under the Council’s strict control.
There should be no personnel in the United Nations
contingents from States having close contacts with South
20

Africa. The Secretary-General and his Special Represen.
iative in Namibia should be fully answerable to the Security
Council, which is the only organ with the authority to take
decisions and control and direct these operations, The
Soviet delegation confirms also the position of principle
already stated by it in the Council on the question of the
method of financing United Nations operations in Namibia,
208. In its view, the resolution adopted by the Council
should have contained provisions condemning the Pretoria
r.@ne for its continued refusal to comply with Council
resolutions. It should also have contained provisions for the
Council to take appropriate measures to put pressure on
South Africa if it continues to disregard the will of the
United Nations and its resolutions in the future. Furthermore, we feel that some parts of the resolution are not
sufficiently clear. We ‘feel for instance that the resolution
should have stated more specifically exactly what the
mandate of the Group will be and should have indicated
that the actions of the South African AdministratorGeneral should be under the strict control of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
209. The defiant position taken by the Pretoria rigime on
the Namibian settlement, and also the whole course of the
consideration of the Namibian question in the Security
Council, only increases our doubts and fears regarding
future developments in Namibia and the possible role to be
played by the United Nations in that connexion. The Soviet
delegation thinks that it is particularly important not to
allow the measures provided for in the resolution and in the
Secretary-General’s report to be used against the interests
of the Namibian people. The Soviet Union intends to
follow closely the developments in Namibia and to defend
consistently the interests of the Namibian people. It will
support the generally recognized role of SWAP0 in ensuring
the independence of Namibia.
210. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. Gromyko, said in his statement to the General Assembly on 26 September this year:
“Colonialism and racism must be fully and irrevocably
eliminated from the African continent too. Those who
want to preserve the racist rhgimes, which are so odious
to the peoples of Africa, must realize that their cause has
been lost, and lost irretrievably.

“The objective, inexorable laws of historical deveiopment will prevail. The day is not far off when the hour of
independence will strike for the peoples of southern
Africa, too, and when the entire African continent to the
last inch will become free.“8
211. Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): Bolivia, a Catholic country, mourns the unexpected death of His Holiness Pope John Paul I. My delegation is
grateful for the statements of condolences that we have
heard and we express our deep sorrow to His Reverence the
representative of the Holy See.
8 fiid., 8th meeting,paras 53 and 56.

212. The delegation of Bolivia extends a warm welcome to
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of State who are
with us today.
213. Bolivia has always expressed its firm support for
Namibia’s independence and sovereignty, and since the last
Council meeting on the situation in the Territory, we were
the first country to propose-a month ago-the adoption of
the Secretary-General’s report, not only because all his
initiatives have been impartial and coherent, but also
because of the practical objectivity of the procedures
suggested. In our opinion, the explanatory statement we
have heard today makes even more viable the proposal to
which we are solemnly committed: the transfer of power to
the people of Namibia, with the assistance of the United
Nations and in conformity with resolution 385 (1976) and
the resolution adopted today, by means of free and fair
elections.
214. I am pleased that I was able to vote in favour of the
adoption of a resolution that has facilitated the expression
of the constructive and reasonable attitude of the Namibian
people, through SWAPO, the sole great and heroic representative of the people, recognized by the United Nations
because of its national authenticity and to avoid a situation
in which democratization may be confused with dispersal.
In contrast with the obstructionist positions of South
Africa, SWAP0 has shown understanding and political
responsibility which has definitely won our solidarity.
215. I wish to express again my appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his colleagues for the guidance that
his reports constantly provide. I am deeply grateful to you,
Mr. President, for everything you have done in connexion
with this disturbing and long-standing problem of Namibia’s
independence.
216. For Bolivia, only a democratic government elected
by the people in elections free of any intimidation or partial
treatment can in full sovereignty exercise its right to
self-determination in a nation like Namibia-a nation that
we wish to be genuinely free right from the start. This
genuine democracy has two aspects. There is the internal
aspect-there cannot be true democracy without true
freedom; and there is the external aspect-there cannot be
and must not be any interference in the expression of the
people’s will by means of external pressures or, even less,
by means of moral or economic intervention like that
which Bolivia experienced in its efforts at establishing
people’s institutions. Those efforts were frustrated on
9 July last by external actions but were renewed by the
people jn the conclusion of a pact among all the political
parties, under the auspices of the present Government, in
order to achieve soon what the Minister for External
Relations of my country spoke of a few days ago in his
statement to the General Assembly:9 elections by Bolivians
for Bolivians.
217. With regard to the resolution which has just been
adopted, my delegation wishes to place on record that
Bolivia welcomed from the start the hard work undertaken
in an effort at conciliation by the five Western members of
9 Ibid.,

11 th meeting.

the Council, whose participation we have appreciated in
good faith and considered of great value. In considering the
resoiution itself, my delegation would point out that
paragraph 5 calls on South Africa to co-operate. The
implementation
of this resolution in all its aspects, in
particular this aspect, must be energetically pursued.

221. The Council today has made a serious and deep
commitment. The adoption of the Secretary-General’s
report and, consequently, the establishment under his
authority of the United Nations Transition Assistance
Group place upon the members of the Council, to the
extent of their responsibilities, and upon the Organization
itself the obligation to support any efforts being made to
implement the measures proposed in the report which has
been adopted.

218. Finally, the text does not mention the problem of
Walvis Bay. As a country which has been subject to
territorial encroachments and whose people continues to
suffer greatly as a result of its loss of its coastline, Bolivia
attaches great importance to that problem. My delegation
presumes that this omission does not indicate a weakening
of the Security Council’s determination to maintain the
criterion of the territorial integrity of Namibia, including of
necessity Walvis Bay.
219. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO

222. SWAP0 has amply demonstrated its goodwill and
determination to co-operate in the implementation of the
Secretary-General’s report, and we are pleased at that. But
the other side, the racist Government of South Africa, has
not responded in like manner, quite the contrary. In the
circumstances, we urge South Africa to demonstrate that it
is prepared to co-operate in carrying out a process leading
to Namibia’s independence, in accordance with the will of
the people expressed under the auspices and protection of
the international community.

(Venezuela) (interpretation

from Spanish): My delegation voted in favour of the draft

resolution which was submitted earlier in an effort to join
in a co-operative undertaking to bring about a peaceful
settlement of the problem of the independence of Namibia,
a Territory illegally occupied, oppressed and exploited by
the racist regime of Pretoria and the transnational
corporations.

223. My delegation wishes once again to place on record
its fervent hope for the rapid emergence of an independent,
prosperous, free and sovereign Namibia and, consequently,
my Government pledges its co-operation, to the extent of
its ability, in the carrying out of the operations planned for
the transition period and set forth in the very comprehensive and excellent report submitted by the Secretary
General.

220. We are deeply concerned over the attempts of the
South African Government to flout the agreement reached
with the five Western Powers and contained in document
S/12636, an agreement aimed at providing the necessary
institutions, instruments and guarantees for the accession to
independence of Namibia by peaceful and orderly means.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-70005-December

1979-2,200
