UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
@qLBWRY

THIRTIETH-

YEAR

1861st

MEETING:

JlJN

6 1984

@p.c.
(-J==J~~gmaN
8 DECEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l861)

. .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. ... .. ... .. ..

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*
The situation in the Middle East:
(cr) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 11892);
(h) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1893) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1861

..-

. _

i,..I

.’

’ ,.
,.,,,::
1

. ..,._

-’
i

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
.-

.
..-..

-.---_----I..

-

-...

._

__

__...,,”

.,.

-.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the O&%al Records of the Security Council.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1’January 1965; became fully operative
on that date.

---

_

.
_ _..*..

-

... .

.--.-..--

..--

*.-..---.-

_...__.

^_

l

t

_-

. - . --

.-

_.

. . ..

”

1861st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 8 December 1975, at 10.30 a.m.
with another decision taken at the 1859th meeting,
I propose now, with the consent of .the Council, to
invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to participate in the discussion.

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and.Nofihern
Ireland).
The representatives
of the following
Present:
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania,
Sweden, Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
N&them
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon,
Uqited Republic of Tanzania and United States of
,.
._ ;,
Ameritia.
‘- . - ..._..Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l861)

’

of the agenda

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Ghorra
(Lebanon),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Allaf
(Syrian Arab Republic)
and Mr. Aql (Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took places at the Council
table.
. .. .
-.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has before it, in
‘1 document S/11898, a draft resolution sponsored by
Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
United Republic of Cameroon and United Republic of Tanzania.
3. Mr.. JACKSON
(Guyana): We shall have an
opportunity
in January next year to discuss fully
the situation in the Middle East, including,
most
importantly,
the Palestinian
problem.
Thus, even
though the item now before the Council is entitled
“The situation in the Middle East”, my delegation
will limit itself on this occasion to the specific reason
which has caused this meeting to be held: the massive
air attack unleashed by the forces of the Israeli
Government
on villages and Palestinian
camps in
Lebanon on 2 December 1975.

The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1892);
(b) ‘Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to -the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1893)
The meeting

wus called to order at 12.15 p.m.
Adoption

4. Before expressing the views of my delegation on
this matter, however, let me welcome the representatives of the PLO, who have been appropriately
invited by the Council, as representatives of a party
directly concerned, to participate in this debate: The
representative
of the PLO in his address to the
Council on 4 December [1859th meefing[ brought to
our deliberations a dimension and a perception which
can only be beneficial to the determination
of the
stand of the Council on the issue before us.

of the agenda

The agendu was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(4 Letter dated.:! December !??5,from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the ‘U&t&d ‘Ntitibris
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11892);

5. Since there has been disagreement in the Council
over the participation
of the PLO in this debate,
let me state the position of my delegation.
I shall
do so in an attempt to avoid embrangling the situation
by a resort to the histrionics-of a political rally.----

(b) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of ‘Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11893)
.-.,.
.1.-... ..-. -- .-.____._l. _____ . .
In accordance with the decision
1. The PRESIDENT:
taken at the 1859th meeting of the Security, Council,
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
I propose now, with the consent of the Council,
‘to invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Egypt and
the Syrian Arab Republic to,p&cipate
in the discussion, without the right to vote. In accordance

6. The PLO, as its name makes clear, is a liberation
movement designed to secure the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people. It is an organization
whose
existence is a reality, recognized by the United
Nations, and accorded observer status by the General
Assembly.
Certain rights flow logically from that
1

..._

status-rights
which, in the view of my delegation,
are superior, in the context of participation
in Security Council debates, to those accorded to persons,
whether of the Secretariat or otherwise, by rule 39
of the provisional
rules of procedure. The decision
taken by the Council is a correct one. It is a just
decision. Indeed, if it were to be given a title, it
could properly be called the “uniting
for justice”
resolution.

United Republic of Cameroon would first of all like
to welcome among us the representative of the PLO,
which the Security Council has invited to participate
fully in this debate on the Middle East situation.
That historic decision of the Council should be
viewed in the context of the resolutions of the twentyninth and thirtieth sessions of the General Assembly
relating to Palestine, notably resolution 3375 (XXX)
of 13 November 1975, whereby the Genera1 Assembly:

7. Turning to the substantive aspects of the question
before us, it is observed from a scrutiny of the
records that Lebanon has, on several occasions,
brought complaints to the Council concerning attacks
on its territory and its population
by the military
forces of Israel, and the violation of its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. On some of those occasions
the Council deplored the failure of Israel to abide by
resolutions adopted by this body; adjudged many of
its military actions against Lebanon as premeditated
and carefully planned; condemned
Israel for such
actions; declared that such armed attacks can no
longer be tolerated; issued solemn warnings to Israel;
and considered taking adequate and effective steps or
measures in accordance with the Charter should such
military actions and defiance by Israel of Security
,Council rre~olutions persist.

’

“Culls for the invitation of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the representative
of the
Palestinian
people, to participate
in all efforts,
a’deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East
which are held under the auspices of the United
:. Nations, on an equal footing with other parties, . ..‘*.
6
From this standpoint, I should like to reaffirm my
.Government’s
conviction that no final and just settlement of the Middle East problem can take place
without the effective participation
of the PLO, widely
recognized
by the members of the international
‘community
as the genuine representative
of the
Palestinian people.
12. My delegation, which firmly supports the legitimate aspirations
of that people to return to its
homeland and exercise its right to self-determination
without foreign interference and to assume its responsibilities in exercising sovereignty over its territory,
can only be gratified to see the representative of the
PLO occupying with dignity the place which lawfully belongs to his people in the United Nations.

8. The last such occasion was in August 1973,
when resolution 337 (1973) was unanimously adopted
by the Council. Since then, Israel has continually
carried out military
acts which indiscriminately
killed and maimed people in Lebanon and violated
the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its territory. Many, if not all, of those attacks have been
aimed with exceptional venom against the Palestinians.
But none has been as brutal as the massive attack
perpetrated on 2 December. Indeed, so vicious was
that attack that it evoked considerable hostile reaction within Israel itself-if
the press reports of that
reaction are accurate.

13. It was with deep concern and alarm that my
delegation learned of the news of the massive and
barbarous attack launched by Israel on 2 December
against Lebanon-a
hospitable
land for meetings,
age-old crossroads of goods and ideas, and a peaceful
non-aligned country-an
attack which caused more
than 100 civilian fatalities, numerous casualties and
considerable material damage. My delegation can only
energetically
condemn, as it has done in the past,
this armed aggression, the premeditated,
blind and
criminal nature of which has been eloquently described
by previous speakers in this debate. We condemn
this heinous and infamous act because it constitutes
a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a State Member of the United Nations,
and because it implies the adoption, implementation
and systematic practice of State terrorism as a political
instrument
to intimidate
the Arab peoples and to
perpetuate the occupation of territories annexed by
force. .

9. But the attack has also evoked hostile reaction
outside of Israel and has been roundly condemned.
The Co-ordinating
Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries in the United Nations (New York) issued
the following Declaration on 4 December:
[The speaker reud out the declaration
S/ 11897.1

in document

Guyana serves on that Committee,
and therefore
fully supports the terms of the Declaration.
10. The Council will soon take a decision on the
complaint made by Lebanon. We can do no less than
was done in the past. Indeed we should do more. It
is with this in mind that my delegation has co-sponsored the draft resolution S/11898.

14. Besides posing a serious threat to international
peace and security and being likely to lead to a further
escalation of further serious violence, the Israeli
aggression, as was pointed-out so pertinently by the
representative
of Egypt in the Security Council
on 4 December [1859th meeting],
undermines
the
efforts being made to reach a just and peaceful settle-

‘11. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from French): The delegation of the
2

ment in the area and is doing irreuarable harm to
the structure of peace which the parties concerned
are so arduously trying to build.

21. Finally, the draft resolution before us constitutes an st&ng and appropriate reply on the part of
the Security Council to the aggression perpetrated
by Israel on 2 December last against Lebanon, a
State Member of the United Nations. The Council
must
unhesitatingly
condemn
this
barbarous,
premeditated,
unprovoked
armed attack by Israel
against innocent civilian people, an attack that spared
neither women nor children nor invalids; a barbarous
armed attack which, in its course,. indiscriminately
destroyed houses, schools, hospitals and refugee
camps.

15. My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to repeat its expressions of sympathy to the Government of Lebanon and the PLO and to offer its profound
condolences to the families of the victims of :the
. ..
aggression of 2 December.
16. It is in order to reply to the criminal actions
of Israel and to redress the unspeakable wrongs done
to Lebanon and the Palestinian people, and also to
reaffirm on this occasion the authority of the Security
Council as the organ charged with the maintenance of
international
peace and security, that I have the
honour to submit officially to the Council, on behalf
of the delegations of Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania and the
United Republic of Tanzania, and my own delegation,
the draft resolution S/l 1898.

22. My delegation
is convinced that all men of
feeling and till Governments
that sincerely desire
to see a just and lasting peace established in the
Middle East will vote in favour,on this draft resolution,
now officially before the Security Council.
23. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): At the request of the
Government of Egypt, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic. the Security Council has been convened
to deal with Israeli air attacks against Palestinian
refugee camps in Lebanon. Again we are confronted
with the question of violent acts having their source
in violence and leading to violence, in a spiral which
can bring only increased suffering for the peoples of
the Middle East. The magnitude of the Israeli air
attacks illustrate how this violence is escalating. The
Swedish Government
looks upon this development
with sorrow and with dissapointment.
The attacks
on the Palestinian camps during which hundreds of
men, women and children were killed and wounded
can serve only to exacerbate the conflict and to
increase hatred and exasperation.

17. In the pl’eamble of this draft, we recall in sufficiently clear terms the well-known concerns of the
Council with regard to the repeated attacks by Israel
against Lebanon. The dominant idea underlying these
concerns is the failure by Israel to heed the resolutions of the Council calling upon it to refrain from
all acts of force in the region and to respect the
independence of Lebanon and take into account the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
18. Israel’s
recent massive air attacks against
Lebanon have been premeditated
in nature and are
sufficiently grave on this occasion for the Council not
only to be able to call on Israel immediately to cease all
military
attacks against Lebanon,
but also for it
vehemently
to condemn
the Israeli Government
for its flagrant act of aggression in violation of the
terms of the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

24. A flagrant breach of the principles which form
the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations
‘has been committed.
The efforts to reach peaceful
solutions have been made more difficult. The United
Nations, therefore, has to condemn this act. But
human lives are sacrificed also in Israel through
acts of violence and terror. This violence is no less
reprehensible.
The PLO on several occasions has
assumed responsibility
for such acts, and it is
important
that we express our condemnation
of
these also. _

19. By adopting this draft resolution, the Security
Council will be issuing a solemn warning to Israel
that if such premeditated armed attacks are repeated,
the Council will have to consider taking appropriate
steps and measures to give effect to its decisions.
The operative part of the draft as summed up above
represents the least that can be done, in view of the
gravity of the situation created in the region by the
Israeli aggression, under the responsibilities
conferred by the Charter on the Council in the safeguarding of international
peace and security.

25. We cannot see how this spiral of violence
can be brought to an end unless the basic problems
are discussed between the parties directly concerned.
In this debate, all parties, the PLO as well as the
Arab States and Israel, must accept the basic political
realities in the area. The right of Israel to exist
must not be questioned. The Palestinian people have
a right to their otin statehood. The basic prerequisite for development
towards a peaceful solution is
that the parties speak to each other. A dialogue
does not in itself hold any guarantee of success,
but to refuse to participate
in a debate with the
opponent is to invite certain failure for the efforts
to-wards peace. This holds true both for Israel and
for the representatives of the Palestinian people.

20. This concise draft resolution is clear and direct;
it avoids lengthy commentary and, as will have been
noted, does not seek to raise the wide range of
problems arising from the crisis in the Middle East
which the Security Council has decided to examine
at ‘an appropriate date. Nor do the sponsors of this
text wish to distract the attention of the members of
the Council by mentioning
acts of violence in the
region of which the Council has not at present been
seized.
3

:..

‘;

_...

---

_ ,_----

26. The escalation of violence in the Middle East
cannot be seen in isolation from its general political
context. The Security Council will debate these
problems in January. It is our hope that Israel will
find it possible to take part in these deliberations,
which we hope will be conducted in a-constructive
spirit that takes into account the legitimate demands
of all parties.

31. Today, we have two complaints
to consider,
presented by .Egypt and ‘Lebanon;
which bear on
particularly
lethal. bombings, since the victims are
numbered
in scores, and, according
to certain
sources, exceed a hundred,
not including
the
wounded. Contrary
to previous situations,
these
bombings are not reprisals against terrorist actions
wag&l on the territory of Israel. ,As avowed by the
Israeli authorities themselves, these are operations of a
pre’qentive nature. At any rate, neither reprisals, nor,
above all, prevention are concepts which are accepted.
in’intemational
relations. While we protest against
all ‘violence, whatever its origin, we must recognize
that’ when it involves a responsible
Government,
which is bound to comply with the rules of the
Organization,
the requirements
of the international
c$nmunity
may be far niore pressing.

27; The Prime’ Minister of Sweden addressed himself to this question only a few weeks ago in the
General Assembly. I quote from his statement:
“In the Middle East two.peopIes look at the same
land as part of their national home. The result is a
tragic conflict and deep suffering in the whole
region. The people of Israel have lived for almost
30 years in a State which was recognized already
in its infancy by many other countries, including
the leading Powers. It has a right as have all other
States in the area to live within recognized and
secure..--borders.
At the same time, occupied
territories must be returned in accordance with
United Nations resolutions. The people of Palestine
have a political identity and a just claim to national
selfdetermination.
So long as they are denied that
right the conflict will not be resolved.“’
This basic position of principle will guide
in. the coming deliberation
in the Council
Middle East question.

32: Accordingly,
the Government
of France condemns most firmly the action which has been undertaken against Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon.
We consider these operations to be inadmissible,
presented as being of a preventive nature and which
lead to massacres where innocent
civilians
are
included and in particular,
women and children,
Palestinians
as well as Lebanese. We refuse to
accept that a chain reaction of violence is to be considered as inevitable. We consider that it is our duty
to try to break that chain reaction.
.:
33. Further, it is a fact .that the Israeli actions of
2 December have been unanimously
deplored, as is
proved in the press articles which have been published
even in organs which wish to evince understanding
and sympathy for the Jewish State’s concern for
its security. These articles are known to all, and in
any case to those who are primarily
concerned
since they are also to be found in the Israeli press.

Sweden
on the

28. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, I am speaking for the
first time on the substance of the subject we are
dealing with since you assumed the presidency of the
Council. I shall not enter into the substance of my
statement without congratulating
you personally on
your accession t? this post of such great responsibility. I have no doubt that this eminent post will
be further enhanced by the competence and talent
of your guidance, which everyone here recognizes.

34. But beyond these legitimate references to legal
and moral criteria, the Israeli actions seem to us to be
all ,the more reprehensible
since they occur at a
time when Lebanon itself is .enduring an ordeal, as
we all known, and thereby aggravate the sufferings
of a people to which France is ‘linked by close
ties of friendship. We attach the utmost importance
to respecting the security and the integrity of Lebanon. We are all aware of the praiseworthy ,and
difficult efforts it has made to remain outside from
the conflict, despite the hospitality given on its soil
to numerous Palestinian refugees. We consider too,
that the stability of the Lebanese State, is an essential
element for balance in the Middle East, and we’
therefore wonder how the Israeli authorities can be
unaware of the very grave consequences; for this
balance, of actions such as those of 2 December.

29. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity
to express my gratitude to Mr. Malik of the Soviet
Union for the flexible and effective manner in
.which he”guided our debates last month, which on
several occasions :dealt with particularly
complex
problems.

.-

30. Once again the Security Council has before it
the consideration
of attacks committed
by Israel
against Palestinian refugee camps on the territory of
Lebanon. This is far from being the first debate
which it de.yotesto matters of this nature. The latest
#to date took place in April 1974 [1769th meeting].
Although attacks have continued since then, the authgdties in Lebanon, as we were reminded by the
representative
of Lebanon [1859rh nreefing], being
aware of the fragile prospects for negotiating
the
settlement to the Middle East conflict, refrained from
seizing the Council of this matter again.

35. On the other hand, what is also at stake, as
all the speakers who preceded me have emphasized,
are the prospects for negotiation. These are uncertain
and .fragile. The evident and natural solidarity which
unites the Arab States to the Palestinian
people
4

leads them to consider any action against it as
affecting themselves. Israel cannot, therefore, hope to
start the negotiations it calls for if at the same time
it threatens and strikes on Arab soil a branch of the
Arab people.

37. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (frunslution
fiok
Chinese): First of all, allow me, in the name of the
Chinese delegation, to express our warm welcome tb
the representatives of the PLO who are participating
in the ‘debates of the Security Council. The Council
has been considering the Middle East question for
nearly three decades, but this is the first time that
the representatives of the PLO have participated in the
Security Council debate on the Middle East and
Palestinian question. This is the legitimate right of
the Palestinian people, which has won the support
of the Third World countries. and other justiceupholding countries.

39. The fact that the Israeli Zionists should be so
outrageous and rampant in frequently invading Lebanon is evidently neither an accident nor an isolated
incident. This clearly shows that the Israeli authorities are trying to intimidate the Arab and Palestinian
people by means of bloody massacre so as to fad&
tate the continued pursuance of their policies”‘cf
aggression and expansion. The Arab and Palestinian
people as well as all the justice-upholding countries
and peoples have repeatedly condemned the Israeli
authorities ,for their crimes of aggression and expansion and demanded their withdrawal from all the
occupied Arab territories and the restoration of the
national rights of the Palestinian people. Turning a
deaf ear to all. this, the Israeli authorities have
instead exacerbated their atrocities of aggression.
Fundamentally speaking, the Israeli Zionists dare to do
so many evils in such a truculent way because they
have the support and abetment of the super-Powers
in different ways. Meanwhile, the situation of “no
war, no peace” which the latter have deliberately
created and tried hard to maintain in the Middle East
for the needs of their contention for hegemony has
also provided the objective conditions for Israel’s
continued pursuance of its policies of ,aggression and
.,,_..
_- ---expansion.
40. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Arab and Palestinian peoples in
their just struggles against Zionism and hegemonism
and for the recovery of their lost territories and the
restoration of their national rights. We are resolutely
opposed to Israeli aggression and the super-Power
contention and expansion in the Middle East. This.
position of ours is firm and ,unshakable. .-

38. The Chinese delegation has listened attentively
to the speeches made by the representatives of Lebanon and other Arab countries as well as the speech
made by the representative of the PLO. We fully
support their solemn indictment against the fresh
atrocities of aggression committed by the Israeli
Zionists. The irrefutable fact is: On 2 December,
Israel sent large number of aircraft to invade Lebanon,
carrying out wanton and indiscriminate bombing raids
against some villages and refugee camps in the
northern and southern parts of Lebanon, killing and
wounding over 200 innocent Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians, many of whom were old folk, women and
children, thus creating another shocking incident in
cold blood, This is one more serious crime of aggression
committed by the Israeli Zionists against the Arab and
Palestinian people and a new debt of blood owed
by the Israeli Zionists to the Arab and Palestinian
people. The Chinese Government and people. express
great indignation at the atrocities of aggression committed by the Israeli authorities, extend our deep
sympathy for all the victims and their families and
give our firm support to the solemn position taken by
. the Lebanese Government and people, the other Arab
countries and the Palestinian people in strong condemnation of the Israeli atiocities of aggression.

41. The Security Cbuncil should uphold justice and
take a clear-cut attitude vis-bvis the naked atrocities of aggression committed by the Israeli authorities. In the view of the Chinese delegation, the
Security Council should adopt a resolution strongly
condemning the atrocities of aggression committed
by the Israeli authorities and demanding an immediate
end to all Israeli acts of aggression; at the same time,
the Council should call on the people of the world to
give firm support to the Government and people -of
Lebanon as well as the Palestinian and’ other Arab
peoples in their just struggle against Israeli aggiession. We are convinced that the entire Arab and
Palestinian people will draw due lessons from the,
Israeli crimes of aggression, unite even.more closely
and carry through to the end the’just struggle against
Israeli aggression and expansion.
42. The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by the five non-aligned
States-Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania, United Republic of
Cameroon and United Republic of Tanzania. The
Chinese delegation ,wishes to point out in particular
that we cannot accept any amendment .designed to’
equate the aggressor and those who commit atrocities
with the victim of aggression and atrocities. For
this would not only be confounding the black and

36. Thus the peace efforts made by one and all
encounter not only major obstacles because of’the
principal facts of the conflict, .but alsotragic episodes
which create a nefarious tension likely to jeopardize
the over-all settlement. But if one cannot aGoid
obstacles, it is up to us, on the other hand, to aioid
a repetition of these episodes. It is regrettable that in
these matters the -resolutions of the Council h&e
remained ineffectual as a series of pious’hopes. While
condemning Israel for its latest raids in the ‘territory
of Lebanon, we wish today firmly to warn Israel ‘to
abstain in future from actions which strike at ,a
population, already sorely tried, jeopardize the
restoration of balance of Lebanon and threatens
prospects for negotiation.
\-

5

white and distorting
unjust and tantamount
the atrocities.
43.

the facts, but would be most
to condoning the aggressor and

Such an example of stability amid religious diversity
can only serve to undermine the favourite thesis of
Israel, ‘according to which it is difficult for Jews,
Christians and Moslems to live side by side in the
same country.

Mr.

KANE
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
from
Before going into the substance of the matter
before the Council, I should like to express the deep
satisfaction of my delegation at seeing the representatives of the PLO seated around this table as the
legitimate representatives
of the Palestine people. I
should like to congratulate
them for their discreet
but effective diplomatic action which led to recognition
by the Security Council of the right already recognized to them by the General Assembly. While my
delegation is rightly pleased with the decision taken by
the Council, which certainly goes along with the current of history, we cannot hide our horror at the
tragedy and mourning which has struck the Lebanese
and Palestinian peoples.

French):

47. To justify the unjustifiable
and to continue to
defend that thesis which is clearly based on racism,
the Government
of Israel seeks to pit Palestinians
against Lebanese and Christians against Moslems.
It is this policy of aggression supported by great
expenditures,
that has led to the confusion which
Lebanon is now experiencing. In the opinion of the
Government of Israel, therefore, Lebanese democracy
must be destroyed at all costs in order to justify
the dictatorship
of Zionism over the other peoples
living in Palestine, including the Jews of Palestinian
origin. Such an objective, where religion is used for
racist purposes and for economic exploitation,
may
well cause additional
innocent victims in Lebanon
unless the Security Council takes the necessary measures to halt Israeli bombings and impose the force of
international law.

44. Once again the world, and the Council, have
been witnesses of an aggression deliberately committed
by Israel against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples,
the obvious purpose of which was to defy international public opinion and the Security Council. The
cruel bombings carried out by the Israeli army in
Lebanon. which have caused hundreds of innocent
victims, ~111 once again be added to the long list of
deliberate acts of genocide knowingly planned by
Israel against the Palestinian people.

48. Violence, however intensive, will in any case not
sap the will of the Palestinian people to reconquer
their inalienable rights. The recovery of the Palestinian homeland usurped by the Zionists will be achieved
all the more rapidly since the Palestinian
people
-Jews,
Christians and Moslems alike-enjoy
the
unreserved support of the international community.

45. Five deliberate acts of aggression have been
committed
by Israel against Lebanon since 1967.
While the Palestinians live in every country of the
Middle East, particularly in the Arab States bordering
Israel, why is Lebanon the favourite target of Israeli
bombings? The obvious reason, which escapes no
one, not even the friends of Israel, goes beyond the
simplistic explanations
given here and there by the
representatives
of Israel to justify
deliberately
organized aggression designed to spread disorder in
Lebanon itself.

49. Before concluding,
I should like on behalf of
my country, my Government
and my delegation to
express to the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples our
heartfelt condolences for the cruel losses they have
suffered as a result of the bombings carried out by the
Israeli army in Lebanon. In the harsh ordeal they
are enduring they can once again rely on the active
and brotherly solidarity of the Government and people
of Mauritania.
The meeting

46. Lebanon, in fact, has always been a land of
balanced politics, exemplary democracy and religious
tolerance, a land where Jews, Christians and Moslems
have lived together in harmony and mutual respect.

---..
Litho

in United

Nations,

NewYork

rose at 1.05 p.m.
Notes

’ See Offick~l Records of the Generul
Plenary
Meetings,
2401st meeting.

6
- 00150

_____
____

Assembly,

Thirtieth

Session,

._.._..
82-61202-December

198312,200
