United Nations

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4462nd meeting
Wednesday, 30 January 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mauritius)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Franco
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Ms. O’Donnell
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
The situation in East Timor
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (S/2002/80 and Corr.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-23649 (E)

*0223649*

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Spain. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association countries belonging to the
European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.
It is indeed a pleasure once again to greet the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. We renew our deep
gratitude to him and to the rest of the personnel of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for the remarkable way in which
they are carrying out their Security Council mandate.
We are also very pleased to greet the Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta. Our thanks and praise go also to the
people of East Timor, without whose support the
extraordinary progress achieved over the past year
would have been impossible.
The year 2002 will mark the birth of a new
country that will become a Member of the United
Nations: 20 May will be independence day for East
Timor and a date for the Organization to remember
with pride and satisfaction. However, we want to stress
that it will not be the last day of the United Nations
association with East Timor. There is a need to
guarantee the security of the country and the viability
and stability of the future Government as UNTAET
progressively transfers responsibilities to it. The
European Union strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the mandate of
UNTAET be extended until 20 May. We also welcome
the proposals for the phasing out of the United Nations
presence and for a successor mission to serve for an
estimated two years after independence.
The European Union has already endorsed the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the mission
should be an integrated one drawing upon all the
services of the United Nations. We welcome the

2

consistency of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2002/80) vis-à-vis the proposals he had set
out in his report (S/2001/983) of last October. We look
forward to further specific proposals in due course.
Since the previous report of the SecretaryGeneral was issued in October 2001, the pace of
progress towards independence has accelerated. The
security environment has improved. A draft
constitution is being intensely discussed by the
Constituent Assembly with the assistance of, inter alia,
the European Union. Presidential elections will take
place on 14 April.
We congratulate UNTAET and the East Timorese
people on the increasing number of responsibilities that
local institutions are assuming in areas such as public
administration, security and social and economic
affairs.
We acknowledge the crucial role that the
Indonesian Government is playing under the leadership
of President Megawati Soekarnoputri. Relations with
Indonesia are gradually improving, although important
issues such as cooperation in the investigation of
serious crimes and human rights violations, payment of
pensions and the demarcation of the common border
are still pending.
Despite these achievements, major challenges to a
successful transition remain. Several reported incidents
of political violence should remind us of the need for
adequate channels for expressing political dissent and
diversity. The full and peaceful integration of various
political currents through political parties will be
critical for a successful transition to democracy.
In the elections held in August 2001, the East
Timorese people showed their political maturity. The
coming 14 April elections should be held in a similarly
peaceful and transparent way.
Despite the continued long-term militia threat
along the border with Indonesia, we note that the
Secretary-General deems it feasible to plan for a
gradual assumption of security responsibilities by East
Timorese institutions. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to reduce UNTAET’s military and
civilian police components by the time of
independence. We note his observations that the
security situation and the provision of adequate
training and equipment to the East Timor Defence

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

Force and the Police Service will directly affect the
downsizing plans.
Success in East Timor is very much about
reconciliation. During recent months, refugees have
continued to return, although there are still many in
camps in West Timor. Efforts should continue to be
made to promote cross-border contacts, increase
mutual confidence and resolve the problem of the
payment of pensions.
Reconciliation, however, must be cemented by
justice. We welcome the recent establishment of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
The continuation of the work carried out by the courts
and the Office of the General Prosecutor will be
important steps in this direction.
The European Union once again calls upon the
Government of Indonesia to ensure the speedy
operationalization of the Ad Hoc Human Rights Court,
fully mandated in accordance with international
standards, with jurisdiction over all human rights
violations. In this regard, we welcome the appointment
by the Government of Indonesia of judges for the Ad
Hoc Human Rights Court and recall the urgency of
making the Court operational. We trust that cooperation
with UNTAET in judicial matters will progress in a
similar way. The European Union is ready to provide
technical assistance to both the judges and the
prosecutors of the Ad Hoc Court.
We are hoping for a parallel evolution in the
economic and social services areas. The SecretaryGeneral’s report contains some good news, showing
that economic activity is expanding. The international
community has an important role to play in supporting
the economy of East Timor. It is now time to move
towards a relationship based on development goals.
The donor community should provide support beyond
independence.

The date of 20 May might well become a
significant milestone in the often troubled history of
United Nations peacekeeping. We are learning the hard
way, through trial and error — or perhaps in this case I
should say “trial and success”.
In May, a new State will be born, and the United
Nations — that is, all of us — will have reason to be
proud. It is now up to all of us to bring this process to
fruition and to help our new sibling stride safely into a
world that is demanding, but full of promise.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting on this
important subject. I welcome Secretary-General Kofi
Annan’s report of 17 January, submitted to the Security
Council, on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). I would also
like to express my appreciation for today’s briefings by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and by East Timor’s Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta.
At the outset, I would like once again to express,
on behalf of the Government of Japan, our high regard
for the contributions that UNTAET has made to efforts
aimed at achieving East Timor’s independence and for
the leadership that Mr. Vieira de Mello has
demonstrated in the process. Naturally, the Government
of Japan supports the extension of UNTAET’s mandate,
as recommended in the Secretary-General’s report,
until 20 May this year — the date on which East Timor
is to become independent.

The collection and investment of revenues from
natural resources will be essential. As it becomes less
dependent on international donors and develops into a
stable country based on sound institutions and peaceful
relations with its neighbours, it will become attractive
to international investors.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our admiration for the people of East Timor,
who, in cooperation with UNTAET, have been making
strenuous efforts to achieve their own independence.
We would encourage them to tackle, with a sense of
ownership, the remaining tasks leading up to
independence, including the adoption of the new
Constitution and the holding of the presidential
election.

As we see other countries in the world falter in
the wake of conflict or natural disasters, we hope that
the success of East Timor will prove to be less of an
exception and more of a precedent.

For its part, the Government of Japan will
continue to extend to the people of East Timor and to
UNTAET its utmost cooperation and assistance in
order to ensure the stability and prosperity of East

3

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

Timor. The comprehensive resolution of the issue of
East Timorese refugees will be vitally important for the
stability of East Timor. Recognizing that fact, Prime
Minister Junichiro Koizumi recently announced, in
response to the Joint Appeal made by the United
Nations and the Government of Indonesia, that Japan
would extend assistance amounting to $5.39 million to
support East Timor refugees in West Timor. Prime
Minister Koizumi also told Mr. Xanana Gusmão, the
former President of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance, who is now visiting Japan, that the
Japanese Government will consider extending
assistance amounting to $1 million for the activities of
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation.
Furthermore, the Government of Japan is now
preparing to dispatch an engineering group of
approximately 700 members of its Self-Defence Forces
to the peacekeeping operation in East Timor. The
engineering group plans to begin its deployment on the
ground in the course of March and April, engaging in
the construction and repair of roads and bridges, thus
making a contribution to the reconstruction and
development of East Timor.
We are pleased to note in the Secretary-General’s
report the progress being made in planning the
functions and structure of the post-UNTAET follow-on
mission. The Government of Japan is of the view that a
United Nations presence is necessary in order to ensure
the stability of East Timor after it achieves
independence. We therefore hope that the work of
preparing the Secretary-General’s recommendations on
the follow-on mission will be completed as soon as
possible and that the Security Council will promptly
decide on the establishment of the mission.
I would like to make it clear in this context that
the Japanese Government supports the idea of funding
a minimum and indispensable civilian component,
including 100 key functions, with peacekeeping
assessed contributions.
The independence of East Timor, which will soon
be achieved, will be a success story for a world in
which conflict and instability are widespread. But as I
have stated several times in this Council, many
difficulties lie ahead for East Timor, before and after
independence, and it is the responsibility of the
international community to continue to extend its
support and cooperation to the people of East Timor.

4

Recognizing this, the Government of Japan is
determined to continue to play an important role in the
international community’s efforts to support East
Timor.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Let me begin by
expressing what an honour it is for all of us who are
concerned with the East Timor process to see you, Sir,
presiding over this meeting. This stresses the
importance that the Mauritius presidency of the
Security Council, whose performance we all praise,
attaches to this question.
I would be remiss if I also did not mention the
symbolism of the presence at the Council this morning
of the Prime Minister of Australia and the State
Minister of Ireland.
Portugal fully supports the statement that has
been delivered by Ambassador Inocencio Arias of
Spain on behalf of the Presidency of the European
Union. Since a lot of our views are contained in that
statement, I will focus my own on some issues of
particular relevance to my country.
Like others, I would like to start by thanking you,
Sir, for convening this meeting and giving the general
membership of the United Nations the opportunity to
participate in this debate. I also want to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for taking time from his
very busy agenda in Dili to come to New York and
brief us on the progress achieved by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
as well as on his views for the future of the United
Nations presence in East Timor. I also must express our
appreciation to the Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for sharing
with us the insights of the East Timorese leadership.
I would especially like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his staff for the report we have before us.
In
it
the
Secretary-General
reaffirms
his
recommendations for the United Nations peacekeeping
mission that will succeed UNTAET, as well as for the
measures being taken to achieve as seamless a
transition as possible from one to the other. The fact
that the framework defined several months ago and
amply discussed with the Timorese is now being

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

reaffirmed and reinforced clearly shows how well the
United Nations knows the situation on the ground and
how seriously it has engaged in the planning exercise.
Portugal fully supports the recommendation
contained in paragraph 104 of the Secretary-General’s
report to extend the current UNTAET mandate until the
date of independence. As this historic day approaches,
I believe we need to look closely at what has been done
to date, as well as at the way ahead of us.
We have all many times congratulated UNTAET
for the progress it has achieved, together with the
Timorese and the rest of the international community,
in East Timor’s security, political, economic and social
life. But I think we have grown used to looking at
UNTAET and East Timor as a success story and to take
that for granted. We sometimes loose sight of how
difficult and complex UNTAET’s task was and still is.
The initial UNTAET mandate, contained in
resolution 1272 (1999), was approved in October 1999.
Although the first United Nations officials moved to
Dili very soon after that, it was not until the first
trimester of 2000 that the mission was fully deployed.
This means that we are having this debate just about
two years after the very start of UNTAET. Two years is
really not much time to work literally from scratch on
establishing a security environment, building a
democratic government, improving human capacity,
rebuilding infrastructure and restarting the economy.
We all have very strong reasons to feel proud if
we consider that, only two years after the widespread
violence that followed the popular consultation, the
Timorese can reasonably expect to have not only their
long-fought-for independence, but also a functioning
administration, a democratic regime that respects
human
rights,
and
prospects
for
economic
sustainability.
In just two years security has been re-established,
the training of local police and defence forces is under
way, 192,000 refugees have returned and been
successfully reintegrated in their communities, and the
health and education systems are working again. Many
roads, bridges and public buildings have been rebuilt,
and water and electricity are being provided to the
population. A Constitutional Assembly has been
elected and a Transitional Government subsequently
appointed, new legislation has been passed in all areas
of activity, and the courts and prisons are functioning.

I believe we should be asking ourselves how
many United Nations missions can claim such an
extensive record of achievements. How many of our
own countries can report similar developments in such
a short time and under such difficult conditions? East
Timor is four months into the process approving a
constitution and very close to concluding it. I do not
believe it would be feasible to accelerate this and other
processes without serious risk to their future
sustainability.
My Government strongly believes that all these
reasons amply justify the continued engagement of the
United Nations and the international community in
East Timor, especially after independence. The fact that
UNTAET and the Timorese have achieved so much is
all the more reason to continue supporting them, so
they can finish and strengthen the tasks that the
Security Council entrusted to them. Any other option
would be irresponsible and unacceptable. It would be
like punishing the good student because he has been
doing all his homework and is therefore getting better
results than his colleagues.
Section III of the Secretary-General’s report
outlines in some detail the plans for the transition to
the post-independence United Nations mission in East
Timor. Portugal strongly supports the framework and
line of action proposed, as well as the timeline
envisaged for that process. We believe that an
integrated peacekeeping mission, comprising military,
police and civilian components, is the best approach to
post-independence support for East Timor. We feel
very strongly that a number of civilian support
positions should be included in that mission and
financed through assessed contributions in order to
ensure minimum stability to the new administration in
its early stage of independence.
I would like to highlight the recommendations of
the Secretary-General in the area of security. We noted
that despite the significant improvements there are still
some risks and that the planned downsizing of the
peacekeeping force is taking this into account. We also
noted that the Secretary-General linked the progressive
downsizing of the military and police components of
UNTAET to the progress in training and making
operational the East Timor Police Service and Defence
Forces. We very much support this approach by the
Secretary-General, which is based on the continued
analysis of the prevailing situation on the ground.

5

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council as a whole, and its member
States individually, have been instrumental in the
progress of East Timor towards independence. By
handing down to UNTAET a very comprehensive
mandate, the Council did not make the mission’s goal
any easier, but it certainly allowed it to develop an
integrated and wide-ranging approach to peace and
stability in the country. It allowed the United Nations
and the international community to develop its action
with due regard for the interlinked nature of the
requirements for stability. We all know that in today’s
world there is hardly any separation between security,
political, social and economic problems. To address
one, we have to address all of them in a coordinated
manner. This is by no means an easy task, but it is the
only way to address conflict and post-conflict
situations if we are to reach sustainable solutions. This
is as valid for East Timor as it is everywhere.
In its presidential statement of 31 October 2001,
the Council endorsed the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for the post-independence mission in
East Timor, including the need to ensure assessed
funding for a number of civilian positions. The Council
has thus made clear that it is willing to continue to
have a supportive and constructive role in East Timor’s
independence and stability. It has also made it possible
for the Secretariat to have an early and very clear basis
on which to develop an exit strategy which takes into
account the United Nations capacities, the situation on
the ground and the wishes of all people of the country.
I believe that, for the first time in its
peacekeeping history, the United Nations is analysing
the impact of its withdrawal from a country and is
trying to define timely measures to counter and reduce
its negative effects. This means we are learning from
past mistakes and establishing good precedents for the
future.
Looking at the post-independence period in East
Timor, I must underline a number of areas that we
believe are crucial for the sustainability of democracy
and the rule of law. These are the training of the
Timorese police and military, the development of the
judiciary, and the establishment of a human rights
culture. In all these areas several steps have been taken,
both through UNTAET and through United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizatons and bilateral
donors, but a lot remains to be done.

6

Without a strong and well-trained judiciary, the
basic premise of democracy — the separation of
powers — cannot become a reality and the people will
not be able to trust their governmental institutions.
Also, without a strong judiciary, there is not much
room for reconciliation and the healing of society.
Reconciliation and justice must go hand in hand. I
believe the Timorese have shown they are very tolerant
and willing to forgive. They want to leave the past
behind them and build a new future. But this is not
likely to last if there are no assurances that in that
future, crimes will not go unpunished.
Similarly, the police and military must absolutely
be perceived as professional forces, subject to civilian
rule, that exist to protect and help the citizens. As for
human rights, I do not need to point out how important
it is that they are not only formally included in the
legal basis of the State but also implemented in the
daily administration of the country.
Portugal believes that the post-independence
presence in East Timor must continue to have a strong
role in these areas. Building credible institutions will
be the best legacy that the United Nations, indeed all of
us, can leave in East Timor. And it is not an area where
we can afford to fail. I can assure you that Portugal has
done and will continue to do its utmost to support these
endeavours.
In the four months ahead of us, the role of the
Council will continue to be crucial. A number of
aspects, both substantive and procedural, will need to
be discussed and agreed on so that the Council can take
timely action to turn the planning exercise into a
reality. We are looking forward to further
recommendations from the Secretary-General on issues
such as the mechanisms of cooperation between the
United Nations and the Timorese authorities after
independence, especially in the area of security, and the
mechanisms that will trigger the post-independence
United Nations mission in the country. Portugal would
welcome an early discussion of these issues among
Council members and between Council members and
other interested countries.
The independence of East Timor will be a historic
moment not only for the Timorese; it will also be very
special for the United Nations. Some people have said
that East Timor is the child of the United Nations. I
would say rather that East Timor is the child of its own
very difficult struggle but that it would not be about to

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

stand on its own if it were not for the excellent
caretaker leading it in its first years.
The independence of East Timor is an important
date in a long process in which the East Timorese were
always the major players as the masters of their own
destiny. In the past, they were prepared to die in order
to prove that they were alive. In the future, I am sure
they will give us a lesson of responsibility in the
management of their new democratic State.
But let us not forget that the international
community cannot assume a neutral role in the process
of building their nation, because the international
community has implicitly recognized that for many
years it was guilty of the neutrality it assumed when
the Timorese were the innocent victims of the
injustices of history.
The United Nations was able to reconcile the
international community with the Timorese. The
Council, as one of the Organization’s major organs, has
the duty to guarantee that the responsibility of the
United Nations is exercised until the adequate means to
run the country are put at disposal of the Timorese.
Through the Timorese case, the Council also has the
opportunity to reflect on the way the United Nations
operates in all its dimensions in its peacekeeping
missions. Not currently being a member of the Council,
I am sure that you will not disappoint those who trust
its sagesse.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, and Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, for
organizing this public meeting on this important
subject despite the heavy calendar of the Security
Council this month.
This debate once again affords us an opportunity
to deliberate on the situation in East Timor in the
presence of the country’s Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, and
the head of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, who are together in this Chamber.
High tributes are owed to both. The participation of
Prime Minister John Howard this morning was
encouraging, Australia having been such a key player.

The Secretary-General’s current report underlines
progress in a number of important areas regarding the
situation in East Timor. While awaiting his report on
UNTAET’s successor mission, I should emphasize a
few critical elements on the journey ahead.
First, East Timor is on course to becoming a
major success story of the United Nations. But that can
be assured only if the United Nations exit is premised
on a sound strategy and not only on political
expediency or financial considerations. I would only
emphasize that the Security Council underscored the
need for a gradual and orderly exit from East Timor
beyond independence when adopting presidential
statement PRST/2001/32 at its 4403rd meeting last
October, during which Ambassador Mahbubani also
made reference to the Secretary-General’s report.
Secondly, we recognize the constructive role of
Indonesia in ensuring the stability and vitality of the
Timorese State and its people. We were heartened by
last week’s meeting in Kupang, Indonesia, between the
East Timorese Government and its West Timorese
counterpart to address reconciliation and the return of
refugees to East Timor. The Indonesian Supreme
Court’s recent verdict, we hope, will add to a positive
spirit in next month’s high-level talks in Denpasar to
address
the
outstanding
bilateral
issues
comprehensively.
An early resolution of those issues will have a
significant effect on the containment of an illegal
economy along the border and on the return of refugees
to East Timor. For a nascent Government like that of
East Timor, the draining of precious foreign currency
through smuggling can indeed prove destabilizing, as it
introduces many other vices into society. Similarly, the
return of the remaining 60,000 to 75,000 refugees to
East Timor before independence will also remain a
critical benchmark. An early conclusion of the
Memorandum of Understanding between East Timor
and Indonesia in that regard, we believe, would also
deepen the relations between the two countries.
Thirdly, continued financial support to East
Timor will remain critical in the foreseeable future.
The rationale and pitfalls in that respect are well
articulated in the report, especially in paragraphs 75
and 84. The Timorese Government should be assured
of adequate assistance. As has been stated this
morning, there is a need for early funding in a number
of areas, particularly for making operational the

7

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation,
accomplishing tasks related to the prosecution of
serious crimes. However, the essential point remains
that, for an independent East Timor to be viable and
vibrant, UNTAET’s successor mission should be
funded through assessed contributions.
Finally, Bangladesh supports the extension of
UNTAET’s mandate and other observations and
recommendations that the Secretary-General has made
in his report. Just like the others present here,
Bangladesh is looking forward to the ceremonies in
May in East Timor. That occasion will be a celebration
of hope, in which Bangladesh will be privileged to
participate at a high level, in keeping with our
involvement in East Timorese reconstruction.
The President: I now invite the representative of
Fiji to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Naidu (Fiji): Mr. President, my delegation is
very pleased to see you preside over this very
important meeting. We welcome you to New York. We
also commend the dynamic leadership of Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello through whom the Security Council
mandates have been accomplished to date. My
delegation also wishes to recognize the contribution of
Mr. Ramos-Horta, Senior Foreign Minister, for his role
in the developments in East Timor leading to its
independence on 20 May 2002.
Fiji is closely following the progress of
developments in East Timor. As a fledgling State of the
wider Asia-Pacific region that has come out of years of
struggle and conflict, we are truly proud of East
Timor’s achievements thus far. Its successes closely
mirror those of similar peace-building initiatives in the
Pacific, such as Bougainville, Solomon Islands, and, to
some extent, my own country, Fiji. We hope that this
wind of peace heralds more constructive engagements
towards democratic governance in the region and
beyond.
Fiji’s peacekeeping task in Suwai, bordering West
and East Timor, has not been an easy one. While light
is visible at the end of the tunnel, we will stay engaged
as long as is necessary.
We congratulate the Constituent Assembly and
the people of East Timor on their plans for
independence on 20 May 2002 and observe that the
presidential elections scheduled for 14 April 2002 are

8

on target. Fiji has been approached to provide one of
the two international members of the Board of
Commissioners for the April presidential elections. In
this regard, my Government is pleased to be of service
in this historic engagement, as well as in similar
electoral engagements, such as the recent one in the
Solomon Islands.
Some remarkable advances made since October
2001 are detailed in the Secretary-General’s report on
the mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Fiji is
heartened by the building of a rapprochement between
West and East Timor through the border reconciliation
meetings between Indonesia and East Timor. As
expected, the resulting positive effects on internal
security have been reported by the Secretary-General.
This increasingly welcome environment, coupled with
some outstanding tasks for the new Assembly to
resolve with the assistance of UNTAET, will encourage
more refugee returns.
In this difficult transition period, we are
particularly challenged by the preparatory work on
building a gender component into the administration
system prior to independence. In turn, we are hopeful
that this will engender a more secure domestic
environment than as reported with respect to women
and children.
We are pleased to see civil service recruitment
reaching close to its target, a slow but steady
development of the infrastructure and robust socioeconomic progress, especially in the education sector.
It is critical, however, that allocations in the United
Nations core budget remain committed to support a
specific number of civilian technical assistance posts.
This would boost programmes for socio-economic
development and poverty eradication.
All parties have been alerted to the downside of
UNTAET’s drawdown and ultimate withdrawal. In
anticipation of this event, we therefore encourage the
Constituent Assembly, in conjunction with UNTAET,
to continue with measures that would cushion the
impact on the local economy.
Although security is largely at hand, much
depends on the border delimitation issue to be
determined by the respective Governments of East
Timor and Indonesia. Capital investment is also critical
in order to develop the full capacity of the East Timor
Defence Force and, similarly, for the certification

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

targets of the East Timor Police Service. Until both the
Defence Force and the Police Service show the
capability to maintain security in East Timor, the
UNTAET military and civilian police components
should stay engaged. This transition is predicated on a
viable capital programme.
Other related concerns that will sustain postindependence East Timor are equally dependent on
benevolent international and bilateral donations. In this
regard, we are very hopeful that an outpouring of
goodwill will in time bring a fitting closure to
UNTAET’s mandate.
We also look forward to the celebrations on 20
May 2002, and we anxiously await the welcoming of
East Timor into the fold of the United Nations, thus
increasing the number of Member States from 189 to
190.
The President: I thank the representative of Fiji
for his kind words addressed to the Chair.
I now invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea):
Mr. President, let me begin by commending you for
your leadership in the Security Council this past
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his useful briefing. We also welcome the
presence of Senior Minister Ramos-Horta and the
briefing he has given us.
In the process of helping East Timor achieve
independence, we have witnessed several landmark
events. Following the successful completion of the
Constituent Assembly elections last August, we now
have a number of other critical tasks before us, such as
the presidential elections in April and the independence
celebrations in May.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the staff of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timorese people for their hard work in
preparing those political processes. We hope that the
East Timorese people, despite some reported rivalries
among political groups, will once again demonstrate
their capacity for democracy by smoothly adopting a
Constitution and holding peaceful and democratic
presidential elections.

We are eager to witness and participate in the
historic celebration of a new nation’s independence,
and my delegation fully endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend UNTAET’s
mandate until that time.
Regarding the restructuring of UNTAET, we
welcome the detailed downsizing plan that will
continue to be implemented until independence, as well
as the general picture that has been painted of the postUNTAET mission. In accordance with the plan, the
Republic of Korea’s military battalion successfully
completed its one-and-a-half-year mission in the
eastern area and was recently redeployed to the
Oecussi enclave. The Korean battalion will do its best
to ensure the security of the new mission area and to
promote the development of the area together with a
Japanese engineering company, which is expected to
arrive there soon.
With respect to the United Nations mission in
East Timor after independence, we fully agree with the
Secretary-General’s basic assessment that the
continued assistance of the international community
will be required, considering the still weak security
environment of East Timor and its fragile
administrative and economic foundations. In keeping
with the East Timorese people’s efforts to become selfreliant in the shortest possible time, a gradual exit
strategy for the United Nations peacekeeping mission
should be planned and implemented in a way that will
not diminish all the progress that has been achieved up
to now. We hope that the planners can work out a
downsizing programme that strikes a good balance
between the United Nations assessed contributions and
the roles of bilateral and multilateral donors. We look
forward to seeing another report of the SecretaryGeneral before the termination of the UNTAET
mandate, containing further specific proposals for the
mandate and structure of the successor mission of
UNTAET.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize two
points. First, a slackening of resolve among donors or
the overly speedy disengagement of the international
community in East Timor would be detrimental and
must be forestalled. Secondly, the long-term viability
and progress of East Timor will very much depend on
its relations with its neighbours and other regional and
international friends.

9

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

We will continue to follow the developments in
East Timor with great optimism and anticipation. The
Government and the private sector of the Republic of
Korea are committed to developing strong political and
economic ties with the democratic republic of East
Timor.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to address the Council today and for
your presidency this month. We are, as always, very
appreciative of Council meetings which are held in
open session, like this one, as well as of other
mechanisms to strengthen dialogue with Council
members, such as the very useful troop-contributor
meeting held on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) last week.
We are also very pleased to see Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello and Mr. José Ramos-Horta here participating
in the discussion today so eloquently and perceptively,
as they always have in the past.
New Zealand is very happy to support the
renewal of UNTAET’s mandate through to East
Timor’s forthcoming independence in May this year.
We very much commend the hard work and
determination of the East Timorese people and of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor and the leadership provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in laying the
foundations for independence in such a very short
period.
The Secretary-General’s report of developments
in East Timor, from mid-October 2001 to the present,
summarizes very well both the achievements and the
ongoing challenges. New Zealand very warmly
endorses that report. We welcome in particular the
innovative step taken by the East Timorese Council of
Ministers to hold open meetings in each of East
Timor’s 13 districts as a means of educating the
population on the workings of government. We also
very much applaud the interim Government’s ongoing
efforts to strengthen East Timor’s relations with its
neighbour, Indonesia. We also note with some pleasure
how the small seeds planted by New Zealand customs
officers back in January 2000 have today grown into a
very respectable East Timor customs, immigration and

10

quarantine service responsible
significant government revenue.

for

bringing

in

As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
however, the partnership venture between East Timor
and the United Nations is not yet over. I noted the
words of Prime Minister Howard of Australia in his
most eloquent statement, when he said that, without
continuing support, these successes cannot be
maintained. I think that, if one looks at the themes that
have come through from the discussion in the Council
both this morning and this afternoon, that has certainly
been a very consistent theme. Our colleague from
Singapore used the term “unfinished business” and I
think that is very much what everyone has in mind.
It is certainly true that the challenges that lie
ahead are considerable and, as underlined in Oslo last
month, will call for constant vigilance that precious
funds are directed to top-priority activities. Both the
East Timorese leadership and the international
community have a particular duty to ensure that mutual
expectations — both those of the East Timorese people
and those which the international community has of
East Timor — remain realistic and within the capacity
of donors and the East Timorese Government to
deliver.
For our part, we take this occasion to renew New
Zealand’s unequivocal support for what the people and
the interim Government of East Timor, with
exceptional international assistance, are striving to
achieve. We all share the same end-goal — selfsufficiency for the country and people of East Timor —
and look forward to donor relations with East Timor
reverting to a normal development model as soon as
feasible.
We are therefore very happy to endorse the
Secretary-General’s concept of a successor mission
whose primary objective will be to enable an
independent and stable East Timor to stand on its own
two feet and for the United Nations to quickly fulfil its
post-independence mandate.
For its part, New Zealand will continue to
contribute to East Timor’s and international efforts in
the build-up to independence and beyond through
ongoing military and civilian expertise and through
development assistance. We are now well-launched
down the path of a new bilateral relationship with a
new and very valued regional neighbour. It is thanks to
the determination of the United Nations to do right by

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

that new and small country that the possibility for such
constructive links exists.
We therefore reiterate New Zealand’s support for
this last extension of UNTAET’s mandate and look
forward to the Council’s detailed consideration of the
United Nations post-independence presence at a later
date.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): It is a great honour to have
you, Sir, presiding over today’s meeting.
Let me begin by paying tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, whose leadership has been instrumental in
making the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) a success story we all should
be proud of. I would like also to welcome Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, the Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of East Timor and one of the greatest
leaders of his country.
The work of Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team
has been made easier thanks both to the vision of the
East Timorese leaders, such as Senior Minister RamosHorta, and to the political maturity of its heroic people.
At this critical juncture, as we prepare for
independence and plan for the successor mission to the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), it is important to convey a clear
message to the East Timorese people. This must be a
message of encouragement and unflinching support: we
will not let you down, you will not be alone, your
struggle for freedom was not in vain.
Independence will be declared in a few months,
but that will not be the end of the United Nations
involvement in East Timor. It must be the beginning of
a new phase in which the exercise of sovereignty by
the East Timorese will have to be shored up by our
cooperation and support in a vast array of critical areas.
The mission of the United Nations in East Timor
was not merely the creation of new State; it was, and
still is, the creation of a functioning, stable and
democratic State. As our Secretary-General rightly
points out in his latest report, a number of difficulties
facing the nascent State will require significant
assistance from the international community. We must

ensure a smooth transition to independence — one that
preserves stability and security as well as continuity in
the public administration. For that to happen, we
cannot rely solely on voluntary contributions. It is
necessary to secure a predictable source of funding.
Brazil supports the establishment of a successor
mission, as proposed by the Secretary-General, which
would comprise a military component, a civilian police
component and a civilian component. Given the very
limited pool of professional and administrative
expertise in East Timor, it is particularly important that
the civilian component include the 100 key functions
within the administration to guarantee continuity and
ensure on-the-job training for East Timorese officials.
Undoubtedly, these positions must be included in the
assessed funding of the new mission.
As for the military and civilian police
components, their downsizing is desirable. The only
factor that must guide the downsizing process,
however, is the capacity of the East Timor Defence
Force and the East Timor Police Service to provide
external and internal security. As far as we know,
despite the relative calm in East Timor, hard-line
militias may still pose a long-term threat and continue
to be a source of concern.
If we are to apply commonsensical lessons from
our own previous experiences with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, we must hope for the best of
scenarios but prepare for the worst. I am confident that
stability will be preserved in East Timor as the
democratic process evolves and the reconciliation
efforts gain momentum. However, let us ground the
decisions concerning the level of the force and the
duration of its presence in a clear assessment of the
concrete needs of the future sovereign State of East
Timor.
We have witnessed important progress in the
implementation of UNTAET’s mandate over the last
year. The election for the Assembly was a huge success
that bodes well for the future of party politics and
democracy in East Timor. The Constituent Assembly
has made strides in its deliberations. With regard to the
refugees, it is good news that there has been an
increase in the number of repatriations. This is also a
sign that the efforts of Xanana Gusmão, with a view to
healing the wounds of past animosity, are bearing fruit
despite reports of misinformation in the camps. Brazil
appreciates the efforts of President Megawati of

11

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

Indonesia to solve pending issues and build strong
bilateral ties with East Timor based on friendship and
mutual respect. This is crucial for the stability and
development of East Timor.
All these positive aspects notwithstanding, it is
clear that there remain important deficiencies that must
be addressed with the continued support of the
international community. It is also important to address
legal problems that might inhibit economic recovery
and development, particularly the need for clear and
stable legislation on property rights as well as a
commercial code.
The impressive growth of East Timor’s gross
domestic product in 2001, by 18 per cent, will be
difficult to maintain in 2002. In this context, it
becomes even more important to continue to put in
place income-generating projects to minimize the
possible adverse impact of the decrease in United
Nations personnel and expenditure. In addition, it is
essential to maintain the current level of public
services after independence. The deterioration of such
services, which include health and education, would
hurt the most vulnerable and could constitute a blow to
public confidence in the future State.
Anyone who deals with development issues
knows that widespread poverty, high unemployment
rates and the collapse of public services are an
explosive mixture and a recipe for trouble. This is
exactly what we must avoid at all costs, and it is why
the international community as a whole must continue
to provide generous support for the rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of East Timor.
A mission with a mandate as broad as that of
UNTAET requires a sizeable investment. It is time to
protect the investment we made. We cannot afford to
jeopardize the progress achieved.
The day of independence will mark a new era in
East Timor, the fulfilment of a legitimate aspiration of
an admirable people. But it will also be a moment to
reflect on the complex challenges that lie ahead in
terms of making the independence of East Timor work
for every citizen. The international community must
bear in mind that the declaration of independence is no
magic wand that will turn East Timor into a fullfledged and functioning State. Now is the time to show
solidarity and ensure that independence becomes more
than a symbolic event to celebrate the glory of those
who fought for self-determination.

12

The celebration of the deeds of the East Timorese
heroes is important, but it will be really meaningful
only if the people of East Timor are given the
opportunity to use their independence to attain a
dignified livelihood. To that end, the assistance of the
international community continues to be vital. We hope
that the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations will continue to give high priority to
East Timor. This will require matching our words of
support with resolute decisions and firm actions.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Philippines. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to express my delegation’s pleasure in seeing
you preside over this meeting and our congratulations
on your delegation’s successful and able leadership and
guidance of the Council during this month.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his latest
comprehensive report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
In addition, we wish to express our appreciation to
Prime Minister Howard, Senior Minister Ramos-Horta
and Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for their statements
earlier today.
We are almost at curtain time in East Timor. All
our efforts for more than two years will be rigorously
tested starting 20 May, when East Timor formally
declares independence. As the Secretary-General
observes, the international community has abundant
reasons to be proud of what has been accomplished in
East Timor in such a short period of time. For many of
us, it is also truly gratifying to have made some
contribution in the efforts towards creating a strong
foundation for an independent East Timor — a real
success story in the history of the United Nations.
In times of success, such as in East Timor, it is
not difficult to be lured into complacency, to rest on
our laurels and become victims of our own success and
achievements. However, we hope that our success in
East Timor will not distract us from the multitude of
tasks remaining to be done.
We have not yet reached the point, in our view,
where we can be reasonably assured that our efforts in
East Timor will be secure and durable. My delegation
therefore urges the Security Council and the
international community to remain vigilant and to

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

ensure that the gains we have achieved thus far, and
intend to achieve in the future, in East Timor are
preserved and sustained.
We have carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General. It is essentially, in our view, an
unequivocal call for adequate funding and support for
East Timor. UNTAET, the Secretariat and other
international partners are working hard to come up
with a comprehensive plan for the future of East Timor.
But we should know that without sufficient funding it
will be virtually impossible to implement successfully
even the best-laid plans. The maintenance of security
and the building of a sustainable administrative and
economic structure in East Timor depend on this.
We thus call on the donor community to intensify
its efforts to ensure adequate and predictable funding
for the growing needs of East Timor. With crises in
other parts of the world, and the international
community’s attention riveted to the war on terrorism,
we hope that East Timor will not be relegated to the
background or, worse, forgotten in the scramble for
assistance and support at this critical time. The
international community should not fail to respond to
the aspirations of the East Timorese, who deserve, at
the very least, our continued support and active
encouragement. The people of East Timor have earned
the right to freedom and independence. We cannot let
them down.
Attaining independence in East Timor is no small
achievement. But it cannot be the final chapter of the
United Nations exit strategy for East Timor.
The Philippines supports the further extension of
UNTAET’s mandate until the declaration of
independence in East Timor on 20 May. We also
express our broad support for the proposed framework
for the successor mission to UNTAET and in this
regard look forward to its further elaboration by the
Secretary-General. We urge the Security Council to
accept these recommendations.
In the meantime, the Philippines remains
committed to participating in United Nations efforts in
East Timor and to supporting the East Timorese people
in their historic endeavour.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending my delegation’s felicitations to you, Sir, for
presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council
in this month of January. It is also a pleasure for my
delegation to congratulate Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic, which
became members of the Security Council on 1 January
this year. We are fully confident that the new members
will provide valuable contributions to the work of the
Council.
I should also like to join previous speakers in
welcoming the presence in our midst of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and of the Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. José Ramos-Horta.
Having listened with keen interest to their
insightful briefings on the challenges and opportunities
that have arisen during East Timor’s transitional
period, leading up to the historic moment of
independence and preparations for a successor mission
to the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET), my delegation would like to
emphasize how important it is for the international
community, including Indonesia, to focus its concerted
attention on the future of East Timor as it embarks on
its journey to nationhood in May this year, and beyond.
Indonesia’s commitment and support in this
regard need no further reiteration. Indonesia and
UNTAET have jointly engaged in various productive
bilateral talks since the last meeting of the Council.
Seizing the initiative once again, we have now
scheduled talks at the ministerial level with the
representatives of UNTAET and East Timor, to be held
in Bali on 25 February 2002, and to be followed the
next day by a trilateral ministerial meeting between
Indonesia, UNTAET and East Timor, and Australia. In
my Government’s view, these talks provide the most
appropriate forum for exploring ways and means to
resolve the outstanding and wider issues of interest to
the parties.
Since October last, there have been encouraging
developments with respect to the issues of refugees,
security, justice and reconciliation. With the prevailing
atmosphere of calm and stability in the border area, the
number of refugee returns has been steadily rising
since October 1999, to date totalling more than
190,000 East Timorese. Motivated by this environment
of
normalcy,
Indonesia’s
Regional
Military

13

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

Commander in Udayana decided to withdraw two
battalions of the army from the East Nusa Tengara
province.
My Government has consistently called for
resolving the refugee issue once and for all, because
not only has the refugees’ prolonged presence caused
disharmony with the local population in East Nusa
Tengara, but also because, as time marches on, the
issue will become increasingly complex and harder to
deal with. More important, however, is the fact that to
leave the refugees to an uncertain fate is indeed a
violation of their fundamental human rights. Bearing in
mind the upcoming presidential election and the
nation’s subsequent independence, it is a matter of the
highest priority that they become active participants,
along with the rest of their countrymen, in these
momentous and fundamental processes and thereby
determine the future of their own country.
It was with this in mind that the Government of
Indonesia and the United Nations launched a Joint
Appeal on East Timorese refugees on 27 November
last, in Jakarta. It is expected that through this
endeavour around 60,000 refugees could be repatriated
this year. Through this body, my delegation appeals to
donor countries and institutions to contribute
generously to these efforts. Indeed, support for the
Joint Appeal is singularly urgent, as my Government
has, as of 1 January this year, discontinued the
assistance which had been provided since September
2000.
Nonetheless, Indonesia will continue to make
provisions, within its modest means, for vulnerable
groups and emergency situations until 30 April 2002,
when the camps will finally be closed. Hence, this is a
crucial period, during which the refugees will have to
finally decide on the options offered by my
Government: whether to accept repatriation before
their country’s imminent independence or to join
Indonesia’s resettlement programme.
Moreover, Indonesia and United Nations agencies
continue to enhance coordination on voluntary
repatriation such as encouraging a “go and see” visit. A
special fund has also been established to alleviate any
insecurity relating to the pension benefits of former
Indonesian government employees who have returned
to, or will live in, East Timor. Within its limited
capabilities, Indonesia will make a contribution of $2
million towards that fund.

14

Simultaneously, reconciliation is an important
component in post-conflict circumstances, including in
encouraging the repatriation of refugees. In this
respect, we were gratified by the dialogue session held
by Mr. Xanana Gusmão with some 1,000 East
Timorese, predominantly pro-autonomy supporters, on
3 November last. Just last week, Mr. Gusmão reiterated
that the new Government of East Timor would ensure
their safety if they returned to their homeland. My
delegation can only underscore the importance of such
reconciliation initiatives, and it earnestly hopes that the
international community will lend this process its full
support.
It is also pertinent to note that the Indonesian
military and United Nations peacekeeping forces have
been working in close cooperation and coordination,
leading to more favourable conditions along the border.
The third meeting of the East Timor-Indonesia Joint
Border Committee took place from 19 to 21 November
2001 in Dili, and negotiations are expected to continue
in the near future. Meanwhile, both sides have agreed
to a joint border reconnaissance next month. My
Government will continue to provide the assistance
deemed necessary in this regard and hopes that all
parties will support this effort in the same spirit as it is
being given.
Pursuant to Indonesia’s assurances that justice
would be upheld, Presidential Decree No. 6/M/2002
was issued on 12 January 2002 regarding the
appointment of 18 judges to the Ad Hoc Human Rights
Court as a follow-up to the Presidential Decree issued
last year to expand the jurisdiction of the Ad Hoc
Human Rights Court. The Ad Hoc Court is expected to
commence its work next month.
With regard to the Atambua cases, Indonesia’s
Supreme Court has overruled the decisions of the
District Court of North Jakarta, as well as those of the
High Court of Jakarta, with regard to the six
perpetrators, and their sentences ranging from 10 to 20
months have been reset at from 5 to 7 years. While
welcoming this development, my Government fully
respects the independence of the national judicial
system.
To conclude, this significant meeting of the
Security Council merits profound introspection
regarding the future of East Timor and the new
objectives of the successor mission following the end

S/PV.4462 (Resumption 1)

of UNTAET’s mandate in May 2002, provided the new
Government consents to this.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello to make a few, very brief
remarks.
Mr. Vieira de Mello: For the sake of brevity, I
will also speak on behalf of José Ramos-Horta.
I would like first to thank all the speakers for
their generous words addressed to my colleagues, to
the second Transitional Government and other
Timorese institutions, not least the Constituent
Assembly. Whatever our joint achievements, they
would not have been possible without the unfailing and
unanimous support of this Council over the last 27
months. We thank the Council for the unanimous
support it has expressed for UNTAET’s mandate
extension until independence. With regard to the
successor mission, we welcome the approval in
principle of the concept outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General, as well as the support expressed by
many speakers for the civilian positions in core areas
that the Secretary-General proposed be funded from the
assessed budget of the United Nations.
With regard to the request made by some
speakers that the Secretary-General present specific
proposals in his next report — his end-of-mission
report — for the successor presence of the United
Nations in East Timor, we have taken note with great
attention of the suggestions formulated here by many
delegations, in particular by the Russian Federation and
France.
I would like to confirm to the representative of
Guinea that, indeed, we shall be convening a last
donors conference in Dili about 10 days before the
country becomes independent, a donors meeting to
which we will be presenting the outcome of the work
being carried out by the Planning Commission. That

outcome should be a mid-term development strategy
for East Timor, which is what, I believe, the
representatives had in mind.
Finally, on the comments that were made on a
variety of topics, I would like to say that we have not
only taken them into account in the past. We will
continue to do so in the future because we definitely
share those observations, in particular those made
about the extension of the mandate of the Constituent
Assembly and the good use this extension should be
put to in refining the text of the first constitution of
East Timor with regard to the presidential election, the
justice system, the truth and reconciliation commission,
economic development, as well as the situation of the
remaining refugees in West Timor.
To conclude, I would like to thank the Council
and Ministers very sincerely, on behalf of José RamosHorta and the second Transitional Government he
represents here today, for the support and solidarity
extended to us by this Council in the course of today’s
debate, which will serve as strong encouragement to all
of us, particularly the people of East Timor, in the final
phase of the transition to independence of a territory
the Council tasked us to administer and steer.
I thank you, Minister Gayan, for presiding over
this meeting today, and, through you, we extend our
gratitude to Ambassador Koonjul and his team for the
keen interest and sympathy they have demonstrated in
the preparations for this debate of the Security Council
on East Timor.
The President: I thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his kind words.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

15
