S/PV.8063

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8063rd meeting

Thursday, 5 October 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/801)
Letter dated 2 October 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/830)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-31067 (E)
*1731067*

Colombia

S/PV.8063

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

in the context of its ongoing efforts to enhance the
overall effectiveness of United Nations missions.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/801)
Letter dated 2 October 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/830)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/801, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, and document S/2017/830, which contains a
letter dated 2 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:
“Following the completion of the 12-month
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(the Mission) on 25 September 2017, the Security
Council welcomes the remarkable achievements
in Colombia following the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a stable and Long
Lasting Peace reached between the Government of
Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia — People’s Army (FARC-EP).
“The Security Council takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General of 25 September (S/2017/801)
and welcomes the assessments, recommendations
and lessons learned therein. The Security Council
expresses its intention to take them into account
2/8

05/10/2017

“The Security Council recalls resolutions
2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016) and congratulates
the parties on the historic. progress made since
the signing of the Final Agreement, including
the culmination of the ceasefire, the cessation of
hostilities, the process of laying down of arms and
the transformation of the FARC-EP into a political
party, bringing over five decades of conflict
between them to a close. The Council pays tribute
to the political will of the parties in achieving
these milestones and to the leadership and spirit
of cooperation they demonstrated in calling for the
United Nations to partner with them in an innovative
tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism
(MVM). The Security Council emphasizes that
their determination and commitment have ensured
that Colombia’s peace process continues to be a
source of inspiration for the resolution of conflicts
globally and retains the potential to set an example
for peace processes elsewhere in the world.
“The Security Council expresses its gratitude
for the exemplary manner in which the Mission,
led by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Jean Arnault, accomplished the two tasks
mandated to it by the Security Council, based upon
the agreement by the parties, in having coordinated
the MVM for the monitoring and verification of the
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and overseen
the laying down of arms process. The Security
Council underscores that this work played a vital
role in supporting the successful implementation
of the corresponding provisions in the peace
agreement. The Council welcomes the Mission’s
work with the MVM to promote a gender-sensitive
approach. The Council expresses its appreciation
to the Mission for delivering the swift, flexible
and tailored support envisaged by the Council and
demonstrating the potential of the United Nations
at its best.
“The Security Council also expresses its
gratitude to the observer-contributing countries,
particularly those from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States. The Council
also acknowledges the two guarantors of the
peace process, Cuba and Norway, and the two
accompanying countries, Chile and Venezuela.
17-31067

05/10/2017

Colombia

“The Security Council notes the equally
important work still ahead to implement the
specific security, political and socioeconomic
provisions of the Final Peace Agreement and
reaffirms the need for both parties to fulfil their
commitments to achieve a lasting peace. In that
regard, the Council recalls resolutions 2366 (2017)
and 2377(2017) which established and mandated
the United Nations Verification Mission to verify
implementation by the Government of Colombia and
the FARC-EP of the process of political, economic
and social reincorporation of the FARC-EP and the
implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees. The Council trusts that the work of
the Verification Mission will be a strong source of
support and encouragement for Colombia’s peace
process.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/18.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/837, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2381 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): We meet today, just
days after the first-ever bilateral ceasefire between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN). For the first time in over half a century, the
guns between those two once-warring sides have fallen

S/PV. 8063

silent. That creates yet another historic opportunity for
peace for the people of Colombia.
It is testament to our unity of purpose on that issue
that, in the brief time that has elapsed, the Council
has come together to adopt resolution 2381 (2017),
authorizing the United Nations Verification Mission
to support the monitoring of that ceasefire. In doing
so, the Council has once again shown that it is ready
to respond swiftly, positively and unanimously in
support of peace in Colombia. As the penholder on
the resolution, I want to offer my thanks to all Council
members for their support in making it possible.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his recommendations, which outlined an effective
and appropriate response to the ceasefire through the
existing Verification Mission. I am also grateful to
Special Representative Arnault and his staff for their
quick work after the announcement on 4 September and
during a complex phase of transition for the Verification
Mission.
We know that this is just the start and we recognize
the challenges faced by the parties just to reach this
crucial point after months of talks in Quito. if that
peace is to be built and sustained, all of their efforts will
need to continue. Both parties share a responsibility
for ensuring that the ceasefire improves the safety and
security of all Colombians. It is vital that they seize
the opportunity that this ceasefire presents. We may not
see another opportunity like it for both sides to work
towards a lasting peace. Therefore, let us do all we can
to support the Government of Colombia and the ELN
in that effort.
We can be proud today that the United Nations has
been able to respond positively to the request of the
parties. Through this adoption, we have again shown
that the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, stand ready to support Colombia on the
journey towards peace.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2381 (2017) this afternoon. We
commend the strong commitment of the parties in
Colombia to peace. It is important that the Council
stand with them.
The United Nations Mission in Colombia has
played an important role in supporting the peace
process. We would like to thank the Mission and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jean Arnault

17-310673/8

S/PV.8063

Colombia

for their excellent work. We would also like to thank the
Special Representative for the efforts of the Mission on
the inclusion and participation of women and we trust
that this will be continued in the second mission.
We are happy to see that the Security Council
could once again show its unity and strong support for
the peace process in Colombia by quickly adopting a
resolution that approves the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to verify the ceasefire between the
Government of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN) — a ceasefire that once again shows the
commitment of Colombia to moving forward, building
on the momentum of last year. We want to praise the
courage and leadership of the Colombian Government
in that regard.
In our discussions as a Council, we repeatedly say
that mandates must be clear, realistic and up to date,
and that we must allocate the necessary resources for
missions to deliver on those mandates. In this instance,
that means making sure that the mandate to verify
the ceasefire agreement with the ELN is realistic,
including with regard to allocating the right resources.
It also means making sure that the United Nations
Verification Mission can live up to the mandate to carry
out the additional task of verifying the ELN ceasefire
agreement without affecting the implementation of
its previously mandated tasks under resolution 2366
(2017).
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report,
expected on 8 December, which will give us the
opportunity to review the situation in order to ensure
that the resource allocation is realistic and that the
mandate is up to date.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing Uruguay’s renewed
delight regarding the extraordinary progress of the
peace process in Colombia. We are strongly welcome
the temporary national bilateral ceasefire that was
announced on 4 September by the Government of
Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN), and its entry into force from 1 October 2017 to
9 January 2018.
We received and took very seriously the joint
request of both parties in their Joint Communiqué of
29 September for the United Nations to participate
as international coordinator in a monitoring and
verification mechanism made up of representatives of
the Government of Colombia, the Ejército de Liberación
4/8

05/10/2017

Nacional and the Catholic Church aimed at ensuring
compliance with the temporary bilateral ceasefire.
In that regard, Uruguay welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2381 (2017), endorsing the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
letter dated 2 October (S/2017/830) and which will allow
the United Nations Verfication Mission in Colombia to
carry out the tasks requested by the parties.
To conclude, we would like to express the firm
commitment of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to ensuring lasting peace in our
brotherly country Colombia.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported the
adoption of the resolution 2381 (2017), expanding the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. The mission will now provide assistance in
monitoring compliance with the temporary ceasefire
agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. In addition to the
achievements of the peace process with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, we hope that
this ceasefire will complete the final solution to the
lengthy internal conflict and achieve domestic peace
in Colombia.
We value the support of the guarantors in this
process: Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, Norway and
Venezuela. We expect that the Government and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional will meet their
obligations in good faith and that the Verification
Mission will provide the necessary assistance to that
end. We believe that expanding the mandate of the
Mission by increasing its staff by 70 international
observers and setting up an additional 33 posts is fully
in line with the expectations of Colombia.
As to the Verification Mission, it has become an
excellent tradition to develop the mandate of the Mission
in close coordination with the Colombians themselves.
Today’s consensus vote clearly demonstrates that the
Security Council is ready to provide constant support
for the good faith of the two parties. We are convinced
that the national ownership of the peace process by
the Colombians is the main reason for these positive
developments and the best guarantee for lasting peace
and further developments. That is the most important
lesson both for States that are experiencing a difficult
chapter in their history and for the members of the
17-31067

05/10/2017

Colombia

S/PV. 8063

Security Council in considering the most complicated
situations on our agenda.

have played and continue to play in brokering a longerterm peace.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2381
overseeing the ceasefire between the Colombian
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN). Recently, the Colombian Government and the
ELN reached a temporary ceasefire agreement, which
representss major progress in the Colombian peace
process. China congratulates and commends all parties
for their efforts, including the Colombian Government.

Through resolution 2381 (2017), we join other
members of the Council in supporting the work of the
United Nations Verification Mission in monitoring the
ceasefire, which will help build confidence between
the parties and prevent a return to armed conflict.
We commend the Mission for drawing on its existing
staff, logistics and resources to take on this temporary
additional task while carrying out its mandate to verify
the political, economic and social reintegration of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.

Since the Colombian Government reached the
ceasefire agreement and the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia last year, the Colombian peace process
has continued to experience new progress, resulting
in positive momentum in support of the dialogue for
peace between the Colombian Government and the
ELN, which has created conditions conducive to the
early realization of comprehensive sustainable peace
and stability in Colombia.
The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia started its work officially not long ago,
and the adoption of resolution 2381 (2017) further
strengthens its mandate. The Verification Mission,
while advancing the implementation of the peace
agreement, will oversee the ceasefire between the
Colombian Government and the ELN. China hopes
that the Secretariat will finalize its preparation work
as soon as possible. In helping the Verification Mission
to successfully carry out its mandate, we also hope that
on the basis of respect for sovereignty, independence
and the territorial integrity of Colombia, the Mission
will strengthen communications with the Colombian
Government and conduct good internal coordination
work, while ensuring the comprehensive implementation
of the mandate so as to provide constructive help to the
greater outcome of the peace process in Colombia.
Ms. Tacho (United States of America): After 52
years of armed struggle, the United States welcomes the
historic ceasefire between the Colombian Government
and the National Liberation Army. We congratulate the
parties on their commitment to pursuing the sustained
and lasting peace that the people of Colombia deserve.
We want to recognize the role of the Catholic church
and Ecuador, in particular, for the special role that they

As the parties work to consolidate the security
gains from the ceasefire, we recognize the work has just
begun and that there will undoubtedly be challenges
ahead, but we look forward to hearing the SecretaryGeneral’s update on the progress and implementation of
the ceasefire in the coming weeks. With our vote today,
the United States is proud to stand with Colombia as it
continues on the path to a more comprehensive peace.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2381 (2017) extending the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to include
monitoring the temporary bilateral ceasefire between
the Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN). We also commend the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/18. on the
conclusion of the mandate of the first United Nations
mission in Colombia. The swiftness and flexibility
with the Council has responded to the parties’s requests
demonstrate yet again the determined support of the
United Nations to the peace process.
Italy. as a member of the group countries providing
support and cooperation to the negotiations in Quito,
welcomes the conclusion of the ceasefire agreement
with the ELN, which bears witness to the parties’
commitment to the search for a sustainable political
solution to the conflict and the shared priority
objective of protecting civilians. We encourage them
to remain on this path with courage and resolve, and
we join in the appeal made by the Pope during his
visit to Colombia in early September. We also support
the essential implementation of measures on security
reintegration provided for by the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), and their

17-310675/8

S/PV.8063

Colombia

05/10/2017

verification pursuant to the mandate of the second
mission of the United Nations.

We believe that it is the result of the recent progress
Colombia has made in the peace process.

The peace process made historic progress last year,
but there are now major challenges in its implementation
phase. The United Nations can play a key role — the first
mission, which recently concluded its work, bore witness
to that — and will continue to support the efforts of the
Government and the FARC-EP through the Verification
Mission. The clarity of its mandate and its presence
on the ground near the communities most affected by
the conflict, and now exposed to the fragility of the
transition, leave no doubt in this regard. However, the
commitment and determination of the parties involved
is the primary condition for the success of this process
so that its scope and potential for regeneration can offer
all Colombians new opportunities to participate in the
political, social and economic life of the country.

We trust that both parties have taken the necessary
steps to make the process irreversible. Although
we acknowledge the differences between this peace
process and the process with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia – Ejército del Pueblo, we
have no doubt that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, and his entire
team will continue to work just as hard as they have
been working since they embarked on the path in 2016.

To conclude, I wish to renew our appreciation for
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and his team, and for the unity and effectiveness
of the Security Council’s work, to which Italy has had
the honour of contributing.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2381
(2017), authorizing the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia to begin the tasks assigned to
the monitoring and verification mechanism, which
will primarily verify the achievement of the historic
bilateral, temporary national ceasefire agreement
between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional.
We thank the United Kingdom for its work and the
way it conducted negotiations on the resolution. We are
also grateful to all members of the Security Council
for their support to this process and their commitment
to resolving the last armed conflict in our region. We
praise the leadership of the Government of Colombia
and the decisiveness of the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional in establishing the first bilateral ceasefire in
this conflict, which is the result of recent progress in
Colombia’s peace process.
Similarly, I thank all Council members for
committing to and supporting a process to resolve
the longest-running armed conflict in my region. We
commend the Government of Colombia on its leadership
and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional on its decision
to broker the first bilateral ceasefire in the conflict.
6/8

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine reiterates its
full support of Colombia’s efforts in the implementation
of the final peace agreement, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We welcome
the completion of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia on 25 September, as was stated
in the presidential statement S/PRST/2017/18, just
adopted. We welcome the official beginning of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, the
second United Nations special political mission to
support the Colombian peace process.
We are also proud to note that, through its Mission
in Colombia, the United Nations has contributed to the
successful implementation of the crucial agreements on
the ceasefire and the laying down of arms. I wish we
had more people like that at the United Nations. That is
why we believe that the United Nations should carefully
study the lessons learned in Colombia and apply such
best practices in other parts of the world.
We welcome the temporary national bilateral
ceasefire announced between the Government of
Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, and
welcome resolution 2381 (2017), which supports that
positive development. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the British delegation for its leadership
and hard work in preparing the draft resolution and
presidential statement, which led to their successful
adoption.
Finally, the Security Council should continue to
provide the support required to advance peace, human
rights and development for all citizens in Colombia.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2381 (2017) and the endorsement of the
17-31067

05/10/2017

Colombia

Secretary-General’s recommendations on United
Nations support for the Mission tasked with verifying
the temporary ceasefire between the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional and the Colombian Government.
In that regard, we thank the British penholder for its
efforts.
We welcome, in particular the responsiveness
of the United Nations and its readiness to assist the
parties in the negotiations process. In one month,
the Secretary-General and his team, in particular
his Special Representative, Mr. Jean Arnault, have
managed to submit proposals that would provide a
swift and effective response to the request for support
to uphold the temporary ceasefire. After the successful
disarmament and political transition of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), we
hope that the Ejército de Liberación Nacional will take
part in the peace process to end the conflict with the
Colombian Government.
The ceasefire and all commitments arising from
it spark considerable hope for the current talks under
way in Quito. The peace process conducted with the
FARC demonstrates that the decades-long violence is
not inevitable. We call upon all parties involved in the
negotiations to respect their commitments, including
those not covered by the United Nations Mission.The
United Nations, along with the Catholic Church, will
attempt to strengthen the climate of trust. Nonetheless,
success depends, above all, on the political will
demonstrated by the parties. France will continue to
support United Nations action in Colombia — a great
and friendly nation on a historic path of courage and
determination.
In recent years, the country has shown that conflict
is not inevitable. The will of the parties could reverse
the course of history. By supporting the peace process,
the United Nations was able to fulfil its mission of
maintaining international peace and security. The will
of the parties and the support of the United Nations
have made the peace process in Colombia a source of
inspiration for us all.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on steering the work

S/PV. 8063

of the Security Council this month and for convening
today’s meeting.
I would also like to congratulate the members of
the Security Council on their vote of confidence in
Colombia and in its efforts to build peace, through
their unanimous adoption of resolution 2381 (2017),
authorizing the United Nations Mission in Colombia
to monitor and verify the temporary national bilateral
ceasefire with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, for
a period of 101 days.
I would also like to thank the members of the Security
Council for the statement adopted on their behalf, as it
recognizes the historic progress that we have made. It
is a tribute not only to the Government of Colombia,
the parties, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia – Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional, but to the Colombian
people, who acknowledge that they wish to rewrite the
pages of history. We would like to, and we can, reverse
the course of history as you, Sir, have just stated.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
its invaluable efforts as penholder of resolution 2381
(2017). Its ongoing support was key to the Council’s
agility. It helped us to provide a very swift response
to the needs expressed by the parties — through the
Government and the Catholic Church, which we
thank — by tabling today’s resolution in a time frame
that shows that the Security Council has flexible
mechanisms through which the specific duties of a
second special political mission could be assigned.
That mission began on 26 September. We believe that
the ceasefire was a historic undertaking for the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional, a guerilla organization, which
has never in its 53 years — as it is older than the FARCEP — signed a bilateral ceasefire. We believe that this
bodes well for the future.
In conclusion, I would like to make two points.
First, I would like to highlight the teamwork
undertaken with Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and the Department
of Political Affairs, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, which made a
significant contribution to the process. He is now tasked
with maintaining a gender perspective in the forces
and the group of observers assisting us, and the vision
for the region. The way in which the region united to
support the two missions was remarkable. The region
also stands with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional to
foster dialogue in Havana and Quito, and by providing

17-310677/8

S/PV.8063

Colombia

support with troops, civilian observers and unarmed
soldiers. It will also be providing civilian observers for
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Secondly, on behalf of the Government and people
of Colombia, I would like to thank the parties involved

8/8

05/10/2017

in this endeavour and for the vote of confidence in us,
which we hope to repay through a successful conclusion
of the peace process and the 101-day bilateral ceasefire.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

17-31067
