S/PV.7080

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7080th meeting

Wednesday, 11 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Menan
Mr. McKell
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

13-61411 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1361411*

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in the meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: In my last briefing to the Council
in June (see S/PV.6974), I expressed my Office’s
frustration and despair at the Council’s inaction and
paralysis regarding the situation in Darfur. This is
my Office’s eighteenth report to the Council since
the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005), by which the
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, referred the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court.
Resolution 1593 (2005) represented hope for
Darfur’s victims — hope that there would be an end to
their suffering; hope that there would be accountability
for crimes, and that justice would not only be done but
would be seen to be done; and hope, above all, that
lasting peace and security would return to Darfur. That
hope was strengthened even further when the Council
mandated my Office to report on progress every six
months in order to enable the Council to remain actively
seized of their plight.
Sadly, with each report provided by my Office to
the Council, the hopes of the victims of Darfur have
faded. With this eighteenth report, it would be an
understatement to say that all hope is lost. Over the years
and despite the blatant disregard of the Government of
the Sudan for the Council’s resolutions and presidential
statements, the situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate and the plight of Darfur victims has continued
to go from bad to worse. Not only does the situation in
Darfur continue to pose a threat to international peace
2/17

11/12/2013

and security, but other situations — such as that in
Abyei, as well as the situation along the border between
the Sudan and South Sudan — have also deteriorated.
In 10 years, the situation in Darfur alone has cost the
United Nations and humanitarian aid organizations
more than $10.5 billion, and has taken the lives of
47 aid workers, with many more injured and abducted.
Attacks on peacekeepers appear to have become
the norm, with a record number of 57 killings. In this
reporting period alone, peacekeepers from Tanzania,
Rwanda, Zambia and Senegal have been killed. My
Office salutes their sacrifices and recalls that intentional
attacks on personnel involved in peacekeeping missions
are crimes under the Rome Statute. Sadly, not enough
seems to have been done to identify those responsible,
despite the repeated insistence of the United Nations
and the African Union that the Government of the
Sudan must duly investigate. It is in the common
interests of the United Nations, the African Union and
the ICC to ensure that those responsible for attacking
peacekeepers are swiftly brought to justice. I encourage
the United Nations and the African Union to share
information from their own internal investigations with
my Office, in the interests of justice.
This year alone, 460,000 people have been newly
displaced in Darfur. The number of people killed,
abducted and displaced continues to grow each year.
All these are crimes that will not stop unless the
Council and the States parties to the Rome Statute show
a determination to apprehend their authors.
Since 2004, the Council has adopted 52 resolutions
and 17 presidential statements and issued 17 press
statements on the Sudan situation as a whole. The
Government of the Sudan’s failure to cooperate
with the ICC is but one of the many incidents of the
Government of the Sudan’s continuous failure and/
or refusal to implement the Council’s decisions.
Inaction and paralysis within the Council have not only
prolonged the suffering of Darfur’s victims, but have
bolstered Mr. Al-Bashir’s resolve to ignore the Council,
prompting him to even publicly boast in a 13 October
2011 speech that the Sudan does not implement Security
Council resolutions.
The same, sadly, holds true today. Without stronger
action by the Council and States parties, the situation in
the Sudan is unlikely to improve. Alleged perpetrators
of serious crimes against the civilian population will
continue to commit crimes unless they are brought to
justice. My Office has done its part, and it is now up to
13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Council and to the States parties to heed the cries
of the millions of victims of the crimes that continue
unabated in Darfur. The time has come for the Council
and States parties to seriously devise strategies for
arresting those alleged to be responsible for these
crimes. That is the only way to stop the seemingly
endless suffering of the Darfur victims.
It is a serious indictment on the Council and on
States parties that Mr. Al-Bashir and Mr. Hussein have
been able to travel to various countries without fear of
arrest. The Council’s silence, even when notified of
clear failures and/or violations by States Members of
the United Nations of their obligations to comply with
the Council’s resolutions only serves to add insult to the
plight of Darfur’s victims. The question that Darfur’s
victims are undoubtedly asking themselves is: Has
resolution 1593 (2005) become meaningless? What is
the point of the Office of the Prosecutor’s briefings
if there is no concrete follow-up action taken by the
Council? Why has none of the eight ICC Chamber
communications transmitted to the Council by the
Registrar not been acted upon?
At this point, we can do no more than recall the
astute words of the Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court
when it opined:
“When the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, refers
a situation to the Court as constituting a threat
to international peace and security, it is expected
that the Council would respond by way of taking
such measures which are considered appropriate,
if there is an apparent failure on the part of the
relevant State party to the Statute to cooperate in
fulfilling the Court’s mandate entrusted to it by the
Council. Otherwise, if there is no follow-up action
on the part of the Security Council, any referral by
the Council to the ICC under Chapter VII would
never achieve its ultimate goal, namely, to put an
end to impunity. Accordingly, any such referral
would become futile.”
In spite of the frustrations, challenges and obstacles,
my Office’s determination to carry out the mandate
given to it by resolution 1593 (2005) has not and will
not waver. We owe it to Darfur’s victims to show them
that we have not abandoned them and that we may be
their only hope for justice. To this end, our judicial
activities are ongoing; in particular, preparations for
the trial of Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain are on
track. My Office has focused on that case in particular,

S/PV.7080

taking into account that the trial is scheduled to start
on 5 May 2014. The willingness of Mr. Banda to appear
voluntarily is a clear sign of the confidence that he
has in the system of justice provided at the ICC and
his strong belief that he will receive fair, impartial
treatment in accordance with the highest standards of
procedural fairness and due process, including the right
to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. A message
to all other Darfur fugitives is that they have nothing to
fear in coming to ICC if they are innocent. To be sure,
any person brought before the Court will be afforded
all the requisite facilities and enjoy the right to legal
assistance and other necessary safeguards to ensure
that he or she undergoes a fair trial that respects the
due process guarantees stipulated in the Rome Statute.
The failure of the international community and the
Council in particular to put pressure on the Government
of the Sudan to arrest and surrender persons against
whom arrest warrants have been issued continues to
present an ongoing challenge for my Office in moving
forward with the other trials. Within my Office’s limited
resources, security challenges and lack of cooperation
on the part of the Government of the Sudan, my Office’s
activities in these other cases are limited to preserving
evidence and maintaining contacts with witnesses.
That is the only way we can ensure a smooth kick-start
of judicial proceedings in the event that the fugitives
are arrested.
The report submitted to the Council for this
briefing provides an overview of allegations of crimes
that continue to be committed in Darfur and that cry
out for full investigation. It is particularly noteworthy
and indeed disturbing that persons against whom
arrest warrants have already been issued are allegedly
implicated in the commission of these crimes. If it has
not been clear to the Council before, it should now be
clear that lasting peace in Darfur will remain elusive
for as long as those alleged to be responsible for the
commission of these crimes remain at large. The alleged
crimes include attacks by the Ministry of Defence,
either targeting or indiscriminately affecting civilians
and other persons, as well as alleged attacks by rebel
movements, alleged criminal acts affecting displaced
persons, and alleged abductions of and attacks on
humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers, among
others.
The plight of displaced persons is particularly
worrying. Much as the precise numbers of displaced
persons may be in doubt, there is reason to believe

13-614113/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that the crisis may even be worse than imagined and
is exacerbated by lack of access to humanitarian aid,
such as food, water and the most rudimentary shelter in
the form of plastic sheets. Allegations of the hijacking
or stealing of humanitarian aid food deliveries by
the Government of the Sudan’s Humanitarian Aid
Commission are also of concern to my Office, as they
have reportedly left hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons suffering.
Alleged aerial bombardments affecting civilians
also feature in our overview. There is no doubt that
civilians continue to bear the brunt of all these armed
attacks. My Office has taken note of a recent survey
that identifies violence in Darfur as the major cause of
death among refugees, and the apparent ongoing pattern
of incidents previously highlighted by my Office
wherein thousands of militia members enter targeted
towns in Land Cruiser vehicles, on horseback and on
camels and confront local tribe members. Those attacks
have allegedly resulted in civilians killed and injured,
with tens of thousands displaced at a time. My Office
has also noted increasing clashes between Arab tribes
that have in the past supported the Government of the
Sudan’s Janjaweed militia, including related concerns
that the Government of the Sudan is increasingly
willing to fan the flames of violence, even among its
traditional allies, to deflect their demands for greater
compensation for their involvement in the military
campaign of the past 10 years.
My Office notes the pervasive and corrosive effect
of organized sexual and gender-based violence on
women and girls, which is a key concern for my Office,
and the fact that it remains seriously underreported.
Sexual and gender-based violence is undoubtedly a
threat to peace and security in Darfur. My Office
notes attacks on human rights defenders, civil society
members and community leaders, which likewise have
a corrosive effect on the ability of communities to
speak up in search of justice, peace and security. Those
communities are also increasingly exposed to unliveable
conditions by attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers, which diminish the assistance they can
receive and which prevent the United Nations Mission
in Darfur from being able to execute its mandate. The
interference of the Sudan’s National Intelligence and
Security Services in the work of humanitarian aid
workers has caused substantial deterioration in the
level of health coverage that they have provided as a
stop-gap to the total lack of local services.

4/17

11/12/2013

On the matter of non-cooperation, the Council
has yet to respond to eight formal communications
from the Pre-Trial Chamber, including concerning
the non-cooperation of the Government of the Sudan
in the Harun and Kushayb case. The Council’s silence
and inaction contribute to the Sudan’s continued
determination to ignore the Council. The Office recalls
the statement of the Chamber in these cases that the
ICC has no enforcement mechanism and thus relies on
the States’ cooperation, without which it cannot fulfil
its mandate and contribute to ending impunity.
Let me conclude by noting the Assembly of States
Parties’ omnibus resolution from its recent 2013
session — resolution ICC-ASP/12/Res.8 — in particular
its reference, in paragraph 13, to the Security Council’s
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, of 12 February
2013. The resolution encourages further strengthening
of the Security Council’s relationship with the Court,
such as through support for international justice in
peacekeeping mandates, the holding of annual open
debates on the Court and identifying other means to
institutionalize cooperation. Rome Statute States parties
have an essential role to play in making that stronger
relationship a reality. That is certainly essential if we
dare hope to make progress towards ending impunity
in Darfur. I still believe that is possible. I hope the
Council does as well.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in French): Allow me, at
the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.
(spoke in Arabic)
I should like to say, for the purposes of the record
of this meeting, that our participation today does not
mean that we recognize the International Criminal
Court (ICC) or that we are going to cooperate with it,
since the Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute. My
statement is addressed solely to the Security Council,
in line with the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties.
What we have heard from the ICC Prosecutor
reminds one of the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of a Member State of the Council to

13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

justify her country’s failure to join the ICC: that the
privileges conferred upon the Prosecutor amounted
to powers greater than those of Governments. The
briefing we have heard today is a perfect example of
that. The Prosecutor has addressed the Council as if she
were giving members orders.
While serving to highlight that justification, the
briefing also did not address the crux of the matter
and strayed into addressing the relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the status of
Abyei — almost as if the Prosecutor had become a judge
and had more power than Governments. The briefing
serves to underscore the fact that the ICC has taken on
the role of a judge and become the political rival of the
Sudan. The Prosecutor provided alleged information
without citing the sources or without any member of
her team having been given impartial information. The
information came from biased sources.
The briefing ignored all the positive developments
in Darfur as a result of the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace by the Darfur transitional
Authority, including all the steps taken by the special
court to begin to bring to justice those alleged to have
committed crimes in Darfur. The Prosecutor also did not
mention the willingness of the Sudanese judicial system
to combat impunity, nor its ability to do so. We have
provided the Council with a great deal of information
concerning the special court for Darfur and the trials of
those who committed crimes. That serves to highlight
the willingness of the Government of the Sudan to end
impunity and the fact that the judicial system in my
country is willing and able to do so.
Perhaps the Council has taken note of the position
of the African Union following its contact group to the
region in November. I also wish to recall the emergency
Summit held in Addis Ababa in October. Perhaps that
will serve to remind us that the African Union has
lost entire confidence in the ICC given the distortion
of the Rome Statute owing to the politicization of
international justice, which many had warned against.
We also recall the decision taken by African leaders
that no African President should not be brought before
the ICC or any foreign court while they are in office. A
failure to respect Africa’s will and its right to deal with
its own cases would run counter to the right of people to
democracy and freedom. Great strides have been made
to implement all aspects of the the Doha Document for
Peace, including justice and reconciliation.

S/PV.7080

As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
we have provided the Council with ample information
on the measures taken by the prosecutor of the special
court for Darfur. Those measures have resulted in
sentences of capital punishment against six people on
the Abu Zereiga incident. We also recently provided
the Council with information on an investigation into
crimes against peacekeepers of African Union-United
Nations Mission in Darfur and aid workers, as well as
information on all ongoing judicial proceedings. We
will also transmit to the Council information about the
sentences of the court.
All that clearly shows the willingness and ability
of the Sudanese justice system to deliver justice. It also
serves to highlight the fact that national legal measures
are ongoing in Darfur — in contrast to the briefing and
the report that was presented to the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now going
to give the floor to members of the Security Council.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for the briefing on her eighteenth
report to the Security Council. We have heard the
statement made by Elhag Ali Osman, Permanent
Representative of the Sudan.
Pakistan is not a party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, but we do recognize the
rights and obligations of the States parties to the ICC.
During its term as a non-permanent member of the
Council, Pakistan has consistently supported a peaceful
and viable resolution of the conflict in Darfur through
an inclusive political process, one that respects and
upholds the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan. We have noted from the Prosecutor’s report
that the trial of Abdallah Banda will start on 5 May
2014, and that the defendant will appear voluntarily
before the Court.
It is mandatory for all States to protect the right
to life of their citizens. The Government of the Sudan
must therefore continue to take all the necessary
measures to investigate human rights violations in
Darfur and bring violators to justice. We welcome the
steps taken by the Government of the Sudan towards
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and the establishment of the National Human
Rights Commission. The international community must
continue to fight impunity by utilizing a full range of

13-614115/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

justice and reconciliation mechanisms, including truth
and reconciliation commissions, national reparations
programmes and institutional and legal reforms. The
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council
should be managed correctly and skilfully so that the
independence of the Court is not compromised. The
Court and the Council should have the necessary space
to maintain statutory distance between them. The
utilization of peacekeeping mandates for the objectives
of the ICC mentioned in the report, for instance, should
not blur the distinction between the jurisdictions of the
Court and the Council.
A sustainable and viable peace in Darfur can be
realized only through a broad-based, multipronged
approach. Our efforts should provide impetus to an
inclusive political dialogue, prevent attempts to derail
the political process, through a policy of incentives and
deterrence, promote justice and reconciliation, create
a conducive security environment and address the
human rights and humanitarian aspects of the conflict
in Darfur. We agree with the Prosecutor that regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements
contribute to accountability. That is best done by
enhancing the capacity of national justice systems.
In that regard, we support the efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union (AU), particularly
the AU High-level Implementation Panel, towards
achieving peace, stability, justice and reconciliation
in Darfur. In addition, the League of the Arab States
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation should be
closely associated with those efforts.
Overall, the security and political situation in
Darfur shows a mixed record of progress and setbacks.
We welcome the initial steps taken by the signatories
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur towards
implementing the Darfur development strategy and
the work undertaken by the Darfur Regional Authority
in developing various projects. It must be insured that
those projects a tangible impact on the lives of ordinary
people in Darfur. It is equally important that all pledges
made at the Doha donor conferences be fulfilled at the
earliest possible time. Simultaneous progress on both
those tracks will strengthen the prospects for peace
in Darfur. The Council should continue to encourage
the engagement of the Joint Chief Mediator with the
non-signatory armed opposition groups. Incidents
similar to the killing of Mohamed Bashar should not be
repeated. Similarly, the Council should send a strong
political message to prevent the armed groups outside
Darfur from further destabilizing the region.
6/17

11/12/2013

Recently, inter-tribal clashes over natural resources
have become a major security challenge in Darfur.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to intensify its
efforts to address the deep-rooted causes of conflict and
friction in the region. Progress on all provisions of the
Doha Document, particularly those related to land and
property issues, will help improve the situation. The
international community will have to take bold decisions
to provide economic relief to the Sudan in order to ease
fierce competition over resources. An essential first
step is to lift the debilitating bilateral sanctions against
the Sudan that adversely impact ordinary people and
indirectly fuel disputes over resources.
The people of the Darfur region have faced a long
conflict that has cast its shadow over the lives of an
entire generation.
The conflict must not go on forever. We must help
the people of Darfur reconcile their quest for peace and
justice with the goal of a lasting political solution.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and
for presenting the eighteenth report of her Office to
the Security Council, and to thank the Ambassador
of the Sudan for his statement. We take note of the
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor aimed at
investigating violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law in Darfur.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur constitutes
the primary basis for dialogue and sustainable conflict
resolution. We note that some important steps have been
taken to defuse intercommunal tensions and promote
reconciliation in Darfur.
At the same time, the security situation in
Darfur continues to be volatile. Intensified attacks
by non-signatory armed groups and their attempts
to expand combat operations to other regions of the
Sudan have resulted in civilian casualties, substantial
population displacement, the looting of civilian property
and deterioration in the humanitarian situation on the
ground. The allegations of continued sexual and genderbased violence in Darfur are a matter of particular
concern. The reports of human rights violations and
abuses committed against civilians should be properly
investigated so as to bring those responsible to justice
and prevent such violations from being repeated in the
future.
The persistent refusals of non-signatory armed
groups to join the peace process seriously hamper the
13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

prospects for further progress in the implementation of
the Doha Document. We believe that greater pressure
should be exerted on those groups, including through
targeted sanctions, to make them renounce violence
and lay down their arms.
Unfortunately, the international presence in
Darfur, including United Nations staff members,
aid workers and peacekeepers, has continued to face
attacks throughout Darfur during the reporting period.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all such attacks, which
constitute a crime under international law. The ongoing
investigation must be finalized in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice and avoid impunity for such
offenses. We note that the Office of the Prosecutor has
put a priority on addressing that issue.
In conclusion, we once again stress the need for
the international community’s further support for
the implementation of the Doha Document and the
importance of rebel groups renouncing violence as
vital prerequisites for ensuring durable peace and
reconciliation in Darfur.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
have listened carefully to the briefing by Prosecutor
Bensouda and the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan. The question of Darfur is
very complicated and involves many elements, including
the political process, security and stability, development
and reconstruction, humanitarian assistance and justice
and judicial order. Among those elements, the political
element is key. Only by promoting sustained progress
in the political process can lasting peace be achieved
in Darfur and solid foundations be laid for progress in
other areas, such as justice and the rule of law.
China believes that all of the efforts of the
international community regarding Darfur should
first facilitate pushing the political process in Darfur
forward and then achieving other goals.
The Sudanese Government plays a key role in
the promotion of the political process. Recently,
the Sudanese Government has been committed to
promoting the peace process in Darfur, implementing
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in good faith,
and diffusing intercommunal ethnic conflicts. In the
mean time, it has invited rebels to join the national
dialogue with a view to seeking a comprehensive
political settlement for the question of Darfur. The
rebels, on the other hand, have also reiterated that

S/PV.7080

they are ready to seek the reunification and territorial
integrity of the Sudan. China welcomes that.
We call on the international community to
provide active support and assistance to the Sudanese
Government, and we hope that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) will play a constructive role in
that regard.
As for the ICC’s work relating to the question of
Darfur, China’s position remains unchanged. We hope
that, in that regard, the Council will take into due
account the positions of the African Union, the League
of Arab States and other organizations and countries in
the region.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I thank Ms. Bensouda
for her report and for the briefing today. Sadly, we have
not seen an improvement in the situation in Darfur since
she last addressed the Council in June (see S/PV.6974).
The situation in Darfur remains a serious concern. Over
the past six months, we have continued to see heavy
intercommunal fighting and sporadic clashes between
Government and rebel forces, and we have received
reports of continued aerial strikes by the Government
of the Sudan. It has been reported that over 460,000
individuals have been newly displaced between January
and November of this year.
Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers
continue to be attacked throughout Darfur. In
particular, we would like to take this opportunity
to condemn the attack on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
on 24 November, which resulted in the death of one
Rwandan peacekeeper, bringing the total killed in the
past year to 13. Many others were injured in that attack,
and we wish them a speedy and full recovery. Such
attacks against UNAMID are unacceptable. We hope
that the ongoing review of the Mission will address the
challenges facing UNAMID. We call on all parties to
ensure that the Mission is granted full and unfettered
access across Darfur.
We thank the Prosecutor for her updates on the
trial of Abdallah Banda and on the termination of
proceedings against Saleh Jerbo following reports of
his death.
It remains a matter of deep concern, however, that
the Government of the Sudan continues to frustrate the
pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur by shielding
all of the others currently indicted by the International

13-614117/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Criminal Court (ICC). The Government of the Sudan
has a clear and indisputable obligation to cooperate
with the Court pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). It
has consistently and repeatedly failed to do so. We call
once again on the Government of the Sudan to meet its
obligations and to cooperate with the ICC, including
with respect to the enforcement of the five separate
arrest warrants issued by the Court.
During the reporting period, we once again saw
some ICC States parties regrettably fail to comply
with their obligations under the Rome Statute by not
implementing the arrest warrants when visited by
someone indicted by the Court. The United Kingdom
urges all ICC States parties to meet their obligations
under the Rome Statute with respect to the travel of
fugitives from the Court.
The references in the report to crimes of sexual
violence in Darfur are disturbing. We are grateful to
the Office of the Prosecutor for its ongoing work in that
regard. The United Kingdom believes that there is more
that can and must be done to combat sexual violence
and address the culture of impunity that has been
allowed to develop for such crimes. That culture must
be replaced with one of accountability. We encourage
all States to cooperate with the Court so as to ensure
that the alleged perpetrators of those and other serious
crimes of concern against the people or Darfur are held
accountable for their actions.
In a presidential statement in February this year
(S/PRST/2013/2), the Council reiterated its previous
call for States to cooperate with Courts and Tribunals,
and expressed its commitment to an effective follow-up
to Council decisions in that regard. It is now high time
that the Council did so by looking urgently at what it
can do to assist the Court so that it can complete the
task we gave it when we referred the situation in Darfur
to the Court over eight years ago.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for the eighteenth
report to the Council and for her briefing today.
The ICC is called upon to make an important
contribution to efforts to bring to justice those involved
in the gravest crimes committed during the Darfur
conflict. Their efforts in that regard complement the
work of national legal institutions in combatting
impunity. The Court needs to render an objective
assessment of the acts committed by all parties involved

8/17

11/12/2013

in various situations. The Court’s effectiveness in
meeting that challenge will decide its reputation and
thereby how seriously States take the Court. With
regard to the situation in Darfur, that means that a
careful, unbiased investigation must be conducted into
the cases of both Sudanese officials and leaders of rebel
groups, who also have serious violations to answer for,
which deserve the Court’s attention. We are satisfied
with the balanced approach of the Prosecutor in that
regard.
In the eight years since the Council adopted
resolution 1593 (2005), the ICC has achieved some
success in investigating Sudanese cases. Some
have reached the stage where further legal action is
impossible without the presence of the accused in The
Hague. That situation requires further steps by the
Court in the context of seeking optimal approaches to
the problem of combating impunity in the framework
of the Rome Statute. In that connection, we note the
importance of States discharging their corresponding
obligations to cooperate with the Court under the norms
of immunities for senior Government officials.
We welcome the Prosecutor’s steps in bringing
to justice the perpetrators of the attacks on African
Union peacekeepers in Haskanita in 2007. A significant
amount of work has been done on the cases of the
rebel leaders Banda and Jerbo. We have taken note of
information on the closure of the Jerbo case, due to the
death of the accused. Nevertheless, it is important not
to lose the momentum achieved in the Banda trial and
to avoid delays for reasons of a non-objective nature.
We expect that the Court’s discharge of its functions
in the delivery of justice regarding the situation in
Darfur will continue to be harmoniously integrated into
the peace settlement and post-conflict reconstruction
process.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
presenting her eighteenth report on the situation in
Darfur. Since the Security Council decided to refer
the situation in Darfur to the ICC, the Office of the
Prosecutor has informed the Council in a transparent
manner about its work, and we would like to thank it
warmly for that.
The reports of the Office of the Prosecutor give
the Council an opportunity to evaluate the ICC’s
progress in combating impunity and to become aware

13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the numerous obstacles confronted by the Court.
Unfortunately, the concerns that the Council has often
expressed in the past remain pertinent. We must note
once again with deep regret that the arrest warrants
delivered by the ICC for four individuals accused of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and, in one case,
genocide have not yet been executed. We are deeply
concerned to take note of the list that Ms. Bensouda has
given in her report of cases of non-cooperation on the
part of the Government of the Sudan with the Court in
spite of their obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
We also regret that the President and the Minister of
Defence of the Sudan have been able to travel to several
countries in the region, including those that are parties
to the Rome Statute.
During the past six months, the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate significantly. Conflicts have become more
and more frequent and more and more deadly in several
parts of Darfur. Approximately 460,000 persons have
been displaced between January and November 2013,
which is more than double the total number of people
displaced in the two years prior.
We are also very much concerned by attacks against
civilians, especially through aerial bombardment;
the many acts of sexual and gender-based violence;
frequent attacks against those who come to assist the
Sudanese people, particularly humanitarian workers
and the Blue Helmets; and the repeated refusals to
provide humanitarian access. Those crimes threaten
a peace process that is already fragile, based on the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The Council
condemned them clearly in its resolution 2113 (2013).
Luxembourg encourages the Office of the Prosecutor
to continue to monitor the situation in Darfur closely
and to promote the investigations having to do with the
crimes committed there.
Serious threats continue to weigh on the safety
and security of the humanitarian staff and African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) personnel. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms attacks against UNAMID, which have
caused 13 deaths among peacekeepers and many
wounded people since the beginning of the year. To
date, none of the investigations conducted by the
Government of the Sudan on those attacks have resulted
in the slightest condemnation. It is unacceptable that the
Government refuses to cooperate with the ICC, while at

S/PV.7080

the same time it does not take the necessary measures
at the national level to combat impunity.
We ask all Member States, whether or not they are
States parties to the Rome Statute, and all regional and
international organizations concerned to cooperate fully
with the ICC, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).
For its part, the Security Council must ensure effective
follow-up of cases referred to the ICC. It must not shirk
the inherent responsibility in the cases referred to the
Court. Generally, we believe that it is vital to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and the ICC. The
two institutions are complementary. They pursue the
same objectives, each one in the framework of its own
mandate: preventing conflict, and combating impunity.
We believe that the Council should think about what
more it could do to assist the Court, especially to assist
the Court to execute the mandates given to it.
One way of helping the Court would be to list
individuals under an ICC arrest warrant on the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005). Another specific measure that the
Security Council could take would be to answer the
correspondence that the Court has addressed to it on
cases of non-cooperation. As recalled by Ms. Bensouda,
the Court depends on the cooperation of States in order
to be able to discharge its mandate. The silence of the
Security Council in that context is not encouraging a
change of attitude on the part of the Sudan.
In conclusion, I would like to assure Ms. Fatou
Bensouda of the full support of Luxembourg in the
resolute action that her Office continues to conduct
to combat impunity. We associate ourselves with her
vibrant appeal for stronger action from the Security
Council and States parties to the Rome Statute so that
justice can finally be done for the victims of the Darfur
conflict.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and we thank her
for her eighteenth report to the Council, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).
We take note of the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
The report before us echoes the many appeals made
by the Council in its resolutions, expressing once again
the collective concern of this body over the current
situation in Darfur and the lack of cooperation on the

13-614119/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

part of the Government of the Sudan for the execution
of the arrest warrants mentioned in the report.
We also take note of the updates presented in the
report on recent judicial activities, particularly the
preparations for the trial of Abdallah Banda, the registry
of the trips made by other accused individuals and the
interaction with other States in regard to fulfilling their
obligations to execute the arrest warrants as States
parties to the Court. We regret the fact that notifications
have not been duly addressed in many of those cases.
On the other hand, we are pleased to see the
investigative work being done by the Office of the
Prosecutor to put an end to impunity in the region of
Darfur. From a political point of view, it coincides with
resolution 2113 (2013), which reflects the seriousness
of the situation in Darfur and the very dangerous
situation faced by African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur personnel in carrying out
their mandate.
Once again, the report details supposed aerial
bombardments carried out by the Sudanese Armed
Forces targetting the civilian population, who naturally
are extremely concerned. Similarly, during the recent
period, tensions between the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the rebel movements have continued, which, along
with the intercommunal clashes over natural resources,
have increased the tensions in the region, which is
already suffering.
Also alarming are the reports on incidents
related to sexual and gender-based violence and to
crimes and attacks against human rights officials,
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers. We are
particularly concerned by the loss of 13 members of
the peacekeeping forces and 47 humanitarian workers.
Those events warrant exhaustive investigations, since
they violate the integrity of the civilian population and
have, consequently, a significant impact on the fragile
peace process, which is based on the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur.
Guatemala, as a State party to the International
Criminal Court, cannot ignore the suffering caused
to the population and the serious crimes committed
in Darfur, as well as the results of the investigations,
which report actions that would constitute crimes
against humanity. We reiterate that there cannot be
peace without justice.
We express our concern about the failure to
carry out arrest warrants against the four individuals
10/17

11/12/2013

identified in the Prosecutor’s report who are responsible
for crimes against humanity committed in Darfur.
While we understand how extraordinarily sensitive it
is for the Government of the Sudan to carry out the
investigations, we once again urge the Government to
show its cooperation in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005). We are also concerned that some States parties
to the Court are not complying with the cooperation
required of them to execute those arrest warrants.
We consider it essential to strengthen cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court. In that context, our delegation hopes that
the existing cooperation can be renewed by combining
the legal and political perspectives for maintaining
international peace and security. That, of course, does
not mean that the Court should be politicized or that the
Council should be judicialized; rather, the combination
of both authorities, each in their respective field of
action, could fulfil their common mandate of conflict
prevention and combating impunity.
Finally, we would like to reiterate to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court Guatemala’s
support and cooperation in carrying out its mandate.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): I would like to thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing, for the comprehensive
report submitted to us and for the continuing efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor in relation to the situation
in Darfur in difficult circumstances.
Australia is deeply concerned that, in the six months
since the Prosecutor’s last briefing (see S/PV.6974),
there has been no improvement in the situation in
Darfur. Violence has continued unabated. Furthermore,
the Prosecutor’s report makes it clear that crimes,
including the targeting of civilians, sexual and genderbased violence, forced displacements and attacks on
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers continue to be
committed.
Australia remains concerned at the continued
failure on the part of the Government of the Sudan
to ensure the protection of civilians, and at its failure
to cooperate fully with the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the Special
Representative for Darfur.
As the Council recognized when it referred the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) eight years ago, the ICC has a crucial role to play
in ensuring accountability in Darfur. Given the ongoing

13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence and crimes being committed, that fact is no
less true today than it was eight years ago.
While we welcome the Office of the Prosecutor’s
ongoing preparations for the trial of Abdallah Banda,
it is clear that the Office has been unable to progress
on other investigations and prosecutions owing to
the Sudan’s failure to cooperate with the Court. The
ongoing failure to arrest and surrender, or to bring
to justice, President Al-Bashir, Defence Minister
Hussein, the Governor of Southern Kordofan, Ahmad
Harun, and Ali Kushayb is of particular concern.
While the adoption of policies of non-essential contact
has somewhat limited the movements of the indictees
in the most recent reporting period, Australia regrets
that President Al-Bashir and Defence Minister Hussein
have been able to travel outside of the Sudan, including
to certain ICC States parties, without being arrested.
For eight years, the Sudan has ignored its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005). In response, the Council
has been virtually silent. The inescapable conclusion is,
as Ms. Bensouda has put it, that the Council’s silence
and inaction have contributed to the Sudan’s continued
determination to ignore the Council.
The Council’s inaction on that issue lies in stark
contrast to the Council’s recognition of the importance
of accountability processes. As Ms. Bensouda has
reminded us, as recently as 6 August the Council
recalled that
“justice and rule of law are of key importance for
promoting and maintaining peace, stability and
development in the world” (S/PRST/2013/12, p. 5).
The same presidential statement emphasised that
“ending impunity is essential in a conflict and
post-conflict society’s efforts to come to terms
with past serious crimes under international law,
and in preventing future serious crimes under
international law” (ibid.).
The time has well and truly arrived for the Council
to take concrete steps to assist the Court in relation to
the situation in Darfur. We need to consider carefully
what the Council can do to support the Court, which,
after all, is only exercising its jurisdiction as a result
of the Council’s referral. As Australia has suggested
before and as has been suggested earlier today, one
obvious step for the Council to take would be for the
Council’s Sudan Sanctions Committee to give greater
consideration to how the measures at its disposal could

S/PV.7080

assist the ICC on the execution of the outstanding
arrest warrants. But we can do more. We support the
view that we need a Council forum for legal experts to
discuss ICC matters, so as to strengthen the Council’s
cooperation with the Court.
We note that differences of view have emerged
among States in recent months on the role of the ICC in
particular contexts. In that connection, it is noteworthy
that the meeting of the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
in November demonstrated that, by adopting a flexible
and constructive approach, appropriate solutions can
be found to address legitimate concerns. It is essential,
however, that all ICC States parties abide by their
obligations under the Rome Statute, including in
relation to cooperation with the Court.
Eight years after the Council’s referral of the
situation in Darfur to the ICC, conflict continues to
be a daily reality. Rome Statute crimes continue to be
perpetrated with impunity, and that only fuels further
violence. It is crucial, therefore, that the Council
provide stronger support for the Court’s efforts to end
impunity than it has to date.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
is the custom in the Council, I will focus specifically
on the topic of this debate, which is to analyse the
eighteenth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court received by the Security Council, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).
Not as a reproach, but rather so as to exercise our
memory, I would like us, Council members, to remember
that in February, through resolution 2091 (2013), we
noted that the population of Darfur was in an “urgent
humanitarian crisis”. We also reiterated the demand for
an end to military actions, indiscriminate attacks on
and other violence against civilians, the recruitment of
child soldiers, other crimes against children and abuses
against women.
In July, the Council adopted resolution 2113 (2013),
in which it stressed the importance of full compliance
with all of its resolutions on the Sudan and recalled the
importance of ending impunity and ensuring justice for
crimes committed in Darfur. In that respect, Argentina
also notes that the Office of the Prosecutor is mandated
to act in accordance with the provisions of the Council’s
resolutions that specifically address the responsibilities
of that Office.

13-6141111/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Furthermore, Argentina notes that the Prosecutor is
mandated to deal with current crimes, including — as
other members have mentioned — aerial and ground
bombardments affecting civilians, high numbers of
civilian deaths, sexual and gender-based violence,
attacks on human rights and civil society activists,
kidnappings, attacks on humanitarian workers and
the staff of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, impeded access of humanitarian
personnel and peacekeeping forces and the forced
displacement of civilians that has generated — according
to what is known and accepted as accurate — some
430,000 newly displaced people.
As has also been noted in prior statements, the
briefing on Darfur by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), in addition to taking stock of
the crimes committed, emphasized the crucial factor
of cooperation. Despite any subjective opinion that
one might entertain of the individual in the position of
Prosecutor, an objective assessment of the functions
of the Prosecutor — which, in accordance with the
Statute, are established on the basis of the principles of
cooperation and complementarity — would demonstrate
that she is simply doing what she is supposed to do.
The work of the ICC and the Prosecutor is to promote
cooperation and complementarity; it is not to provoke
or cause conflict.
In that context, the Government of the Sudan,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), is required to
cooperate with the Court and to provide all necessary
assistance. The resolution also calls on States not party
to the Rome Statute and all Members of the United
Nations to cooperate with the Court, without politicizing
the situation, and to continue to fight against impunity.
The issue of cooperation with the Court includes
cooperation in the execution of arrest warrants and
follow-up by the Council through referrals to the
International Criminal Court. The Prosecutor’s briefing
recalled — as many Council members have also
done — that none of the eight formal communications
from the Court to the Council has elicited any response
or action on the part of the Council. I must add that
the Council has not even acknowledged receipt of those
communications. However, in presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, we Council members committed to
effective follow-up. To date, however, and despite our
efforts, there has been no agreement on a mechanism to
follow up referrals to the International Criminal Court.

12/17

11/12/2013

Again, I believe that we must focus on dealing with that
issue.
I wish to conclude by recalling that in resolution
2113 (2013), the Council urged all parties to the conflict
to make every effort to reach a permanent ceasefire and
a comprehensive peace settlement based on the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, and to immediately
cease all acts of violence and fulfil their responsibilities
under international humanitarian and human rights
law. It urged the Sudan to cooperate with the ICC in
accordance with the Council’s earlier resolution 1593
(2005).
For our part, we must assume our responsibilities
under our own resolutions and ensure that the Court is
provided with adequate funding when that debate takes
place before the General Assembly, and must encourage
all States members of the international community to
cooperate in good faith with the International Criminal
Court.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on recent developments
in the Darfur situation. As the Prosecutor has explained
in detail, the overall situation in Darfur has shown little
improvement since her briefing in June (see S/PV.6974).
Intertribal and intercommunal clashes still continue
and hinder peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
aid workers.
The lack of cooperation among the parties
concerned and of capabilities and political will on
the part of the Sudanese Government remain major
obstacles to the effective functioning of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The ensuing delay in delivering
justice to the fullest extent in that part of the region
continues to take its toll on innocent people. Under
those circumstances, it is commendable that the ICC
has made progress in its judicial activities, especially
the preparations for the trial of Mr. Abdallah Banda.
My delegation hopes that the trial will go forward as
scheduled, and that it will mark another milestone in
the Sudan situation.
The efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to garner
international support to execute outstanding arrest
warrants are also appreciated. Although it is regrettable
that the warrants have not yet been fully executed, the
efforts of the ICC to urge the State parties concerned to
cooperate with it deserve due recognition.

13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Meanwhile, new allegations are being reported in
the region. My delegation shares the serious concern
of the Prosecutor regarding those allegations, including
alleged aerial and ground attacks affecting civilians
and alleged crimes against human rights activists and
humanitarian aid workers. The allegations that the
Sudanese Government is allowing militias to loot and
pillage with complete impunity and its security organs
to interfere in the work of aid workers are points of
particular concern. In addition, the investigation into
disturbing reports of sexual and gender-based violence
should be made a priority, as the alleged victims are
the most vulnerable and also make up the fundamental
threads of that region’s fragile social fabric.
In order to achieve stability in the Darfur region, all
such allegations need to be thoroughly investigated and
all of those responsible for such crimes should be held
accountable. My delegation encourages the Prosecutor
to keep up her investigating efforts until justice is
delivered to the victims of such serious crimes.
On the issue of non-cooperation, there should be
no doubt that the ICC requires the full cooperation of
States parties in fulfilling its mandate. In cases that
have been referred to it by the Security Council, the ICC
also needs the Council’s robust support. My delegation
would therefore like to stress that it is incumbent
upon the Sudan to cooperate fully with the ICC, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005). The Council
must also redouble its efforts to expand interaction and
dialogue with the ICC with a view to further improving
such cooperation.
We have taken note that the Prosecutor has called
upon the Security Council to ensure compliance with
the Council’s resolutions by the Sudan and other
Governments concerned with regard to the four suspects
at large. The Council needs to consider what support it
can provide to the ICC in that regard. At the same time,
the Council, in close interaction with the ICC, should
continue to closely monitor the Darfur situation. My
delegation stands ready to work with other Council
members and the ICC.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda and thank
her for her presentation of the eighteenth report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), in accordance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Since her last report (see
S/PV.6974), the situation in Darfur has continued to
develop, with some positive progress at the political

S/PV.7080

level, in contrast to the deterioration of the security
situation.
In regard to the political process, we welcome
the positive progress that has been seen in the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and the Darfur Development Strategy adopted
at the Doha donor conference held on 6 and 7 April. The
traditional conflict-resolution mechanisms have been
reactivated and have demonstrated their effectiveness.
The joint efforts of Government and local authorities,
traditional leaders and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) are
reasons for hope, but they should be strengthened
and supported. The growing involvement not just of
UNAMID but also of the Government and the regional
authorities of Darfur has helped, if only a little, to
reduce tensions and thereby to avoid an increase in the
number of displaced persons, which is still at alarming
proportions.
However, peace in Darfur cannot be achieved
without first assuring peace and security for the people.
The deterioration of the security situation is due mainly
to violent intertribal clashes whose underlying causes are
generally connected to the control of natural resources.
Another aspect of the current insecurity that worries
us greatly is the increase in attacks on UNAMID. The
attacks are deliberate and demonstrate a willingness
not merely to circumvent the political process but to
intimidate UNAMID and cause its mission to promote
peace and reconciliation to fail. The perpetrators and
instigators of the attacks should be arrested and brought
to justice. Rebel groups that are deliberately attacking
civilians or are involved in attacks on Blue Helmets
must also be pursued. We should take all these factors
as a whole into consideration and act accordingly.
For its part, Morocco has always called for a
political settlement among all the parties concerned
in order to mitigate the suffering of the civilian
populations and reaffirm our dedication to respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
also reaffirm our dedication to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan. Morocco has always
shared its belief in the Doha Document for Peace and
its conviction that it represents the only possible way
out of the conflict and therefore should be more firmly
supported, so as to enable the root causes of the conflict
to be addressed.
The current situation in the Sudan deserves the
wholehearted attention of the international community

13-6141113/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in order to enable the country to return to peace and
stability. The significant improvement in neighbourly
relations with South Sudan is also an important element
that we hope will have a positive effect on the evolution
of the situation on the ground. The Sudan has shown its
availability and willingness to cooperate with all parties
concerned, witnessed by the many agreements that
have been signed. However, the decision of the ICC to
blame President Al-Bashir does not enjoy international
consensus. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the Arab League and the Non-Aligned Movement,
among others, have questioned the basis for taking such
a step. Perhaps it is time to look at a process that would
respect international justice without threatening the
countries’ peace and stability. We should also clarify
the question of the cooperation of States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, which find themselves in a
complex situation in many ways.
In conclusion, we believe that the long process
that will enable a return to peace and stability cannot
be achieved without the effective and coordinated
cooperation of all parties concerned, including regional
organizations and mediation mechanisms.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing on the Prosecutor’s report
to the Security Council. We also take note of the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan, Mr. Osman, and of the steps taken by
the Government of the Sudan to implement the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, restore peace and
harmony in the communities of Darfur and appoint a
special prosecutor for Darfur with a team to help ensure
accountability for perpetrators of crimes in Darfur.
However, while we acknowledge that progress, there
are also cases reported of human rights violations and
abuses and active hostilities between the Government
of the Sudan and armed groups that affect civilians.
Repeated attacks on United Nations peacekeepers are
now complicated by cases of intercommunal violence
over land and other natural resources in the region. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to investigate,
to bring the perpetrators to justice and to ensure that
reparations are made and victims protected.
The Security Council has been an active partner
in working for peace in Darfur for more than 10 years
through its decisions and continuing support to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). It has endeavoured to protect
14/17

11/12/2013

Darfur’s civilians. While there are challenges, we note
that there are also opportunities that the Council should
not squander if we do indeed want peace and security in
Darfur. First, we commend the efforts of Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, the Joint Special Representative and Joint
Chief Mediator, to bring all stakeholders, especially
the non-signatories of the Doha Document, to the
negotiation table, and we urge the Council to rally
behind those efforts.
While the Government of the Sudan and other
signatories to the framework are making efforts to
implement the Doha Document, it is unfortunate that
three major groups in Darfur have not yet joined it. It is
essential that the Council and all its members, especially
those with influence on the parties concerned, to push
them towards adhering to the Document, in order to end
this long conflict. It is essential that the Government
and the other signatories to the Document redouble
their efforts to implement it, especially in the areas of
security, landownership, the rule of law, civil service
reform and justice, which, as the Secretary-General’s
recent report on UNAMID (S/2013/607) indicates, still
lag far behind the implementation timeline. Equally
important for ensuring the successful implementation
of the Doha Document is that the donors from the Darfur
donor conference should honour their commitments.
The other opportunity that the Council has been
presented with concerns the justice system in place in
Darfur. The Secretary-General’s report on UNAMID
indicates that since his appointment in 2012, the Special
Prosecutor for Darfur has brought nine cases of serious
crimes to trial, resulting in 42 convictions, and is
currently investigating another 57 cases. In that regard,
it would be wise for the ICC and the Council to support
the work and initiatives of the Special Prosecutor. One
way to do that is to monitor the status of his cases under
either the Doha Document or, as was requested at our
most recent meeting on UNAMID (S/PV.7048), through
the Council ensuring that the Government of the Sudan
regularly informs us about the status of investigations
and prosecutions, mainly of the perpetrators of attacks
on peacekeepers and humanitarian staff.
Regarding the indictment issued by the Prosecutor
of the ICC against officials of the Government of the
Sudan, including President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir,
our position is well known. Rwanda endorses all
seven decisions of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union on the issue adopted
since February 2009. We would particularly like to

13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reiterate our support for the African Union’s view
that the quest for justice should be pursued in a way
that does not impede or jeopardize efforts to promote
lasting peace. We believe that all African countries that
have received President Al-Bashir in their territories
have done so in conformity with the decisions of the
African Union summits and in pursuit of the same
goal of peace in the region. We take this opportunity
to once again underscore the importance of genuine
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations. That cooperation can
never flourish without two-way, mutual respect.
Rwanda also calls on the Council and human
rights and humanitarian actors to continue supporting
UNAMID as it provides technical assistance to both
State and non-State counterparts in order to build their
capacity to recognize, analyse and productively address
human rights issues in Darfur.
To conclude, let me reaffirm that Rwanda, as a
member of the Security Council, a member of the
African Union, and one of the major troop- and
police-contributing countries in UNAMID, will
continue to work towards sustainable peace and genuine
reconciliation and accountability for the most serious
crimes in Darfur while promoting complementarity
and the equal sovereignty of nations.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing on the eighteenth report of her Office. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan for his briefing.
Before giving our comments on the report, I would
once again like to emphasize here that Togo is not yet
a State party to the Rome Statute of the ICC. We also
reaffirm the position of the African Union regarding
the status of sitting Heads of State and Government in
relation to the ICC.
The report before us presents the challenges
weighing on the hope for progress with respect to
the judicial activities, ongoing investigations and
cooperation with States in the fight against impunity
that is being conducted by the International Criminal
Court with regard to the situation in Darfur.
As to the judicial activities, and especially the case
of Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain, Togo, as it
has reiterated in its statements on the last three reports
of the Prosecutor, hopes to see a development of ICC
case law to facilitate cooperation of the Prosecutor

S/PV.7080

and States with the defence in order to mitigate the
consequences of security problems encountered by the
defence in accessing evidence for holding a hearing
on the merits. We fear that the continuation of that
situation will cause further delays of the start date of
the trial scheduled for 5 May 2014, to the detriment of
the right of the accused to be tried without undue delay
and contrary to the expectations of victims for speedy
justice. While it is true that there is no definition of
a reasonable timetable in international law, and that
everything depends on the complexity and the history
of each case, objective indicators allow us to assert
that a postponement of the start date could lead to an
unjustifiable delay.
As to cooperation between the United Nations, the
Security Council and ICC States, we regret the lack of
Council follow-up on cases that it has referred to the
Court. As Togo has mentioned in prior meetings on
the subject, the Council must improve its cooperation
and communication with the Court by answering or at
least acknowledging that it has received notifications
addressed to it. In addition, Togo hopes that relations
between the ICC and States will strictly respect the
principle of complementarity, which imposes on
those States the primary obligation of pursuing and
judging perpetrators of crime. With respect to ongoing
investigations, my country reiterates its appeal for an
end to intercommunal clashes and violence as well as
persistent violations and abuses of human rights and
humanitarian law involving militias despite the many
calls for them to end.
We would encourage the Prosecutor to continue
monitoring and advancing the investigations of crimes
that continue to be committed. In that regard, we remain
concerned by aerial bombings and indiscriminate
ground attacks against civilians, including women
and children, even in camps for internally displaced
persons, widespread sexual and gender-based violence,
and attacks on human rights advocates, members of civil
society and community chiefs. We are also concerned
by the recruitment of child soldiers and intentional
actions aimed at provoking total or partial destruction
of ethnic groups.
Once again, we express our concern about attacks
and abductions of humanitarian workers and members of
peacekeeping forces, which have cost the lives of brave
soldiers-peacekeepers of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Togo calls upon the
Office of the Prosecutor to advance the investigations

13-6141115/17

S/PV.7080

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the killing of African Union soldiers in 2007 and all
other attacks that followed in order to shed light on the
circumstances and identify the perpetrators so that they
can answer for their actions.
In conclusion, we hope that there will be peace
in Darfur as soon as possible. We believe that the
international community must do much more to bring
the parties together, in particular those who deliberately
place themselves outside the Doha Agreement, so they
can make up their minds to undertake to do what is
necessary for the reconciliation and political settlement
that the people of Darfur very much need.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
We are pleased to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
to the Security Council. We would like to thank her for
today’s briefing on, as she noted, the eighteenth report
by an ICC Prosecutor on the situation in Darfur since
resolution 1593 (2005) was adopted.
The United States reiterates its appreciation to
her and her Office for their work to advance the cause
of justice for the people of Darfur. Her perseverance
with the long-standing cases in the Court is highly
commendable, particularly given the obstacles the
ICC faces as a result of the Government of the Sudan’s
continued non-cooperation.
Justice will be the cornerstone of a stable and
sustainable peace agreement in Darfur. The United
States remains deeply concerned that the lack of
progress on accountability for atrocities committed in
Darfur continues to contribute to instability throughout
the Sudan. Lasting impunity goes hand in hand with
continued violence and insecurity.
The report of the Prosecutor is replete with stark
reminders of the challenges her Office faces in seeking
to address the atrocities suffered by the victims in
Darfur. It once again details the blatant disregard of the
Government of the Sudan for its obligation to cooperate
with the ICC pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The
most alarming element of the Prosecutor’s briefing is
that individuals subject to the ICC’s arrest warrants in
Darfur continue to remain at large. The Government
of the Sudan has the responsibility to implement the
warrants, yet it has consistently failed to do so, while
also offering no meaningful measure of justice at the
national level. The Government of the Sudan must
fully cooperate with the ICC and its Prosecutor, and we
continue to call on it to do so.

16/17

11/12/2013

In a direct affront to the charges levelled against
them, the individuals subject to outstanding arrest
warrants also continue to cross international borders.
The international community should remain united
against those acts of defiance against justice by
preventing such travel. States and regional bodies
should ensure that the individuals in question are not
invited to their countries and should not facilitate or
support travel by those subject to the arrest warrants.
We welcome the Prosecutor’s continue pursuit of
justice through her continued work on the case against
Abdallah Banda. We look forward to the start of that
trial and the defendant’s continued cooperation.
Yet there are other very troubling elements of the
report of the Prosecutor. Of particular concern are
allegations of sexual and gender-based violence in
Darfur. Such crimes shock the conscience, and the lack
of accountability fuels the cycle of violence through
resentment, reprisal attacks and further conflict.
We also continue to be deeply concerned by
attacks on United Nations peacekeepers. While the
Government of the Sudan claims to be investigating
those deplorable incidents, there have been no results
and no evidence that those killings are being seriously
addressed. Local accountability initiatives, particularly
the Special Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur, also
remain wanting. We urge observers from the African
Union and the United Nations to monitor the Court’s
proceedings, or lack thereof, and report publicly their
observations.
In conclusion, accountability for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur is both
a moral imperative and an issue of peace and security.
The United States places a high priority on promoting
justice and lasting peace for all of the people of the
Sudan. We once again commend Prosecutor Bensouda
for her work to investigate and prosecute those most
responsible for atrocities committed in Darfur.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and
her presentation on the proceedings and investigations
being conducted by the International Criminal Court in
Darfur on the basis of resolution 1593 (2005). I should
like to make three comments.
First, based on the mandate entrusted to it by
the Council, the Court has done its work: analysis of
13-61411

11/12/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

national judicial proceedings in the Sudan — or, rather,
the lack thereof; investigations; the issuing of arrest
warrants against four individuals; judicial proceedings
at The Hague against rebel leaders who have decided
to voluntarily surrender; and witness protection efforts.
The beginning of the first trial, against Abdallah Banda
for attacks against peacekeeping troops, is an important
milestone. That first public trial will make it possible
to concretely raise the massive crimes committed in
Darfur.
My second observation is somewhat darker. As
the Prosecutor said this morning, impunity persists
in Darfur and the most vulnerable — women in
particular — remain the first victims. Four senior
officials accused of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and, one of them, of genocide continue to
evade the efforts of the Court despite the arrest warrants
issued against them.
My third point is: what can the Council do? There are
courses of action. The first is to support the International
Criminal Court. This meeting provides an opportunity
to reiterate our confidence in the Prosecutor and to
express our conviction that the Court contributes to the
solution of conflicts in Africa and the world. It would
undoubtedly be useful to demonstrate that support by
ensuring that the next Council resolution on Darfur
reflect the concerns of the Prosecutor concerning aerial
bombardments, controlling and disarming militias,
sexual violence, and the need for cooperation from the
Sudan with the International Criminal Court.
On a parallel track, there is support the peace
process. Since our last meeting (see S/PV.6974), the
security situation has deteriorated again. Clashes
between the Government, armed groups and now tribes
are increasing, with the number of victims and displaced
persons also increasing. There has been no progress in
the peace process. Reconstruction is at a standstill and
the resources being transferred to the Darfur Regional
Authority are too scant. Under those conditions, people
do not benefit from improvements, which is the only
way to ensure their adherence to the peace plan. The
reason is simple: the Darfur problem cannot be isolated.
It is an integral part of national reform, which is the
only way to provide lasting solutions to the people
and encourage rebel groups to participate in genuine

S/PV.7080

negotiations. We must support the African Union in
that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to say once again how
much we appreciate the involvement of the SecretaryGeneral and the Office of Legal Affairs for the sake
of international criminal justice and the International
Criminal Court. In particular, the directives of the
Secretary-General on limiting contact with defendants
are an essential tool. Those guidelines should be applied
consistently. The image of the Organization and the
effectiveness of international justice depend upon it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda to respond
to questions and comments made.
Ms. Bensouda: The Government of the Sudan’s
representative speaks of the willingness and ability of
the Sudan to investigate and prosecute. The Security
Council is not the forum for addressing willingness
and ability. It is the responsibility of the judges of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to assess
willingness and ability on a case-by-case basis.
The Government of the Sudan’s representative has
stated plainly that he does not respect the decision
of the Council to mandate the Court and my Office
to investigate and prosecute the most serious crimes
committed in Darfur. The Government of the Sudan
has been aware of the alleged crimes committed by Ali
Kushayb, Ahmed Haroun, Abdelrahim Hussein and
Mr. Omer Al-Bashir. The nature of those crimes has
been made public for nearly nine years. Yet nothing on
those cases has been done. I invite the Government of
the Sudan to bring proof of that willingness and ability
to the judges of the ICC. I agree that the Court and the
Council have separate, although interrelated, mandates.
However, the Government of the Sudan’s refusal to
challenge the admissibility of the cases before the ICC
or to arrest and surrender the individuals concerned is a
challenge — not only for my office but for the Council.
We cannot afford to ignore that challege any longer.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

13-6141117/17
