UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/6
7 February 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3739th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 February 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan of 21 January 1997
(S/1997/56), submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council
resolution 1089 (1996) of 13 December 1996.
"The Security Council welcomes the signing in Moscow on
23 December 1996 by the President of Tajikistan and the leader of the
United Tajik Opposition of the Agreement (S/1996/1070, annex I), including
the Protocol on the Commission on National Reconciliation (S/1996/1070,
annex II), and notes the progress made in the inter-Tajik talks in Tehran,
in particular the signing of the Protocol on Refugees (S/1997/56, annex
III). It believes that these agreements, provided they are carried out as
written, represent a qualitative change for the better and give a new
impetus to efforts aimed at achieving national reconciliation. The Council
urges the parties to honour and implement consistently and in good faith
the agreements already reached, in particular in the course of negotiating
future agreements. It also urges them to make further substantive progress
at the next rounds of the inter-Tajik talks.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction that the ceasefire has
been generally observed by the parties since December 1996 and calls on
them to maintain it scrupulously for the whole duration of the inter-Tajik
talks in accordance with their obligations and commitments.
"The Security Council commends the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and calls upon the parties to
cooperate fully with him in continuing the inter-Tajik talks. The Security
Council also commends the efforts of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) in fulfilling its mandate.

97-03660 (E)

070297

/...

S/PRST/1997/6
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to ensure the safety and
the freedom of movement of the personnel of the United Nations, the
collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) and other international personnel in Tajikistan.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the attacks on and kidnapping
of international personnel, in particular UNMOT, UNHCR and ICRC, and others
and demands the immediate release of all those taken hostage. It stresses
the inadmissibility of kidnapping and any other mistreatment of United
Nations personnel and supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to
ensure that the essential security requirements of UNMOT are met.
"In this context the Security Council expresses satisfaction at the
efforts by and cooperation between UNMOT, the Russian Federation and the
parties to resolve the hostage crisis.
"The Security Council considers it necessary for the United Nations to
continue vigorous support for the political process in Tajikistan. It
takes note of the request from the parties to UNMOT to extend the necessary
assistance in the implementation of the Moscow Agreement and to cooperate
closely with the Commission on National Reconciliation in its activities.
The Council accepts the Secretary-General's recommendation not to change
the nature and size of the United Nations presence in Tajikistan at this
stage. It requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation under
review and to submit in due course his recommendations with regard to the
United Nations presence in Tajikistan in the light of the progress in
implementation of the inter-Tajik agreements and bearing in mind the
request for assistance by the parties contained in the Moscow Agreement and
the tasks and functions that would be required to provide such assistance.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern over the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Tajikistan and calls for continuing emergency
relief including assistance for the return of refugees, in the context of
the implementation of the Protocol on Refugees, and support to Tajikistan
for rehabilitation, aimed at mitigation of the consequences of the war and
reconstruction of its economy."

-----
