S/2021/250

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 16 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose, herewith, a copy of the briefings provided by
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres; Ms. Gabriela Bucher,
Executive Director, Oxfam International; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies
Ms. Eva-Maria Liimets, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Simon Coveney,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Ms. Raychelle Omamo,
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya; Ms. Linda Thomas-Greenfield,
Permanent Representative of the United States of America and Member of President
Biden’s Cabinet; Mr. Dag-Inge Ulstein, Minister for International Development of
Norway; Mr. Saboto Caesar, Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Rural
Transformation, Industry and Labour of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Lord
Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United
Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, France, India,
Mexico, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Tunisia and Viet Nam, in connection
with the video-teleconference on “Maintenance of international peace and security:
conflict and food security”, convened on Thursday, 11 March 2021.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members
for this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted
written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, the African
Union, Andorra, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the European Union, Fiji, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Indonesia, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Malta, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Venezuela and Yemen, as well as a joint
statement by the Dominican Republic and Germany.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these

21-03630 (E) 180321 280421

*2103630*

S/2021/250

briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

2/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 1
Briefing by the Secretary-General
[Original: English and French]
I thank you for this opportunity to brief you on the links between conflict and
hunger, an urgent and important issue.
Today I have one simple message: if you do not feed people, you feed conflict.
Conflict drives hunger and famine, and hunger and famine drive conflict. When
a country or region is gripped by conflict and hunger, they become mutually
reinforcing. They cannot be resolved separately. Hunger and poverty combine with
inequality, climate shocks, sectarian and ethnic tensions and grievances over land
and resources to spark and drive conflict. At the same time, conflict forces people
to leave their homes, land and jobs, disrupts agriculture and trade and reduces
access to vital resources like water and electricity, and so drives hunger. The Nobel
Committee recognized this link when it awarded the Nobel Peace Prize to the World
Food Programme (WFP) — a powerful call to action — recognizing the importance
of food security to building peace and stability.
We have made enormous inroads into hunger over recent decades, thanks
to improved productivity and reductions in global poverty. Famine and hunger are
no longer about lack of food; they are now largely man-made, and I use the term
deliberately. They are concentrated in countries affected by large-scale, protracted
conflict. And they are rising. At the end of 2020, more than 88 million people were
suffering from acute hunger due to conflict and instability — a 20 per cent increase
in one year. Projections for 2021 point to a continuation of this frightening trend.
I must warn the Security Council that we face multiple conflict-driven
famines around the world. Climate shocks and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic are adding fuel to the flames. Without immediate action, millions of
people will reach the brink of extreme hunger and death.
Projections show hunger crises escalating and spreading across the Sahel and
the Horn of Africa, and accelerating in South Sudan, Yemen and Afghanistan. There
are more than 30 million people in over three dozen countries just one step away
from a declaration of famine.
Women and girls face a double risk. They are more likely to be forced from
their homes by conflict, and they are more vulnerable to malnutrition, particularly
when pregnant or breastfeeding. Girls who are hungry are at increased risk of
trafficking, forced marriage and other abuses.
Food insecurity is worsened by the reduction of humanitarian access. I am
deeply concerned about the situation in Tigray, Ethiopia, where the harvest season
has been disrupted by insecurity and violence and hundreds of thousands of people
could be experiencing hunger.
In some countries, famine is already here. People are dying from hunger and
suffering critical rates of malnutrition. Parts of Yemen, South Sudan and Burkina
Faso are in the grip of famine or conditions akin to famine. More than 150,000
people are at risk of starving. In Yemen, five years of conflict have displaced 4
million people across the country. Many Yemenis are facing a death sentence as
widespread hunger stalks their nation.
Around half of all children under 5 — 2.3 million children — are projected to
face acute malnutrition in 2021. Some 16 million people face food insecurity.

21-036303/147

S/2021/250

South Sudan is facing its highest levels of food insecurity since the
country declared independence, 10 years ago. Sixty per cent of the population are
increasingly hungry.
Food prices are so high that just one plate of rice and beans costs more than
180 per cent of the average daily salary — the equivalent of about $400 here in
New York.
Chronic sporadic violence, extreme weather and the economic impact of
COVID-19 have pushed more than 7 million people into acute food insecurity.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo experienced the world’s largest food
crisis last year, with nearly 21.8 million people facing acute hunger between July
and December.
The targeting of World Food Programme vehicles in the east of the country
last month and the tragic killing of our colleague Moustapha Milambo, as well as
Italian Ambassador Luca Attanasio and his security officer, Vittorio Iacovacci, are
the starkest possible illustration of the dark alliance between hunger and conflict.
This is the devastating reality in conflict zones around the world. We have
a responsibility to do everything in our power to reverse these trends, starting by
preventing famine. Last September, the Secretariat provided a white paper outlining
the risks of famine in four countries. The situation has only grown more urgent.
Hunger and death begin long before the highest levels of food insecurity. We must
anticipate and act now.
I have therefore decided to establish a High-Level Task Force on Preventing
Famine, led by my Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock. The Task Force will include representatives
from the World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
It will bring coordinated, high-level attention to famine prevention and mobilize
support to the most affected countries.
I have also asked Under-Secretary-General Lowcock to draw on the support
of other Inter-Agency Standing Committee members — and obviously including
UNICEF, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and UN-Women.
The group will cooperate with the non-governmental organizations that are
our vital partners in feeding the hungry around the world. It will also work with
international financial institutions and other specialized United Nations agencies,
including the International Fund for Agricultural Development. I urge all members
of the Council to support the Task Force in every way possible and to do everything
in your power to take urgent action to prevent famine.
Our most serious concern must be the more than 34 million people who
already face emergency levels of acute food insecurity. WFP and FAO have appealed
for the emergency mobilization of $5.5 billion in extraordinary resources to avert
catastrophe for these 34 million women, men, girls and boys. These resources are
needed for a comprehensive package of life-saving aid, including the distribution of
food, cash and vouchers, targeted support for agriculture and medical treatment for
people already suffering from acute malnutrition.
While all countries face some economic strain as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, the solution does not lie in cutting aid to starving children. The
disappointing outcome of last week’s high-level pledging event on Yemen cannot
become a pattern. I ask all countries to reconsider their responsibilities and their
4/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

capacities. The relatively small amounts of money involved in humanitarian aid are
an investment not only in people but an investment in peace.
People suffering from acute hunger must be able to access food and vital
assistance in secure conditions, especially during armed conflict. In line with
resolution 2417 (2018) and on the basis of international humanitarian law, goods and
products crucial to the survival of civilians — such as food, crops and livestock —
must be protected in conflicts.
Humanitarian access must not be impeded, while the use of famine as a method
of war is prohibited. Unfortunately, we do not lack for recent examples of the use of
famine as a tactic of war. The conflict in Syria has plunged millions of civilians into
terrible conditions, which in some instances has reduced them to famine. Famine
was declared in 2017 in certain parts of South Sudan, as humanitarian access to
the population was systematically refused. There are indications in Myanmar that
hunger — resulting from the destruction of agricultural land and villages as well as
restrictions on the freedom of movement — has been used again Rohingyas. The
deliberate use of famine as a method of war constitutes a war crime.
I urge the members of the Council to act using every means so that those
responsible for these atrocious acts are held accountable, as well as to remind the
parties to conflict of their obligations in the context of international humanitarian
law.
Addressing hunger is a foundation for stability and peace. We need to tackle
both hunger and conflict if we are to solve either. Our blueprint for reducing hunger
is the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and particularly Sustainable
Development Goal 2, on zero hunger.
We need to transform our food systems to make them more inclusive, resilient
and sustainable. This will be one of the key issues of the Food Systems Summit,
which I will convene later this year.
At the same time, ending hunger requires us to find political solutions to
conflict. I urge all States to make ending conflict, not simply mitigating its impact,
a key foreign policy priority.
I call on Council members to use your privileged position to do everything in
your power to end violence, negotiate peace and alleviate the hunger and suffering
that afflict so many millions of people around the world.
There is no place for famine and starvation in the twenty-first century.

21-036305/147

S/2021/250

Annex 2
Briefing by the Executive Director of Oxfam International,
Gabriela Bucher
In 1941, the people of Greece were facing a horrific winter. The Axis powers
had plundered local supplies and introduced an extortionate tax on Greek citizens.
Allied forces imposed a cruel blockade, cutting off imports. Prices skyrocketed.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians perished.
I have been invited to address you today as the Executive Director of Oxfam
International, an expression of people power that was first launched to stand with
the people of Greece to demand their most basic of rights — the right to food — in
the midst of conflict.
I am horrified that we are forced to confront the same basic injustice that gave
birth to our founding, nearly 80 years ago. Indeed, as we witness blockades cutting
off food and fuel to Yemen and millions going hungry in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Afghanistan and Syria, we should all be horrified.
Three years ago, when the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2417 (2018), we heard an unequivocal condemnation of starvation of civilians as
a method of warfare. We heard a recognition that peace and security in an armed
conflict means the presence of food as much as the absence of gunfire. But is the
promise of resolution 2417 (2018) being kept?
Many of the countries that were at risk of famine from conflict in 2017 are
still at risk. And now more countries have joined them. Overall, at least 88 million
people are suffering through acute hunger in countries where conflict and insecurity
stalks. Women and girls are disproportionally affected, too often eating last and
eating least.
People in these areas are not starving; they are being starved. It makes little
difference to the hungry whether they are being starved by deliberate action, or
the callous negligence of conflict parties or the international community — an
international community whose most powerful States too often drive starvation with
a plentiful supply of weapons.
I want you to know about A’eshah Yahya Dahish, from Yemen. When her
village was bombed, she was forced to flee. A’eshah had dreamed of becoming a
midwife but, in an economy under attack from all sides, it takes all the energy she
has just to survive. Her two-year-old brother Maydan depends on her, but all she can
afford to feed him is a few crumbs in water. Maydan is so malnourished that A’eshah
believes any exposure to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) will be fatal.
I want you to know Tesfay Getachew, a farmer in Tigray regional state in
Ethiopia. He has faced blackouts and market and bank closures that have devastated
millions, but felt he could rely on the food he grew to feed his family. Last November,
his village was shelled and his crops were set on fire, leaving his family with nothing.
I want you to know Housseina, from the Central African Republic. The country
has seen a deadly spike in violence over recent months that has led to insecurity on
roads, meaning that food is not getting to markets. Food prices have skyrocketed
by 240 per cent in some areas. Housseina’s home and fields were destroyed in
the fighting. With support from Oxfam, she replanted her crops, only to see them
destroyed again in the recent fighting. “My pain was immense,” she said. “I do not
know how to feed my family. We ate almost exclusively the vegetables that I grow.”
Women like Housseina want you to live up to your basic promise to keep
their families safe. She and her fellow farmers are more than capable of producing
enough to feed their families, but they cannot do so in the face of violence. Women in
6/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

conflict face impossible choices — to travel to market and risk crossing checkpoints
or to watch their families go hungry; to harvest their crops and risk being attacked
or to stay and face starvation?
Sometimes they have no choice. Sahar, 3 years old, and her sister Hanan, 8
years old, were displaced by the conflict in Yemen and forced to marry because their
parents said they could not feed them.
I am here to amplify their call to the Security Council to make good on its
unanimous agreement to break the vicious cycle of conflict and food insecurity. How?
First, the Council should deepen its work on this topic with a clear commitment
for action. It should agree on depoliticized criteria facilitating the regular, mandatory
reporting on situations where there is a risk of conflict induced famine or food
insecurity. It should undertake quarterly reviews of action on the white papers
considered under the early-warning system.
Secondly, the Council must take genuine action to support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire — urgently — while ensuring humanitarian
access and the inclusion of women from the beginning of the process. It took four
months for the Council to support the initial call for a ceasefire. People on the edge
of starvation do not have the time to wait another year for action.
Thirdly, the Council should apply the principles it has endorsed in the abstract
to the particular situations on its agenda. It should impartially condemn the starvation
of civilians as a weapon of war, the targeting of critical food infrastructure, and all
restrictions on humanitarian access. It should also take any opportunity to create
meaningful accountability for starvation crimes. Today there is near-global impunity.
Fourthly, it should endorse, and its members should lead, the effort to fulfil
the global appeal for $5.5 billion to meet additional needs to avert famine, most
especially in the light of COVID-19. To be most effective, this aid must flow as
directly and urgently as possible to local organizations, especially women-led and
women’s rights organizations, which are on the front line in addressing hunger.
And fifthly, it should endorse a people’s vaccine for COVID-19 that is free
and accessible to all. Ending this pandemic will not end hunger, but we will not
end hunger if we cannot end this pandemic. Rich nations must unlock global supply
constraints and help get the vaccine to all who need it.
Our failure to address hunger before the COVID-19 crisis and the rampant
inequality and climate change, which has so often triggered conflict, has left us
scrambling to avert famine across the globe.
Let us also be clear: starvation is a symptom of a deeper problem. The
growing crisis of starvation is taking place in a world where eight of the biggest
food and drink companies paid out over $18 billion to shareholders last year. Those
dividends alone are more than three times what we are asking for in aid today to
avert catastrophe. There is not a lack of food, there is a lack of equality. I know this
from my own experience. Growing up in Colombia, life in conflict was all we knew.
None of us were safe. But those of us with resources could eat. Even then, as a girl,
I knew this was unjust.
There is an unnerving consistency in what people living through hunger and
conflict around the world tell us they want. They want peace. But what does peace
mean to them? Peace is not just the absence of war, but the ability to live in dignity
and flourish. It means a job, a return home and stable, affordable food prices. If the
Security Council aims to foster peace in their name, it should be no less expansive
in its perspective and its actions.

21-036307/147

S/2021/250

Annex 3
Briefing by the Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
David Beasley
I thank you, Madam President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
today on this critically important issue. And let me also take this opportunity to
welcome you to your new role as United States Ambassador to the United Nations.
In April 2020, as the world was still getting to grips with the novel coronavirus
(COVID-19), I addressed the Security Council (see S/2020/340) and warned that the
world stood on the brink of two pandemics — a COVID-19 pandemic and, due to
its economic impact and supply-chain disruption, a hunger pandemic. I said that, if
we were not careful in how we addressed COVID-19, the cure could be worse than
the disease.
Armed conflict, compounded by climate extremes and the COVID-19
pandemic, threatened to push the number of people in the world marching to the
brink of starvation from 135 million before COVID-19 to 270 million. I warned
that famines of biblical proportions were a real and terrifying prospect in three
dozen countries. Thankfully, world listened. Leaders responded with economic
stimulus packages and deferred debt for low- and middle-income countries. And
safety programmes, among other things, were implemented. As a result, we globally
averted a catastrophe.
I am proud and sad at the same time that last year the World Food Programme
(WFP) reached 114 million people with life-saving assistance — the highest annual
total in our history.
In 2020, we thought that by 2021 COVID-19 would be behind us and that
economies and systems would be surging back to normal. Unfortunately, new waves
of COVID-19 have been unrelenting, and the concerns of 2020 are now a reality for
2021. So today I must warn you that we are once again sliding towards the brink of
the abyss.
While COVID-19 is undeniably exacerbating fragility around the world, manmade conflict is driving instability and powering a destructive new wave of famine
that threatens to sweep across the world. The toll being paid in human misery is
unimaginable. So I want to thank the Secretary-General for his leadership in trying
to avert these famines.
The WFP’s food insecurity projections for 2021 are truly shocking. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I was last week, is one of the world’s
forgotten conflicts. But this year it is set to become the world’s largest hunger
emergency, with 19.6 million people facing crisis, emergency or catastrophic levels
of food insecurity — up from 15.6 million a year ago. In Afghanistan, that number is
now nearly 17 million people — up from 13.9 million. In Nigeria, it’s 13 million —
a staggering increase on the 5 million in crisis before. In Syria, over 12 million
people face crisis levels of food insecurity or worse — an all-time high and up from
9.3 million. The Sudan, South Sudan and the Sahel, I could go on and on and on —
dozens of countries with millions of their children going hungry because armed
groups won’t lay down their guns.
Now 270 million people are facing a hunger crisis and, as the SecretaryGeneral laid out, famine is a dangerous possibility in over 30 countries. The WFP
estimates that at least 34 million people are knocking on the door of famine.
These looming famines have two things in common: they are primarily driven
by conflict and they are entirely preventable. With modern forecasting, improved
agricultural practices and effective humanitarian organizations, natural disasters no
longer plunge populations into famine.
8/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Make no mistake: man-made conflict is the real culprit. Displacement, a
major consequence of armed violence, means lives are turned upside down, fields
are abandoned and harvests are missed. Families forced from their lands become
dependent on humanitarian assistance just to meet their basic needs.
The cycle of violence, hunger and despair pulls in more and more individuals
and families as the weeks and months pass. But the potential consequences are truly
global: economic deterioration, destabilization, mass migration and starvation.
In recent days I have seen the suffering inflicted on innocent families caught
in the crossfire of these conflicts.
Two days ago I was in Yemen, where over 16 million people now face crisis
levels of hunger or worse. We are heading straight towards the biggest famine in
modern history. It is hell on Earth in many places in Yemen right now. I visited
the Al-Sabeen children’s hospital in Sana’a. While overwhelmingly I found stories
of horror, there were also rare stories of hope. But most are stories of pain and
hardship. Almost all the children I met were sick, skin and bones, and dying of
entirely preventable or treatable illnesses. If I showed you some of the pictures,
you would not believe it, and no one with a heart at all could sit idly by and let this
continue. No one.
And what is really sad is that these are the fortunate ones, because they are
actually receiving medical help. I asked one of the doctors how many beds they have.
She told me, 25. I asked, what about the children you have to turn away, what happens
to them? She replied, they go home to die. Understand, this is at the best hospital.
Around 400,000 children may die in Yemen this year without urgent intervention.
That is roughly one child every 75 seconds. Are we really going to turn our backs on
them and look the other way?
Like a 5-month-old little girl, Soja, who I visited in one room where she was
lying in the arms of her mother, on the verge of death. I talked with her mother, who
told me that in desperation she had sold the only canister of cooking gas she had,
so she could pay for the day’s journey to the hospital to get help for her daughter.
Tragically, I heard just this morning that little Soja passed away.
What about all the other families going through this hell. That have sold —
what?— only to be denied care when they arrived because of the lack of beds.
And now, to add to all their misery, the innocent people of Yemen have to
deal with a fuel blockade. For example, most hospitals have electricity only in their
intensive care units, because fuel reserves are so low. The people of Yemen deserve
our help. That blockade must be lifted, as a humanitarian act. Otherwise, millions
more will spiral into crisis. The bottom line on Yemen: we need money, and lots of
it. And above all, the war needs to end.
Sadly, many other nations bear similar scars from conflict and instability.
During my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last week, I met many
desperate families. It is a cruel irony that this country remains one of the poorest on
Earth, despite its vast natural wealth. The Democratic Republic of the Congo’s history
of conflict and displacement, combined with economic and political instability and
health crises such as Ebola have fuelled surging food insecurity. The WFP’s food
assistance is providing a lifeline to many of these people, preventing them from
being overwhelmed by starvation and famine. But we urgently need more funding to
continue this vital work.
In February I was in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, which has been convulsed
by armed conflict in recent months. As you all know, from the humanitarian
perspective, everyone has been gravely concerned about getting access to help those
in need. I, along with other United Nations leaders, have visited Ethiopia several
21-036309/147

S/2021/250

times since hostilities broke out, including this week, and after detailed extensive
negotiations with the Government we have achieved significant breakthroughs.
We have substantially improved access for humanitarian workers and cargo
in the region, with United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) being able to deliver more support to those in need. Also, the United Nations
now has satellite dishes working: two new ones were approved for the International
Organization for Migration yesterday and will be available for NGOs to use in
Shire and Mekelle. I am hopeful that, in the next day or so, humanitarians will have
additional approval for much-needed satellite phones and communications equipment.
But the real work is only just beginning. We believe 3 million people or more
in the Tigray region require food assistance, so we have a great deal more to do. But
we cannot get on with it unless we receive the funding urgently needed. Tragically,
the list of countries in need, the casualties of conflict, just goes on and on.
Finally, I want to highlight the continuing crisis in South Sudan, where 7.2
million people face acute levels of food insecurity or worse. In early February, I
visited western Pibor, and in recent days I have heard heart-rendering stories about
the plight of people living in the area. In Western Pibor, in extreme circumstances,
mothers are resorting to feeding their children with the skin of dead animals, or even
mud. Just imagine.
This is a desperate situation that calls for urgent attention. Famine-like
conditions have been identified in western Pibor. The local population calls 2021
“the year of starvation”. Their suffering is the result of widespread conflict and
the unprecedented floods that came in 2019 and 2020. These people are in the
crossfire of conflict while bearing the brunt of the climate crisis, just like vulnerable
communities all around the world.
So when we ask Security Council members to provide $5.5 billion immediately
to avoid multiple famines around the world, I urge you to open your hearts, show
compassion and give generously. Together we will use these funds to provide
emergency assistance, to save millions of lives and to protect the livelihoods of the
world’s poorest communities.
But we need the Security Council to play its part too. Because without the
required monies, the world cannot stop famine. Beyond the immediate crisis, we
also need to invest in peace, so that in future desperate families are not forced to the
brink of survival by the bullet and the bomb.
The costs of this violence are immense: $14.5 trillion a year, or 15 per cent of
global gross domestic product in 2019. It would take a fraction of this money to fund
the development programmes that could transform the lives of people in fragile,
conflict-scarred nations and help lay new pathways to peace.
The Security Council has a moral obligation to do everything in its power to
end these wars. But until we can achieve that, we need you to give us the funds to
stop millions of people from dying from starvation. We were able to avert famine in
2020, and we can do it again. Please, do not ask us to choose which starving child
lives and which one dies. Let us feed them all.

10/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 4
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Eva-Maria Liimets
Almost three years ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2417 (2018), which condemned the starving of civilians and unlawfully denying
humanitarian access as a method of warfare. The resolution was conceived as a tool
to break the vicious cycle of food insecurity, but it is we who must use this tool when
required. Only in that way can we put the resolution into practice and break the cycle
of hunger.
Compliance with international humanitarian law is of the highest importance
in reducing food insecurity and preventing famine. The intentional starvation of
civilians is a war crime. We welcome the amendments to the Rome Statute to include
it as such. We call on State parties to take steps that would allow the amendments to
enter into force quickly.
Most of the food-insecure people live in countries affected by armed conflicts.
The intersecting drivers of food insecurity in conflict areas are complex, ranging
from the conduct of hostilities and lack of humanitarian access to the broader drivers
of risk, such as climate change and the pandemic. While rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access is key during an acute food crisis, early action is of the utmost
importance. It is particularly important for safeguarding child and maternal health.
There are numerous cases on our agenda where we have seen an unlawful
denial of humanitarian access. Moreover, various parties to conflict have raided
and looted humanitarian aid storage sites and destroyed infrastructure that is
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population. Resolution 2417 (2018) helps
us deal with such problems by allowing us to impose restrictive measures. We must
not shy away from using those provisions, on which we unanimously agreed.
I would now like to highlight three critical cases.
The first case is South Sudan. We have seen how the humanitarian situation
there worsens on a yearly basis. About 70 per cent of the people need humanitarian
assistance and, if we do not act swiftly, we will edge closer to the sad example that we
see in Yemen. South Sudan’s food security is in its worst state since independence.
That is why today I have the honour of announcing Estonia’s contribution to the
World Food Programme to mitigate the humanitarian situation there.
The second is Ethiopia. Estonia is concerned about the humanitarian crisis
in Tigray. We take note of the Government’s recent efforts to alleviate the situation.
However, more needs to be done. The humanitarian community has made calls to
increase humanitarian assistance in order to avert famine-like conditions on the
ground. To prevent the worst-case scenario, life-saving aid needs to be delivered
to the people in need across the region, including in rural areas. It is critical that
the Ethiopian Government fulfil its commitment to provide unfettered humanitarian
access. We also call for the withdrawal of Eritrean troops from Tigray. In addition,
the growing number of credible reports of atrocities and human rights violations
and abuses is extremely concerning. Independent investigations into reported human
rights violations are an absolute must, and we acknowledge Ethiopia’s announcements
to that end.
The third case is Afghanistan. Forty years of war and poverty, coupled with
a continuing drought, means that 45 per cent of the population is at risk of hunger
this year. All signs show that the situation will deteriorate further. Nearly one in
two children under five will face acute malnutrition. The stalled peace negotiations
between Taliban and Afghan officials and excessive levels of violence across the
21-0363011/147

S/2021/250

country not only keep people from securing their livelihoods, but also severely
hamper the humanitarian aid from reaching those in need. In 2020, humanitarians
faced 1,006 access constraints — more than double the incidents reported in 2019.
Finally, it is also up to us, the members of the Security Council, to respond
to potential famine in the world. I call on all of us to put resolution 2417 (2018) into
practice and convene on this pressing issue more often. That would allow for more
regular reporting and would thus help us to prevent or mitigate future famines.

12/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 5
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland,
Simon Coveney
I would like to extend my best wishes to you, Madam President, in your
new role and congratulate you on a powerful contribution today. Ireland deeply
appreciates your leadership in dedicating the signature event of your presidency to
the Security Council’s responsibility to address the role that conflict plays as the
most significant factor in driving global hunger today. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his remarks and David Beasley and Gabriela Bucher
for their contributions and their organizations’ important work.
My country, Ireland, has a historical memory of famine. The Irish famine was
the worst humanitarian disaster of nineteenth-century Europe. One million people
perished and another million were forced to emigrate. That historical experience
has left a legacy in Ireland. That legacy is our belief that we have a shared global
responsibility to act and to protect populations.
Famine is unconscionable. The use of hunger as a weapon of war is
unconscionable. We have a collective responsibility, and the Council has a particular
responsibility, to see famine become a thing of the past. I will make three main
points today.
First, it is undeniable that conflict is now the main driver of hunger. We have
too often seen starvation used as a weapon of war. Every time that the Council is
briefed on Yemen and Syria, we are reminded that too many are facing death by
hunger. In the twenty-first century, that should be a cause of great shame. Just a few
months ago, the United Nations released emergency funding to help stave off famine
in seven high-risk countries in which conflict is widespread.
We cannot claim to be surprised. Conflict-induced hunger is a phenomenon
that we around the Council table are briefed on time and time and time again. By the
end of last year, an estimated 88 million people, the majority women and girls, were
suffering acute hunger in countries where conflict and insecurity played the key role
in driving that food insecurity.
In Yemen, 24 million people are in receipt of humanitarian assistance. That
is 24 million individual human beings — the kind of children whom we have heard
about in the stories so far today. What conflict in Yemen means is that the Yemeni
people now face the real possibility of facing the worst famine that the world has
seen in many decades.
In Ethiopia, even before the conflict in Tigray, we anticipated that 1.4
million people in that region would need food assistance in 2021. As we speak,
notwithstanding the commitments made by the Ethiopian Government, humanitarian
access remains inadequate as compared to the urgent, large-scale needs there.
Comprehensive assessment missions are not yet being permitted. An effective civilmilitary coordination system has yet to be properly facilitated to allow for the safe
movement of humanitarian actors, some of whom are present today.
In Syria, 10 years into the conflict, 60 per cent of the population — and 80
per cent of those in the north-west of the country — face food insecurity. That is
in a country that ranked in the top half of the Human Development Index some 12
or 13 years ago. I visited the Bab Al-Hawa crossing last month, where emergency
humanitarian aid is channelled to 2.7 million people in the Idlib area. Speaking
to Syrian and international non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies working in north-western Syria brought home to me again the sheer human
misery and the utter waste of human potential that result from conflict.
21-0363013/147

S/2021/250

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) was an impressive moment
in the Council’s recent history. It was a testament to the Council’s unity on the
need to counter conflict-driven hunger. The resolution is a call to action. It restates
core humanitarian principles. It demands the effective application of international
humanitarian law and accountability for those who violate it, and it emphasizes
the importance of humanitarian access to vulnerable populations. Resolution 2417
(2018) gives us the tools that we need to tackle the issue of conflict and hunger. What
we need is the collective political will to use those tools.
That brings me to my second point. Despite the unanimous commitments of
the Council, the intention of resolution 2417 (2018) is not being realized for those
most affected. We need to recognize that the issue of food security and armed conflict
must now be at the heart of the Council’s work. Conflict-induced hunger is not a rare
or infrequent occurrence anymore. It calls for our close attention and prioritization.
Conflict displaces people, destroys livelihoods, disrupts trade and the supply
of food and agricultural inputs, damages infrastructure and reduces access to vital
resources. That suffering is not limited to the most severe contexts. It affects millions
of vulnerable people in many conflict contexts across the globe.
Ireland is honoured to be working with the Niger as the focal point on hunger
and conflict on the Council for the next two years. We will host the first of the
biannual briefings for 2021 next month to discuss the findings of the upcoming joint
report of the World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations to Council members on this issue. We intend to keep a strong
focus on hunger and conflict throughout our two years on the Council.
My third point is that we must adapt our approach to unique country contexts
and acknowledge the different ways in which food systems are damaged by conflict.
In situations of armed conflict, the Council must be seized of the need to ensure the
proper functioning of food systems and local markets.
While rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access is vital during an acute food
crisis, the Council must look at early action to prevent food insecurity and famine,
particularly to safeguard child and maternal health. Early warning and early action
lead to prevention. Prevention saves lives, prevents misery, saves money and allows
food systems to survive. Where there is good reason to fear that food insecurity
could be setting in, including through the deliberate denial of humanitarian access,
the Council must act, and it must act quickly.
In conclusion, let us remember that the relationship between conflict and hunger
is not new. War, by its very nature, disrupts food systems. In the worst scenarios,
hunger is used as a brutal and medieval tactic that is in direct contravention of
international law. All parties to armed conflicts must comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including in relation to humanitarian access.
Those that fail to do so must be held fully accountable by the Security Council.
Resolution 2417 (2018), unanimously adopted by the Council, demands no less. It
is the Council’s responsibility to implement that resolution. It is our duty, as States
Members of the United Nations, to garner the political will to do so. History will
judge us harshly if we fail to do that.

14/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 6
Statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya,
Raychelle Omamo
I congratulate the United States on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I applaud the choice of conflict and food
security as the focus of this debate. I thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers
for their illuminating remarks on this critical subject.
Food security is the core human need. All our other aspirations for development,
security and human progress rest on achieving it.
That is why food security is one of the four policy priorities being pursued
by the Government of Kenya under what is popularly known as the Big Four
Agenda. The drivers of our initiative are ensuring food availability, increasing
land under irrigation, scaling up smallholder production and value addition,
ensuring affordability and establishing 1,000 targeted production-level small and
medium-sized enterprises using a performance-based incentive model in the entire
value chain.
Those interventions will deliver a paradigm shift that we believe will positively
impact development, inclusion, cohesion and sustained peace. However, we are doing
that in the face of growing climate-related and environmental challenges in our
region. Climate change and associated droughts, desertification, land degradation
and desert locust invasions are undermining food security and multiplying conflict
threats. We are particularly concerned by the food insecurity experienced in
communities and areas where there is ongoing violent conflict.
It is my hope that this debate will offer new, or better, ways to address food
insecurity as a multiplier of peace and security fragilities and threats. I believe that
many solutions to ensuring humanitarian access and linking humanitarian aid to
national and local food production will emerge, in addition to the following four
points, which I will make with the utmost brevity.
First, the United Nations, regional organizations and Governments should
insist that civilian infrastructure that is critical to food delivery never be deliberately
targeted by conflicting parties. Similarly, food-related civilian objects, including
farms, markets, water systems, mills and food-processing and storage sites and hubs,
should be protected as a non-partisan resource that has no role in hostilities.
Secondly, countries and regions experiencing armed conflict should do their
utmost to provide and facilitate safe and unimpeded access by official humanitarian
personnel to vulnerable civilians in need of aid, in line with existing international
and regional obligations.
Thirdly, humanitarian agencies should extend support not only to food aid, but
also to building local capacities for producing food and boosting nutrition resilience.
In that regard, support for farm inputs, seed and fertilizers to the local populace in
fragile countries is of the utmost priority.
Fourthly, and finally, is furthering compliance with resolution 2417 (2018)
in mitigating conflict-induced food insecurity, particularly banning starvation as
a weapon of war. Decisions and interventions of the Security Council should be
based on facts and driven by empirical evidence to ensure a balanced approach to
furthering international peace and security.
As I conclude, I urge all of us to work together as we explore all available
options to end hunger and conflict-induced food insecurity for the sake of all
vulnerable populations and international peace and security.
21-0363015/147

S/2021/250

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank Secretary-General Guterres, Executive Director Beasley and Executive
Director Bucher for their powerful advocacy to alleviate the scourge of conflictinduced hunger. I also thank the many Member States for submitting statements
for this open debate, and I welcome ministers and senior representatives from other
countries on the Security Council.
I would like to start with a moment that I will never forget. In 1993, I visited
a refugee camp in northern Uganda. It was my first-ever visit to a refugee camp.
When I arrived, it was overflowing with Sudanese refugees fleeing the civil war in
the Sudan, and I saw a two-year-old. Her rib bones were poking out and she was so
malnourished that she was unable to eat. Then, in an instant, she died right in front
of me. That moment and that little girl are seared in my memory. I remember her big,
gaunt eyes. I remember her mother’s eyes, too, when I saw nothing but darkness and
despair. That day was the first time that I truly understood what the words famine
and acute malnutrition mean.
So, when we use these technical terms — food security, acute malnutrition,
conflict-induced hunger — let us not forget what they really mean. We are talking
about raw humanity. We are talking about pure suffering. We are talking about real
people. We are talking about children and mothers, such as the ones whom I met
in 1993, more than 20 years ago. And the problem is compounded today. Acute
malnutrition can trigger other risks, such as gender-based violence or the exploitation
and abuse of children. In other words, the cruelty of hunger drives more cruelty.
I wish that day in Uganda were the only time I saw that cruelty, that kind
of cruelty up close. But it is not. The menace of hunger has been a repeated scene
throughout my career, and I know many of you have seen it as well. Thirty years
later, I have never stopped thinking about what happened that day. How that nameless
child’s suffering was, and still is, entirely preventable.
After all, in 2021 there is no reason that we cannot get resources to people in
acute need. In today’s world famine is man-made. And I use that gender deliberately.
And if it is caused by us, that means it must be stopped by us too.
In 2018, the Security Council took a powerful step towards addressing this
inhumanity. We acted together. We spoke with one voice in resolution 2417 (2018),
which stated that we would investigate bad actors who violate international law and
use starvation as a weapon of war and hold them accountable.
Last September, the Council was briefed on the status of conflict-driven
hunger (see S/2020/930). The briefing painted a damning, if incomplete, portrait
of the state of conflict-driven hunger around the world. In the six months since that
briefing, the outlook for hunger and famine looks even worse, as you have heard
from all of our speakers today. Why? Today’s conflicts are lasting longer. They are
growing more complex. And of course, the coronavirus disease and climate change
have made a bleak situation even more dire. Here is what that means for vulnerable
people around the globe.
In Yemen, over 70 per cent of the country needs food assistance. And over 2
million children under the age of 5 are at risk of starvation and acute malnutrition.
And on my first day here at the United Nations, I spoke to humanitarian organizations
on the ground in Yemen. And they shared how the country had been brought to its
knees by six years of fighting, how they are desperate for consistent funding and
16/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

support and how their rival efforts have been seriously hindered by the need to cross
multiple lines of conflict.
We are also alarmed by the situation in Ethiopia right now, as you heard from
Mr. Beasley. Fighting in the Tigray region over the past four months has driven
innocent citizens to the brink. Food stocks are depleted. Acute malnutrition is rising.
The ongoing violence has prevented humanitarians from helping a desperately hungry
people. Actors in Ethiopia, including Eritrean forces from across Ethiopia’s borders,
have restricted humanitarian access to the rural areas where the most Tigrayans live.
We cannot allow this situation to deteriorate farther.
We call on all sides — and I stress, all sides — to stop the fighting and allow
this man-made humanitarian situation to be addressed. Also, we need better, earlier,
more consistent reporting on these crises. We need to ensure the Secretary-General
has the mandate and the tools to bring these emerging conflicts and potential
starvation into the spotlight. I commend the Secretary-General’s announcement of
the establishment of a High-level Task Force on Preventing Famine.
And I would note that it is not just Yemen and Ethiopia, as the SecretaryGeneral and others noted.
In Afghanistan, nearly half of the country’s children under 5 are facing
acute starvation.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, violence has led to displacement,
which has led to 5 million acutely malnourished children. And I want to take
this moment to express my condolences over the loss of life, including the Italian
Ambassador and the staff of the World Food Programme.
And in the Central African Republic, nearly 2 million people face high levels
of acute insecurity. May through August is the lean season, when food supplies run
out and, in fact, people refer to it as the “hungry season”. If we want to help, now is
the time.
And finally, in South Sudan, violence has driven people off of their land,
separating innocent civilians from their families. In their search for safety, innocent
civilians are hiding in swamps, where they barely survive off wild foods and
contaminated river water.
And part of what is so devastating about the crisis in South Sudan is the lack
of data and reporting, which leads us to believe the situation is even worse than what
we already know. There is only one reason we are being prevented from seeing the
entire data set: South Sudan’s Government does not want us to know.
That brings me to my last point.
What is different today from when I visited the refugee camp in Uganda
30 years ago? Today we should have better information on where acute hunger
is happening and where it will get worse. And we have seen major advances in
therapeutic feeding for children suffering from acute malnutrition. We can save
lives, if we know where to go and if we put the funding towards it. And if we do not
have the data, we cannot deliver that life-saving assistance. That is a problem that
the Security Council can solve today if it chooses to. This body has the unique ability
to demand and secure timely reporting, data and action.
So, to that end, we ask Secretary-General Guterres and his team for two
formal reports to the Security Council each year, in addition to the current mandate
to urgently notify the Council when there is a risk. We have to — we must —
depoliticize reporting and ensure that we have a regular mechanism for addressing
these situations in the Security Council so that no more innocent civilians starve
to death.
21-0363017/147

S/2021/250

We also ask the Secretary-General to look specifically at how to enhance data
collection and analysis methods. The United States is happy to be a partner in that
effort, and we insist that the United Nations, as a matter of practice, work to analyse
and identify who is responsible for hunger. After all, acute hunger is the callous
weapon of warmongers. It is caused by people with names and faces, and the people
who suffer at their hands deserve justice. It is my sincere hope that we can, as the
Security Council, speak with one voice on this unifying issue.
There is nothing we will do here that will bring justice to the little girl I met
all those years ago, or to her mother, or to the millions of others like them who
have suffered needlessly and continue to suffer needlessly today. But it is within our
power. It is within our power to honour their legacy. We can build a world where no
one experiences extreme hunger. And we can start building that world today.

18/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 8
Statement by the Minister of International Development of Norway,
Dag Inge Ulsten
As we meet, 700 million people in this world do not know where their next
meal will come from, and 270 million of them are facing acute food insecurity. If
you tried to imagine a room full of these people, what would they look like? Most
would be women and young children. If hunger had a face today, it would surely be
female. Tomorrow it would probably be her child. But what would we say to them?
I am afraid we would need to say that we heard the warning but failed to agree on
how to act.
Investing in ending hunger today is also investing in preventing hunger
tomorrow. People go hungry because they live in areas affected by endemic poverty,
climate change, the coronavirus disease and, most of all, conflict. Food security is
security. In resolution 2417 (2018), the world came together and recognized the link
between armed conflict and hunger. It is time we shift the Security Council’s focus
from recognition to action.
Let me therefore express my gratitude to the United States for organizing
this debate. Let me also thank the Secretary-General, David Beasley and Gabriella
Bucher for setting the stage.
Nearly all the countries experiencing acute food insecurity are affected by
conflict and armed violence. These countries will never eliminate hunger unless
peaceful solutions are found. I am particularly concerned about two situations.
In Yemen the situation is desperate. If we do not act, this may become the
worst famine the world has seen in decades. After six years of armed conflict, the
civilian population has little resilience left. More than 16 million people are food
insecure. Nearly 2.3 million children under the age of 5 are at risk of malnutrition.
This situation is first and foremost man-made. Only an inclusive, politically
negotiated solution can bring this crisis to an end.
The crisis in Ethiopia’s Tigray continues to deteriorate. There is widespread
food insecurity and reports of starvation. Systematic looting and destruction of food,
crops and agricultural equipment is cause for great concern. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock warned last week, if food does not get through and there is no
agricultural revival, there is a possible risk of famine.
The Security Council must speak out with one voice against violations of
international humanitarian law, including the obstruction of humanitarian assistance
or access and the use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare. Accountability
must be ensured. Our response to such violations could include imposing targeted
sanctions, where relevant and appropriate.
We urge States parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
to ratify or accept without delay the recent amendment concerning the war crime of
starvation in non-international armed conflicts.
Those with influence over parties to armed conflict must demand that the
parties abide by international humanitarian law. Most hunger stems from politics.
We need political will and political solutions.
The Council and its members must follow up more firmly and consistently
when the Secretary-General activates the early-warning mechanism in situations of
risk of famine and widespread food insecurity. We welcome further discussions on
how to achieve this.
21-0363019/147

S/2021/250

The word famine should be enough to trigger alarm bells. Yet millions of
people live under famine-like conditions or in areas where the lack of food over time
is bringing devastation and death.
But the declaration of famine does not tell the whole story. As we all know,
famine has never officially been declared in countries like Yemen, yet hunger is
causing enormous humanitarian suffering. Protecting civilians must be at the core
of all our interventions, with priority given to the most vulnerable. The lack of
protection fuels conflict, displacement and mistrust.
The Security Council has a Charter-based mandate to prevent conflict by
peaceful means. We must pursue all possible avenues, both in preventing conflicts
and bringing them to an end. The importance of the entire United Nations system,
including the World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, cannot be overstated in this context.
We must build resilience in local communities so that they can better withstand
crises. We must take a more strategic approach as donors and test smarter means of
funding, making wider use of multi-year and multi-sector funding. We must act
immediately when we hear early warnings, while at the same time continuing to
work to remove the reasons for early warnings. There are 700 million people who
depend on us turning our words into action. The children in Yemen are crying out —
crying for peace and food security. If we do not act now, it will be too late.

20/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 9
Statement by the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries,
Rural Transformation, Industry and Labour of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saboto Caesar
Let me begin by conveying, on behalf of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, our
appreciation to the United States of America for convening this timely discussion.
We also thank our briefers for their insightful, but very sobering, remarks.
The fight against hunger remains one of the international community’s
most noble yet difficult endeavours. Decades of progress in the quest for global
food security are being erased in the face of the worst global pandemic in over a
century. We have to grapple with rampant climate change and ecological destruction,
protracted conflicts and other acute challenges, such as the desert locust infestation.
We can and we must do better to ensure that everyone everywhere has access to
sufficient, safe and nutritious food.
For vulnerable and conflict-affected communities, including refugees,
internally displaced persons and those made stateless as a result of political,
socioeconomic and environmental forces beyond their control, addressing hunger is
more than a moral imperative; it is an existential concern.
This challenge brings into sharper focus the need for a comprehensive and
coordinated whole-of-system approach to address the root and proximate causes
of fragility and insecurity. The Security Council, as the primary body tasked with
maintaining international peace and security, must spare no effort in its attempts
to protect the most vulnerable, including by facilitating full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need.
The Security Council must also work more closely with the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council to foster developmental solutions that meet
the basic needs of people in conflict settings. The Peacebuilding Commission,
with its strategic advisory capacities and its convening platform, is also useful in
consolidating our efforts across the peace and security-humanitarian-development
nexus. We must leverage these capacities more often.
For our part, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has accelerated its efforts to
provide food security throughout its nation and across its region. Even though we
have been tried and tested by this pandemic, we have ensured that life, living and
production continue and that we can feed ourselves and our neighbours. We are the
breadbasket of the southern Caribbean. Our farmers and fisherfolk remain crucial
stakeholders in these efforts, and we will do what we must to support them as they
continue to support us. In this regard, we reiterate our calls for urgent, concerted
and decisive action to tackle climate change, which is inextricably linked to food
insecurity. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations must
continue to play a critical role.
While we agree that conflict is a primary driver of hunger in some contexts,
extreme weather events, including floods and droughts, also undermine agricultural
productivity and create food insecurity. The continued suffering of our brothers and
sisters in Haiti, one of the most food insecure countries in the world, is a painful
reminder of the interlinkages between natural disasters, political and economic
stability and acute hunger. Greater efforts are therefore needed on all fronts to address
the interconnecting challenges of conflict, climate change and food insecurity.
We are of the view that all parties to conflict, and those with influence over
them, should heed our collective call for a global ceasefire; global action must
21-0363021/147

S/2021/250

be accelerated to keep temperature rise below 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels;
emissions must be reduced and financial commitments towards adaptation measures
upheld; and major donors, including the international financial institutions, should
scale up the assistance offered to developing and conflict-affected countries,
including by expanding debt relief and concessional funding.
In conclusion, we underscore the need for inclusive multilateral solutions
to advance the sustainable development agenda. If we are to make good on our
collective promise to end hunger by 2030, we must work together. We have a shared
global responsibility. Let us hold offenders accountable. I have hope for success.

22/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 10
Statement by the Minister of State for the Commonwealth and
the United Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon
I thank you, Madam President, and thank you also to the Secretary-General.
And may I put on record our thanks to both Mr. Beasley and Ms. Bucher for briefing
us so comprehensively.
As we already heard from many colleagues on the Security Council today, it
is undoubtedly a tragedy of epic proportions, but here we are in 2021, here we are
in the twenty-first century: we still need to confront famine, and our task — and let
us be clear about that — is made so much harder by those who pursue division and
conflict. And we must work together to address this immediate priority. And that is
why the United Kingdom wholeheartedly welcomes the United States initiative to
bring the vital issue of conflict and food security to the Council today.
The situation is grave. There are no other words for it. Listening to our briefers’
words, I note they spoke of the raw humanity of the situation — the human suffering
unfolding in front of us. I assure them that that resonates with us all.
Right now, famine is likely occurring in many parts of the world, but it is
self-evident to us all in places such as South Sudan. In Yemen, more than 16 million
people face a very bleak future in terms of starvation, likely death in the first half of
this year and, as Secretary-General Guterres has warned us, on the brink of likely
the worst famine the world has seen in decades.
In many of the countries on the Security Council’s agenda, we know that
conflict, as has been said today, is a primary driver of food insecurity and famine
risk. We know that people affected by conflict are less able to source food and less
able to buy it.
We also know, tragically, that armed groups use starvation bluntly as a
weapon of war and see humanitarian assistance as fuel for their enemy. They
wilfully disregard their obligations under international humanitarian law. They
regard humankind as insignificant.
We know that the coronavirus disease and climate change compound this
desperate situation. So the Security Council must redouble our efforts to break the
cycle of armed conflict, which drives and sustains humanitarian crises around the
world. And together, as the United Nations, we must do all we can to use the full
range of tools at our disposal to prevent and end conflicts.
Resolution 2417 (2018) focuses the Council’s attention on conflict-induced
food insecurity in countries both on and off our regular agenda. As we heard from
colleagues today, many of us, including, from the United Kingdom, myself and, most
recently, our Special Envoy on Famine Prevention and Humanitarian Affairs, have
visited these countries directly. We have spoken to people about the brutal realities
they face on a daily basis.
Naming a few conflict situations or country situations, such as that in
South Sudan, where famine is likely to take root in western Pibor, 60 per cent of
the country’s population faces severe levels of food insecurity. Fundamentally, the
Government of South Sudan must do more to foster peace and stability and to deescalate subnational conflict. And across the United Nations system, we need to
work harder and coordinate better if we are truly to remove the barriers that stop us
getting food to those who need it.
21-0363023/147

S/2021/250

In north-east Nigeria, over a decade of conflict has left more than 1.2 million
people unable to access basic humanitarian assistance. The horrifying recent
attack by armed opposition groups in Dikwa, which affected civilians and targeted
humanitarian workers, was utterly and totally unacceptable. Attacks like that have
made the food situation and humanitarian situations so much worse, and therefore
we need to work together to improve humanitarian access on an urgent basis.
As Mr. Beasley highlighted — indeed, Madam President, you yourself
mentioned — across Ethiopia, around 18 million people will require humanitarian
assistance this year alone. In Tigray, humanitarian access remains hugely constrained.
Four months of violence has resulted in forced displacement, human rights violations,
sexual violence allegations and the collapse of essential basic services. The risks of
extreme food insecurity are significant. An estimated 4.5 million people, 80 per cent
of the region’s population, will need emergency aid over the coming months. Urgent
action is needed to avert a major catastrophe. And these are just a few of the many
tragic situations currently faced around the world.
Resolution 2417 (2018) needs to be implemented more effectively. Famine is
not, as we heard today, inevitable. In line with resolution 2417 (2018), the United
Kingdom stresses three immediate actions that we can take to prevent famine and
the suffering caused by food insecurity.
First, we need to improve reporting and evidence of food insecurity and
famine risk, including on who is blocking humanitarian access and, importantly,
how they are blocking it. Reporting needs to be swift and timely so that the Security
Council can take action before it is far too late.
Secondly, the Security Council must act on the reporting it receives. Words
are simply not enough. Despite the provisions in resolution 2417 (2018), the Council
has failed to encourage any independent State investigation into the use of starvation
of civilians as an act of warfare.
And finally, and importantly, we also join the voices of those who say that the
Council must hold to account those responsible for driving conflict-induced food
insecurity — and that includes by the use of sanctions against those who restrict
humanitarian access.
In conclusion, conflict is escalating famine and millions upon millions are
suffering. If we are truly to prevent the starvation of more innocent women, men
and, of course, tragically, children, it is vital that the United Nations reporting on this
situation leads to Council action. We therefore welcome the announcement today of
the High-level Task Force on Preventing Famine to more strongly coordinate the aid
effort on famine protection. And we therefore look forward to working together with
all of Member States — our colleagues, our friends, our fellow Council members
and others across the United Nations family of nations — to bring about the actions
that can properly respond to the harrowing evidence we heard today from our expert
briefers.
The question often asked is, “why?” Put simply, the answer is: because it
matters. Lives literally depend on it.

24/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
At the outset, I thank the delegation of the United States of America for its
initiative to convene this high-level meeting on food security. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres, Executive Director Beasley and Ms. Bucher for their briefings.
The briefers showed us a disturbing picture of reality. Food insecurity, rather
than improving, has become a more serious problem. We still have a long way to
go to accomplish the goal of zero hunger set in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, food crisis in particular is acute
in armed conflict-affected countries and regions in the Middle East and Africa,
warranting high attention. We appreciate relevant countries’ efforts in responding to
the crisis. At the same time, with regard to the famine threat facing some Middle East
countries and African countries, the international community must take emergency
actions, scale up humanitarian efforts, ensure adequate resources and make sure
that humanitarian assistance can enter the affected countries unhindered. Tailored
actions need to be taken to alleviate the difficulties facing women and children.
China supports United Nations agencies, in accordance with United Nations
guiding principles for humanitarian assistance, in engaging and consulting with the
affected countries, strengthening early warning, coordinating among international
agencies for the use of humanitarian resources, and making greater effort to address
the threat of famine in the affected countries. China has provided, and will continue
to provide, emergency food aid, among other related assistance, to the relevant
countries through various channels to help them and contribute to alleviating the
suffering of the affected people.
Food insecurity is nothing new. Armed conflicts, terrorist activities, natural
disasters, extreme weather, global trade and supply chains and commodity prices:
all these factors could be major triggers of food crisis. Meanwhile, fundamentally
speaking, food insecurity is a result of global development deficits and a reflection of
inadequate and uneven development. Some countries and regions, facing a constant
and recurrent risk of famine, are trapped in a vicious cycle of non-development and
armed conflict. Therefore, while focusing our attention on some pressing issues, we
need to approach food security from a broader perspective. We must address both
its symptoms and root causes and take integrated measures within the framework of
international peace and development.
First, we must push for political solutions to hot-spot issues to create a
conducive security environment for alleviating food crisis in relevant countries
and regions. Food security needs to be ensured throughout the cycle of production,
storage, transportation, marketing and distribution. Disruption in any of these stages,
by armed conflict violence and terrorism, can lead to a food-security crisis. As long
as conflicts and wars remain unresolved, people in conflict zones will continue
to face food shortages. The international community should intensify efforts
to facilitate the political settlement of hot-spot issues and create an environment
of peace and security. It is necessary to urge all parties to conflict to respond to
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and implement resolution 2532
(2020). All the parties concerned should adhere to the principles of international
law, such as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other countries,
non-interference in internal affairs and non-use of force, and commit themselves to
the peaceful settlement of disputes.
21-0363025/147

S/2021/250

Secondly, sustainable development should be held as the master key to help
affected countries stand on their own in solving their food-security problems.
Emergency humanitarian aid can provide immediate relief but is not a fundamental
solution. In the final analysis, to achieve food security, it is crucial to address the
affected countries’ development problems related to agriculture, rural areas and
farmers, in accordance with local conditions, eliminate poverty and revitalize rural
areas. Humanitarian aid is very important, but not a substitute for development
assistance. Developed countries should honour their commitments on development
assistance in a timely manner, help developing countries build up their rural
infrastructure, promote green and high-tech agriculture and build their capacity to
meet the challenges posed by climate change and continuously enhance the resilience
and tenacity of their food systems. Farmers are the main actors in food production.
All countries should heed their concerns, address their difficulties and help them
become a backbone of economic development and social stability.
Over the years, China has consistently promoted South-South cooperation,
bilaterally and multilaterally. By the end of 2019, with assistance from China,
24 agriculture demonstration centres had been established in Africa to pass onto
African farmers and agricultural technicians agro-management expertise to improve
their comprehensive agricultural production capacity, benefiting half a million local
people. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)-China
South-South cooperation programme has achieved substantive results in several
countries, directly benefiting over 70,000 farmers in 10 years. China will continue to
share its experience and practice, and to work with other parties to help developing
countries eradicate poverty and solve food-security problems.
Thirdly, international macroeconomic policy coordination should be
strengthened and strong synergies formed to ensure food security. The international
community must strengthen coordination at the policy and operational levels to
focus on and address the deep-rooted problems that have triggered food-security
crises. First, speculation on international capital on agricultural commodities,
especially food, has triggered panic in the global market, driving up food prices
across the board. Secondly, the agricultural-subsidy policy of developed countries
has seriously distorted the international market, which has in turn impacted on
the markets of developing countries and dampened the enthusiasm of farmers in
developing countries to produce food. Thirdly, unilateral coercive measures and
economic blockade have curbed agricultural development and trade cooperation.
Only by solving these problems can the global food industry and supply chain be
kept open and stable, and food shortages, price distortion and abnormal fluctuation
caused by human factors be prevented.
The United Nations needs to play a better role in coordinating and promoting
multilateral cooperation. The Group of 20 should accord higher priority to the
promotion of agricultural development. The FAO, the World Food Programme and
other United Nations agencies should continue to play a major role in strengthening
coordination, with Resident Coordinators, among others, effectively allocating
resources and helping the countries concerned strengthen capacity-building in the
food industry.
Eradicating poverty and hunger bears on the basic rights of the people. We have
made significant progress, but we still have a long way to go. Under the impact of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), global food security is facing new challenges.
According to a United Nations report, COVID-19 may cause an increase of 83
million to 132 million in the number of under-fed people in the world. In November
2020, President Xi Jinping made it clear, when attending the fifteenth Group of 20
Summit, that China supports the United Nations in holding the World Food Summit
and proposes to convene an international conference on food loss and waste in due
26/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

course. China has achieved the goal of lifting all its rural poor out of poverty under
current standards. China looks forward to joining hands with the international
community in solidarity and cooperation, forging a strong synergy of global food
security and making new contribution to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and to the achievement of common development.

21-0363027/147

S/2021/250

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the Director of Oxfam International
and the Executive Director of the World Food Programme for their briefings.
The figures that have just been shared speak for themselves: the risk of famine
and acute food crises is worsening day after day.
Conflicts, climate change, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
the resulting economic recession are contributing to the daily rise in the number of
people facing a severe food crisis. I am thinking here in particular of Yemen, South
Sudan and Nigeria, as well as of the Sahel region, especially Burkina Faso, where
the situation remains particularly worrying. I am also thinking of the Tigray region,
in Ethiopia, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Council has a collective responsibility and a moral obligation to prevent
such a tragedy.
Only collective, coordinated and integrated action will make it possible to avert
humanitarian disasters. States, United Nations agencies, regional and subregional
organizations, non-governmental organizations, as well as the private sector and
international financial institutions, must be mobilized to reduce the risk of famine
and, more broadly, of food crises.
We must strengthen prevention and early-warning mechanisms in order
to better anticipate, prevent and mitigate the effects of such crises. It is vital to
strengthen national and local production systems and to promote social safety nets
that will help the most vulnerable people to meet their food needs. To do so, it is
essential to strengthen cooperation between humanitarian and development actors.
France will continue to work towards that end through its bilateral and
multilateral support. Our funding of food aid has increased by 51 per cent in two
years, to total more than €50 million in 2020. That figure will continue to grow
this year to more than €72 million, an increase of 43 per cent compared with last
year. The French Development Agency earmarked €1 billion in 2020 in the areas of
agriculture, rural development and biodiversity.
We can never say it often enough: because conflicts are the main drivers of
the risk of famine and food crises, it is vital to accelerate the implementation of
resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021), on COVID-19, through a ceasefire and a
humanitarian pause.
Preventing famine and food crises requires that all parties to the conflicts abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian law. It is unacceptable that it
is being flouted every day. The protection of civilians and civilian infrastructures is
critical. The use of starvation against civilians as a method of warfare is a war crime
and should not go unpunished.
France condemns the rise in attacks against humanitarian and medical
personnel and the many obstacles that prevent access to people in need. I am thinking
in particular of Yemen and the Tigray region, where we are calling for concrete
progress on humanitarian access.
While conflict remains the main driver of food crises, we must step up our
efforts to find sustainable political solutions to conflicts. You can count on France’s
continued and unwavering support.
28/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T. S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by congratulating the United States delegation for having
organized this important open debate on conf lict-induced food insecurity. I thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and the Executive Director of the World
Food Programme (WFP), David Beasley, for their briefings. I thank the Executive
Director of Oxfam International, Ms. Gabriela Bucher, for bringing the civilsociety perspective.
I wish to start by paying tribute to all humanitarian, health and aid workers
for their assistance to people in need, especially in these challenging times of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Mahatma Gandhi once said,
“There are people in the world so hungry that God cannot appear to them
except in the form of bread”.
Food security is the basic minimum required, especially when we are facing
such a devastating world crisis as the COVID-19 pandemic.
The World Food Programme estimates that the number of people suffering
from food insecurity is projected to more than double by the end of 2020, to 270
million people, with the COVID-19 pandemic making it worse. The 2020 Global
Report on Food Crises, brought out by the World Food Programme and 15 other
humanitarian and development agencies, mentions that more than 77 million people
are suffering from acute food insecurity in conflict-affected countries.
While resolution 2417 (2018) recognizes the link between armed conflict and
conflict-induced food insecurity and the threat of famine, it is important to note that
food insecurity is by itself not a sufficient condition for political violence and conflict.
The link between the two is context- and region-specific and varies according to a
country’s level of development and the strength of its political institutions and social
safety nets.
Fragile States generally have weak capacities to design, implement and monitor
policies and programmes related to food, thereby increasing their vulnerability while
facing a conflict situation. The solution to a lack of food security in conflict-affected
States therefore lies elsewhere, as such conflict-induced food-security issues should
be taken up by the Council only in the context of specific countries where it may
pose a threat to international peace and security.
We are of the view that armed conf lict and terrorism, combined with
extreme weather, crop pests, food-price volatility, exclusion and economic shocks
can devastate any fragile State, leading to food insecurity, and increase the threat
of famine. Armed groups have time and again resorted to scorched-earth tactics
and deliberately targeted civilian infrastructures such as land, farm animals and
water wells, which erode economic growth and development. The inability to fight
locusts, for example, can affect an entire region and even beyond, and directly affect
food security.
COVID-19 has served only to make food insecurity more complex by, inter
alia, forcing countries to impose restrictions on the movement of people, thereby
depriving farms of workers to bring in the harvest, resulting in a loss of farm-based
employment, limiting access to food in rural areas and eroding the ability of the
State to cope with the socioeconomic pressure of the pandemic. For the displaced,
particularly women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, the lack of
21-0363029/147

S/2021/250

access to dietary energy, clean water and sanitation has had adverse nutrition and
health implications.
At the recent inter-agency dialogue on the impact of conflict-climate changeCOVID-19 nexus on Africa’s food systems, organized by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the African Union, the experts agreed that
building resilience to conflict-induced food insecurity calls for reshaping food
systems to be more inclusive of poor and marginalized populations. We are of the
view that inclusive food systems that empower marginalized people by giving them
a voice in local food policies will usher in a food-secured future. This would enable
young people and women to find remunerative jobs and small farm holders to have
access to agricultural markets, as well as make possible the adoption of climatesmart policies that promote seed diversity, innovation and the spirit of self-reliance.
Civilians in conflict-affected areas need safe, unhindered and rapid access to
basic services, and humanitarian workers need safe ways to ensure that their teams
and emergency supplies can reach communities in need. For example, in north-east
Nigeria, thousands of people are trapped without life-saving humanitarian assistance.
In Yemen, restrictions on land, sea and air trade routes have led to severe cuts in
vital supplies of commodities such as food, fuel and medicines. In Mali, counterterrorism measures limit civilian access to humanitarian aid. The 10-year-long
conflict in Syria has adversely affected food security, putting millions of Syrians at
risk. Unilateral measures can only make those situations worse.
The United Nations and its Member States must make ensuring access a priority
by engaging with national and regional authorities. While all humanitarian action
must be primarily guided by the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, we are, unfortunately, witnessing an increasing tendency to politicize
humanitarian situations. We need to resist the trend of linking humanitarian and
developmental assistance with progress in the political process. Such a position by
donors will only enhance food insecurity in conflict situations. There is an urgent
need for the donor community to scale up assistance to conflict-affected countries
and to ensure that humanitarian agencies receive the necessary funding to fully
execute their plans without any politicization of the basic needs of the people.
The global community has a moral obligation to act in situations where there
are credible reasons to believe that millions of people are in desperate need of
assistance. Food assistance alone surely cannot be a long-term sustainable solution
to food insecurity. Promoting peace and stability and development is paramount
and must include livelihood support, social protection programmes and communitybased approaches including investment in agriculture, infrastructure and capacitybuilding in rural development, especially in conflict areas. That calls for a multistakeholder approach that is coherent and devoid of politics. India stands ready to
extend support to all such efforts.
At the onset of the COVID pandemic, India enacted a series of measures
nationally to augment its food security and to ensure that it emerged from the crisis
much more resilient. Those include developing the Indian digital ecosystem for
agriculture as a modular, interoperable digital platform that aims to improve the
welfare and income of farmers, increase productivity and efficiency in agriculture
and allied sectors, and unlock new opportunities for innovation. With a view to
encouraging the use of modern technologies in agriculture, the guidelines of the
national e-governance plan in agriculture were revised in June 2020 by providing
support for the projects involving the use of modern information technologies. The
creation of a national database of farmers, which already covers more than 50 million
farmers, is also being taken up as a priority.
30/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

India remains strongly committed to the cause of global food security and
has over the last several years contributed to the United Nations Central Emergency
Response Fund and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
response to several humanitarian crises. Furthermore, India has always stepped
forward to extend aid amounting to millions of tonnes of food grains to several
vulnerable countries across the world. In 2019 alone, the WFP sourced approximately
11,000 metric tons of pulses, sorghum, wheat and rice from India to assist vulnerable
populations.
More recently, in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, India has provided
food aid in the form of thousands of metric tonnes of wheat, rice, pulses and lentils
to several countries across the world, including Myanmar, Maldives, Afghanistan,
Djibouti, Eritrea, Lebanon, Malawi, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, South Sudan, Zambia,
Zimbabwe and many others, to strengthen their food security in these challenging
times. As recently as last month, India gifted 2000 metric tonnes of rice to strengthen
food security in Syria. Even as I speak, a ship is en route from India to deliver 1,000
metric tonnes of food aid each to Madagascar and the Comoros.
We remain committed to providing assistance to all vulnerable countries
to support them in their quest for food security. Our spearheading the resolution
on declaring 2023 as the International Year of Millets is in that direction. We are
equally committed to providing vaccines to the world so that we can tackle COVID
and food insecurity at the same time.
I would like to conclude by quoting from the Indian scriptures: “Annam
Brahma” — that is, food is God. Let us resolve to collectively work together in
ensuring that no one ever has to be without food.

21-0363031/147

S/2021/250

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico welcomes the convening by the United States of this debate on the
impact of armed conflict with respect to famine and food security, which represents
an opportunity to make progress on a critical issue and which urgently requires, as
has been said here, a unified, collective decision on our part. The statements we have
heard from high-level officials have broadened our perspective, and the reports from
the Executive Directors of Oxfam and the World Food Programme (WFP) leave no
doubt that this is a very serious and urgent crisis. It is to be hoped that the Council
will act accordingly.
Armed conflict is the primary cause of famine and increased food insecurity.
We have already heard the numbers from the World Food Programme; I will not
elaborate on them for the sake of time.
We must therefore begin by acknowledging out loud the fact that food
insecurity, like famine, is exponentially increased in situations of armed conflict.
Problems with respect to the production, processing and distribution of food, as well
as unequal access thereto, give rise to economic grievances and social inequality and
spark violence in fragile and even not-so-fragile contexts.
Resolution 2417 (2018) represented an important step in recognizing the links
between conflict and food insecurity, but, as we have seen, recognizing them is not
enough to resolve them.
Food security is vital to conflict prevention. A reduction in hunger and
malnutrition are necessary for social cohesion, for stability and peace; all of this
also constitutes a crucial aspect of the post-conflict phase. They are essential to a
fair and just reconstruction.
Food insecurity, which is being aggravated today by the pandemic, also
disproportionately affects women and girls. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, in low-income countries women make up 48 per
cent of the workforce in agriculture but have less access than men to virtually any
kind of support. That is another compelling reason for the empowerment of women
and girls if we really want to eradicate hunger.
On a different scale, it remains worrisome that given the natural disasters
resulting from the climate crisis, which is also of concern to us, the fact that food
chains are affected, even temporarily, can lead to serious situations of food insecurity
in all regions of the world, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
In short, we are faced with a situation that requires our immediate attention.
Famine and food insecurity are central issues on the international peace and
security agenda.
Mexico emphasizes that in accordance with the Rome Statute, deprivation of
access to food constitutes a crime against humanity, which is why we categorically
condemn its use as a method of warfare. It is simply inadmissible.
The Security Council must play a decisive role in ensuring that the parties
involved in armed conflict respect international humanitarian law and ensure the
unrestricted access of the civilian population to humanitarian assistance. In that
regard, we condemn once again, and in the strongest terms, the attack on the WFP
convoy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which the Italian Ambassador, a
police officer and a WFP official were killed. Our condolences go out to his relatives.
32/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

In accordance with resolution 2417 (2018), the Council can and should continue
to work to ensure that its decisions are based on the most current information on the
ground. We need reliable and timely data, as others have said here today. That is why
we believe that the early-warning systems of the Council, and of the United Nations
as a whole, must also be strengthened. Effectively preventing hunger is the ethical
imperative that binds us all. We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative on the
establishment of a task force to prevent hunger and to convene an inclusive summit
on food systems. We need pragmatic and proactive initiatives.
Mexico recognizes your leadership, Madam President, and echoes those who
call on the Security Council to bolster its actions aimed at comprehensively addressing
the multiple drivers of conflict, including, in alarming terms, food insecurity.

21-0363033/147

S/2021/250

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for using your presidency to
shed light on a particularly important theme — exploring the link between hunger
and armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. David
Beasley, as well as Ms. Gabriela Bucher, for their updates on the food situation in
conflict areas and for their firm commitment to help break the vicious circle of
conflict and its corollary, food insecurity.
During my country’s presidency of the Security Council in September,
following a note published by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on this issue, my country, together with other members of the Security
Council, organized a meeting on the same theme — the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/2020/930). Six months later, it is now clear that the conclusions
drawn then are still relevant today. Already in April 2020, Mr. Beasley aptly stated
(see S/2020/340) that we were heading towards a hunger pandemic, in addition to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As Security Council focal point, together with Ireland, on hunger and armed
conflict, the Niger will continue to work with all interested States. In that regard,
the Niger welcomes the fact that, as early as next month, the Council will receive
a briefing on the joint World Food Programme/Food and Agriculture Organization
biannual report on the monitoring of hunger in countries experiencing armed
conflict.
Indeed, we now know that conflict zones, notably because of the resulting
displacement of people, cause populations in distress to leave their means of
production, which exposes them and those who take them in to hunger. My country,
the Niger, located in the Sahel region, knows full well the link between conflict
and food insecurity, as this region, already exposed to the scourge of terrorism, is
among the first to suffer the harmful effects of climate change. Thus, the overlap
between the map of conflict zones and that of food insecurity is by no means a
simple coincidence.
In the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, where a large part of the population lives
on agriculture and where climate change is already exacerbating tensions, an acute
food crisis has been amplified by armed terrorist attacks on civilian populations.
Recent forecasts by specialized agencies show that 3.5 million people in the Lake
Chad basin will face acute to severe food insecurity, and an additional 3.3 million
people in central Sahel already need immediate assistance.
In addition to those constraints, the COVID-19 pandemic has further
exacerbated problems in areas already facing major humanitarian crises. Labour
shortages are compromising crop production and processing. Disruptions due to
transport blockages and quarantine measures are preventing farmers from accessing
markets, and containment measures are hampering the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced people.
Attacks on humanitarian convoys and obstructions of same are unacceptable.
We call on all parties in conflict areas to allow rapid and unhindered access to
populations in territories under their control and to refrain from rendering unusable,
attacking, destroying or removing food aid and infrastructure essential to the
survival of the civilian population. Equally intolerable is discriminatory access to
aid or the use of starvation as a weapon of war.
34/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

That is why my delegation would like to join the other members of the Council
in strongly condemning such practices, which constitute a f lagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, and their perpetrators must face the full force of
the law.
Aware of the link between conflict and famine, in May 2018 the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018), which we hope will continue to
guide our actions in order to expeditiously break the cycle of conflict-related hunger,
whose victims are vulnerable populations, including women and children. In that
regard, my delegation would like to make the following recommendations.
In the context of the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), there is urgent
need to establish an independent, data-driven early-warning mechanism that could
enable an early response so as to prevent the situation from worsening. In that regard,
my delegation would welcome regular reports by the Secretary-General on risk areas,
based on information provided by United Nations entities and Member States.
Peacebuilding efforts must go hand in hand with investment in sustainable
development. Indeed, in many conflict-affected countries the majority of the
population depends on agriculture for their livelihoods. It is therefore imperative that
Governments be supported in laying the foundation for an agricultural policy that
is resilient to the impacts of climate change, including droughts, extreme weather
events, fires, locust infestations and floods.
Finally, breaking the vicious cycle between food insecurity and conflict will
also require concrete actions to stop the proliferation of weapons, which in turn
inflicts untold suffering on populations, including famine. The Sahel, my region, is
one of the most telling examples.

21-0363035/147

S/2021/250

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank our briefers — the Secretary-General, Mr. David Beasley and Ms.
Gabriela Bucher — for sharing an analysis of the food security situation.
We believe that the choice of such a pressing issue as this topic for the flagship
event of her first Security Council presidency highlights the President’s support
for more robust joint action to address food insecurity. Strengthening cooperation
among the States Members of the United Nations on this issue is a priority for us.
The international community needs to make coordinated efforts to respond to the
growing socioeconomic challenges related to poverty, famine, climate change and
migration. Without collective efforts and mutual confidence, we cannot ensure the
effective implementation of the ambitious Sustainable Development Goals.
At the same time, we believe that, to achieve tangible results, the Security
Council must not start interfering in the fine-tuned and effective work of the General
Assembly on this issue, or in efforts to address food security and combat hunger
undertaken by specialized United Nations agencies mandated to do so — notably the
World Food Programme (WFP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO).
The WFP’s contribution to resolving the acute problem of food shortages
in countries with a complicated military and political situation can hardly be
overstated. We regret that today’s list of briefers did not include a representative
from FAO, since it is a leading United Nations agency operating in the area of food
and agriculture and an knowledgeable organization with a unique methodological
capacity that enables it to provide a comprehensive assessment of food security. The
WFP and FAO work on risk assessment and stand at the helm of the United Nations
humanitarian cluster in the area of food security.
As I mentioned, real, thorough and productive work to improve international
coordination in this arena is under way through the specialized platforms of the
WFP and FAO in Rome, and in other bodies of the economic cluster. We are not
entirely sure that the Security Council’s involvement in this discussion would have
any added value. We therefore stand against the idea of appointing a focal point to
monitor the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), as such activity would only
add turmoil to the work of the Rome agencies.
Our position does not mean that we consider these topics and hunger
unimportant. We do not deny that, for some regions and countries, issues like climate
change, hunger and migration can exacerbate conflict, but such phenomena should
be analysed on a case-by-case basis. It would be unjustified to speak of it in globally
and in generic terms, and it may even be harmful to assert their interconnectedness.
Besides, not every conflict poses a threat to international peace and security —
the area under the Council’s purview — and not every hunger-engulfed country is
afflicted by conflict.
Similarly, we do not agree that we should focus on conflict rather than other
causes of hunger, such as the actions of some countries that escalate internal political
crises. By a strange coincidence, the tragedy of hunger afflicts areas with broken
State institutions. That is what exacerbates conflict and heightens the risk of national
food insecurity. Some vivid examples are the daily situations in Iraq, Libya, Syria,
Yemen and Somalia — especially Yemen, where it was not hunger that provoked an
36/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

armed conflict, but the other way around. We must learn from those situations if we
hope to reduce the number of tragic humanitarian catastrophes on this planet.
We are greatly concerned about attempts to anchor the issue of conflictinduced hunger on the Security Council’s agenda, as they seek to promote ideas
and ungrounded links between the topics. We cannot agree that there is a nexus
between food security and protection, which was proposed as a central track of
humanitarian worker activity. We believe that to condemn States for refusal or late
submission of data is to interfere in internal affairs. Cooperation should be voluntary
and unconditional. The problem of ensuring food security amid an armed conflict
is directly related to compliance with international humanitarian law and improving
the efficiency of the humanitarian response. As for ensuring the resilience of food
systems in the face of climate change, that issue falls under sustainable development
and is not directly related to the activities of the Security Council.
We therefore do not deem it necessary to task the Secretary-General with
making mandatory biannual reports to the Security Council about emerging crisis
situations with regard to conflict-induced hunger. The Secretary-General has had a
mandate to act since resolution 2417 (2018) was adopted. Nothing prevents him from
reporting to the Council on specific countries engulfed in hunger.
Coming back to the issue at hand, let me stress that new opportunities and local
production capabilities, as well as stable global commodity markets, more liberal
trade and mitigating the effects of natural disasters, would reanimate economies
devastated by conflicts. Moreover, one of the most important, and obvious, ways
of eliminating the root causes of conflict is to lift sanctions and unilateral coercive
measures. As such, we can only welcome the recent decision of the new United
States Administration to reconsider sanctions against Ansar Allah. But for that, the
hunger situation in Yemen would have reached a point of no return.
Russia agrees that we should promptly respond to the problem of hunger.
However, we should do so with the mechanisms specifically mandated to address
those issues, taking into account the complex nature of sustainable development
challenges facing affected States.

21-0363037/147

S/2021/250

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank the United States presidency for convening
this timely debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Ms. Bucher and Mr. Beasley for their insightful briefings.
Since the Security Council last met to discuss this topic, only six months ago
(see S/2020/930), food security in several conflict situations has gravely deteriorated.
Famine looms large in Yemen, South Sudan, north-east Nigeria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burkina Faso. The number of people suffering from acute
food insecurity in conflict situations increased by 20 per cent over the past two
years. The humanitarian situation has been further compounded by the economic
impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the adverse effects of
climate change and the proliferation of desert locusts.
The vicious cycle involving armed conflicts and conflict-induced hunger is
widely recognized. It is high time the Council renew efforts to break this vicious
cycle and deliver on its commitment to maintain and build peace. In that regard,
allow me to highlight the following.
First, respect for international humanitarian law is a must in all situations of
armed conflict. Starvation must never be used as a method of warfare. We call on
all parties to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations to respect and protect
civilians and civilian objects, including objects necessary for food production and
distribution. The civilian population must not be deprived of humanitarian assistance
or objects critical to their survival.
Women, children and the most vulnerable are disproportionately affected by
armed conflicts. Our response must take due consideration of their special needs.
We reiterate the call on all parties to armed conflicts to adhere to the Security
Council’s demand for an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to more effectively
respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We express our high regard for the tireless efforts of United Nations agencies,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme as well as donors in combating hunger in conflict situations. There is a
strong imperative to ensure unhindered access for impartial humanitarian workers
and guarantee their safety and security.
Secondly, international cooperation is crucial in enhancing Governments’
capacity to protect and meet the basic needs of their civilians and prevent famine,
while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of affected States. As was
emphasized by the briefers and other members of the Council, there is an urgent need
to further strengthen the global humanitarian response, in funding and in kind as well
as in logistical preparedness, so that humanitarian agencies can receive the necessary
support to continue their life-saving work. We must advance a comprehensive and
long-term strategy that aims at supporting local communities to build resilient food
systems, enhance adaptation and sustenance, and guarantee the availability and
accessibility of food and other essential services. Local humanitarian organizations
could be supported and engaged in order to alleviate the strain on the international
humanitarian system.
Thirdly, the most effective way to end hunger is to resolve and end conflicts
and build peace. The Security Council should continue with an integrated approach
in addressing such root causes of conflicts as poverty, injustice, militarism and
38/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

disregard for international law. A whole-of-system approach is crucial for the
United Nations to deliver its promise of sustainable peace and development. The
instrumental role of regional organizations cannot be overstated.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the priority Viet Nam gives to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We call on all countries and partners to show strong,
renewed solidarity and humanity, so as to ensure accessible, safe, nutritious foods
for all, especially the most vulnerable populations.

21-0363039/147

S/2021/250

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
I thank the President and her team at the Permanent Mission of the United
States for organizing today’s high-level open debate on conflict and food security.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, the Executive Director of the World Food Programme, Mr. David Beasley,
and the Executive Director of Oxfam International, Ms. Gabriela Bucher, for their
insightful and comprehensive briefings.
The intersections between conflict and food insecurity are significant,
interlinked and complex. Food insecurity is one of the most concerning consequences
of armed conflict. Across the globe, conflict is driving catastrophic levels of food
insecurity and malnutrition, which can cause serious long-term consequences for
those affected. Food insecurity may also perpetuate conflict as it causes vulnerable
populations to compete for access to limited resources.
As in other conflict-affected countries, the already-difficult situation in
Afghanistan was further exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease, which
was evidenced in the 2021 Global Humanitarian Overview, which reported a sharp
increase in the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance. Today, 18.4
million Afghan people are in need. Additionally, the Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification has reported that around 76 per cent of the population, or 30.5 million
people, are at stress, crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity.
Our Government has responded to the situation by working with the World
Bank and other international partners to provide vulnerable households with cash,
food and hygiene bundles. We also waived electric bills and made additional efforts
going so far as to spend close to 3 per cent of our gross domestic product solely on
responding to the new necessities arising from the pandemic. This is an alarming
fact and one that truly underscores both the extreme nature of our necessities and
how easy it is for unforeseen crises such as public health emergencies and natural
disasters to have devastating effects on the fragile development and food security
gains we have worked so hard to achieve.
But even more devastating than the current pandemic is the relentless
campaign of violence carried out by the Taliban and other terrorist groups. These
groups’ inhumane acts continue to leave many of our people in a desperate situation.
Most Afghans still depend on agriculture as the main source of their livelihoods.
Many face unreliable yields, increased droughts and floods due to climate change,
and isolation, as well as a lack of access to markets. Meanwhile, our Government’s
resources are spread thin, and access to vulnerable populations is limited, owing
to terrorist group activities. Overall, these factors are contributing to a possibly
disastrous situation.
We have always been committed to peace as the most sustainable avenue
for restoring food security in our communities and in addressing our desperate
humanitarian situation. We have consistently called for humanitarian ceasefires
to allow us to reach the most affected people — a call that was amplified by the
Secretary-General and members of the international community. However, the other
side has consistently rejected our offers, and the situation continues to grow more
concerning.
When talking about humanitarian affairs and conflict, be it in relation to food
security or any other topic, we always reach the same conclusion. We cannot have a
sustainable and lasting solution if hostilities on the ground do not stop. As long as
40/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

one side of the conflict continues to deny the humanity of their brothers and sisters,
there will always be food insecurity. As long as terrorists and non-State armed
groups continue to violate their neighbours’ access to food, which is a basic right,
there will always be humanitarian emergencies. To further illustrate the foregoing,
let us consider how the Taliban’s disregard for people’s access to basic services
has even led to the re-emergence of polio in areas where they have influence. The
Taliban’s indifference to the safety of our people and lack of respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law cannot continue.
Let me also take this opportunity to express Afghanistan’s deep appreciation
to the United Nations for developing the 2021 Afghanistan humanitarian response
plan. I would also like to express our gratitude to regional and international partners
for their material support and firm commitments to continuing to stand by the Afghan
people during these difficult times. In this regard, let me underline two points that I
believe may allow us to create an environment to better face our challenges on food
insecurity.
First, there is a need to better coordinate approaches and measures by all
stakeholders across the peace-humanitarian-development nexus to address the
root causes of conflict and help put an end to the ongoing conflict through the
effective implementation of all institutional tools available, including Security
Council resolutions and sanctions regimes. Secondly, we must also work to enhance
our cooperation and efforts aimed at fulfilling the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as a means of strengthening our societal safety nets, and in so doing,
safeguarding the food security of our population.
Finally, we hope that the arrival of Nowruz will bring with it a renewed sense
of possibility for the achievement of our long-awaited peace. We hope to witness
a cessation of hostilities that will allow our people to finally live in peace and
prosperity and enjoy full access to nutritious food.

21-0363041/147

S/2021/250

Annex 19
Statement by the Office of the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations
The African Union (AU) has continued to acknowledge the linkages between
conflict, food insecurity and displacement. Highlighted at the 607th session of
the AU Peace and Security Council (PSC), which was dedicated to agriculture,
food security, peace and stability in Africa, the AU PSC emphasized this link by
acknowledging that agricultural production and food security, as well as peace and
stability, are closely interwoven. At its 607th meeting, the AU PSC underscored
the need for synergies in the implementation of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme.
The 965th meeting of the AU PSC, which was dedicated to the protection of
children in conflict situations in Africa, laid out the AU’s policy on humanitarian
access, particularly in armed conflict. The AU PSC noted that the Council deplored
the ongoing grave violations on the continent, including the denial of humanitarian
access that is crucial in armed conflict settings to alleviating the suffering of affected
populations, including children. Accordingly, the AU PSC appealed to AU member
States to facilitate access and the provision of humanitarian assistance to children
affected by armed conflict.
The communiqué of that meeting further stressed
“the imperative need to make concrete commitments supported by a strong
political will to actively and effectively address the political root causes of
armed conflicts on the [c]ontinent, which include the denial of the fundamental
rights and respect for principles and obligations under the AU Constitutive Act.”
The Security Council discussions focused on resolution 2417 (2018) provides
the Council with the opportunity to achieve prohibition and accountability
objectives. By engaging various humanitarian and other multilateral organizations,
the discussion provides an opportunity to enable them to respond to the increasing
threat of food insecurity. Resolution 2417 (2018) provides for four broad entry points
in relation to food security and conf lict: provision of humanitarian assistance;
affirmation of State obligations with respect to conf lict and hunger; investigation
of allegations and the preservation of evidence, and ongoing monitoring and
further action.
As previously stated, through the AU PSC, the AU has a clear position on
humanitarian access and the protection of civilians. While the AU is founded on
the principle of sovereignty, protection clauses and directives have endowed the AU
Commission, through the AU PSC protocol, the AU Constitutive Act, and the good
offices of the Chairperson, with the right to intervene in a member State pursuant
to a decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government in respect of grave
circumstances, namely, war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.
The effective implementation of resolution 2417 (2018) therefore calls for
concerted efforts aimed at harmonizing — through a shared analysis and common
understanding of threats — messaging among such multilateral actors as the United
Nations and the AU. Accordingly, the AU emphasizes the need to employ a two-track
approach to ensure the protection of civilians in cases of conflict: on the one hand, to
rely on collective political leverage to call for unimpeded humanitarian access, and,
on the other hand, to provide both technical and humanitarian support. Emphasis
should be placed on the need for coordination between the United Nations, the AU
and the regional economic communities and mechanisms, guided by the principle of
subsidiarity and complementarity.
42/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

With regard to the dynamics of conflict and food security, cyclical conflict
settings have historically presented complex challenges for the international
community in ensuring humanitarian access and the overall provision of humanitarian
food aid to vulnerable communities trapped in affected areas. There are instances
where armed groups or warring parties prevent the provision of humanitarian relief
by blocking access to humanitarian actors, using starvation as a method of warfare.
Food insecurity must be viewed as a multidimensional threat influenced not
only by conflicts but also a number of other factors such as trade and economic
interests, agricultural production, health care and environmental changes. Sudden
shocks, such as the coronavirus disease pandemic, for example, resulted in lockdown
measures and movement restrictions that in turn disrupted agricultural and food
supply chains, increasing food prices and resulting in food shortages, and adversely
affecting millions of poor households. Disruptions to food and agricultural systems
triggered by the shortages of workers as a result of mobility restrictions compromised
the provision of inputs in upstream farming activities and downstream trading,
processing and transportation activities.
Similar threats are faced in conflict settings where traditional food-supply
chains are disrupted owing to ongoing violence and the subsequent displacement of
communities. There are instances where such threats are further exploited by warring
parties, which use starvation as a method of warfare and impede humanitarian
access. Furthermore, the destruction and targeting of civilian infrastructure can
directly affect the delivery of aid and the proper functioning of food systems. In the
case of South Sudan, for example, the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement signed
by both the Government and rebel movements clearly provides for a commitment
by the conflicting parties to allow safe passage and delivery of relief aid to civilian
areas. However, the Agreement is barely adhered to: despite the presence of United
Nations peacekeeping forces, a number of relief convoys have been subjected to
attacks leading to the destruction of the consignment and the killing of humanitarian
aid workers.
Member State preparedness through strengthened multi-hazard earlywarning capacity can help strengthen preparedness for State response to multiple
risks to food insecurity, particularly in conf lict settings. Through a strengthened
early-warning capacity, fragile States can be better shielded from falling into
famine as a result of environmental stressors. Early-warning data can better
prepare member States to establish emergency food-reserve funds and encourage
local governments to incorporate safeguards against the hoarding of staple foods
in their agricultural planning.
In that regard, farmers should be encouraged to cultivate climate-resilient
crops. There remains a need for the Security Council to address and ensure the
protection of farming communities and local markets from acts of terrorism in areas
such as the Sahel, and incursions by armed groups in the Horn of Africa and parts of
the Central Africa region. Disruptions in farming activity and the displacement of
rural populations dependent on farming for their livelihoods have been linked with
food insecurity and famines.
Trends of food insecurity have been observed in the Horn of Africa and
East Africa regions, home to the largest number of internally displaced persons
and refugees. Massive displacements are currently occurring in the Sahel region,
northern Ethiopia, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Central
African Republic and southern Cameroon, owing to internal conflicts and acts of
terrorism against civilians. In addition to the hundreds of thousands that have been
internally displaced in Ethiopia’s Tigray region as a result of the ongoing conflict,
and the thousands that have fled across the border to the Sudan, a cross-border
21-0363043/147

S/2021/250

dispute between the Sudan and Ethiopia is also a cause for concern, risking the
potential displacement of farming communities living in the disputed areas.
Stringent measures need to be implemented to prevent populations from further
displacement and to buffer farming communities from armed groups. Such global
security organizations as the Security Council need to focus on these countries,
which are vulnerable to disruptions in food production and transportation activities.
In the West Africa region, threats posed by the increasing presence of
extremist groups, prolonged dry seasons and rainfall variability have generated
new uncertainties for pastoralists, who have historically relied on their traditional
migratory patterns to sustain their livelihoods. Competition over grazing land,
reduced access to water as well as the erosion of customary dispute-resolution
mechanisms have contributed to the resurgence and increased tensions between
farming and pastoral communities in central Mali and northern Nigeria, as well as in
other States Members of the United Nations in the region, further escalating violence
in the insurgency-affected areas.
Such extreme weather events as tropical cyclones and desert-locust invasions
have exacerbated existing structural vulnerabilities faced in the Southern Africa
region, triggering food insecurity and the displacement of communities. The
insurgency in northern Mozambique coupled with the disastrous impacts of recent
and previous cyclones is risking food insecurity for up to 1 million civilians,
according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The Central
African region also faces additional pressure on its natural resource management
due to the disruption of traditional agricultural calendars.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that these challenges can be addressed in
an efficient and sustainable manner only through concerted multilateral action.
The AU stands ready to partner with bilateral and multilateral actors to respond
to conflict situations on the continent, which often exacerbate food insecurity.
Addressing climate change and environmental degradation should be part of our
collective strategy in tackling conflict and climate-induced food insecurity. We
commend the Permanent Mission of the United States of America to the United
Nations as President of the Security Council for the month of March for convening
this important and timely open debate on this very topical subject, and reaffirm the
African Union’s commitment to partnering with the Security Council to develop
comprehensive strategies on this matter.

44/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Andorra to the
United Nations, Elisenda Vives Balmaña
At the outset, let me congratulate the United States of America, as President
of the Security Council for the month of March, on organizing this high-level open
debate on conflict and food security. I want to thank the briefers for their striking
statements, so necessary to bring the world together to address this sober challenge.
Around the world, data and forecasts on food insecurity are largely
concerning. Estimates indicate that the vulnerable population has nearly doubled
this year, increasing to 265 million people, particularly due to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Women, children and people with disabilities
are disproportionately affected. Moreover, funding needs for food security in
humanitarian appeals increased to $9 billion in 2020, as compared to $5 billion in
2015. The tragedy of the grave situation that millions of people are facing around the
world requires the full attention of the international community for action.
The appeal for a global ceasefire by the Secretary-General was an urgent call
in the context of the pandemic. Andorra was among the countries supporting it. My
country wants to reiterate that call. The number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance and victim to food insecurity is increasing dramatically. They need urgent
action. For those who suffer more, we should base our actions on the principle of
reaching the furthest behind first.
We want to acknowledge the commitment of the Security Council to
addressing food insecurity-induced conflict. Almost two years ago, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018). The resolution reaffirms the
need to respect humanitarian principles and the obligation of parties to conflict to
respect international humanitarian law and recognizes that starvation as a method
of warfare can constitute a war crime, alongside the importance of ensuring access
to humanitarian aid.
The reports in relation to the resolution have shown worsening conditions in
areas where food insecurity and conflict are related. COVID-19 has exacerbated
them, but the preconditions and the conflict context are at the origin of the food
crisis. We call on the Security Council to continue and persevere in its cooperation
efforts with all United Nations system agencies and entities to address it, developing
early warning and emergency action mechanisms.
Furthermore, the recent attack on World Food Programme staff in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has again shaken our reality and reaffirms our
commitment to ensuring the safety of the humanitarian personnel of United Nations
missions on the ground. I take this opportunity to express my sincere condolences
to the Government and people of Italy and of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to the families of the victims of that atrocious attack.
What actions could the Security Council consider in addressing the growing
food insecurity in conflicts? Andorra believes it essential to focus on the fight
against the impunity of those who use famine as a weapon of war and obstruct the
work of humanitarian personnel. Andorra was therefore among the first States to
accept the amendment to article 8.2 of the Rome Statute, aimed at criminalizing the
intentional use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare by depriving them of
objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding relief supplies.
It is an important step towards ensuring international justice for perpetrators of that
war crime, and we call on other States to consider accepting that amendment to the
Rome Statute.
21-0363045/147

S/2021/250

The Food Systems Summit convened by the Secretary-General, to be held in
September, aims to produce concrete measures towards the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and to raise awareness of the need to
reform the current food systems. It has our full support.
Andorra believes that it is important to promote a change in the dynamics of
the current production and consumption trends. In particular, we would like to stress
the importance of addressing the phenomenon of food loss and waste within the
global discussion of food systems and improvement of the supply chain, as it affects
their level of accessibility and stability in all regions.
A global transformation towards more equitable and sustainable food systems
will contribute to achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2 and creating enduring
food security, including in the context of armed conflict, which can lay the foundation
set the ground for durable peace. Andorra will therefore continue to be committed to
working to end food insecurity and supports the mainstreamed inclusion of the topic
on the agenda of the Security Council.

46/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 21
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan,
Jeyhun Bayramov
I would like to start by thanking the United States presidency of the Security
Council for dedicating this high-level open debate to such a topical issue.
The gloomy statistics of recent years show an increase in the number of people
suffering from acute hunger driven by, among other things, conflict and climate
change. With the continuing spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the situation
has been further aggravated. Notwithstanding the importance of innovations in the
food and agriculture system, a sustainable solution to this problem requires the
elimination of the root causes.
Unfortunately, conflict-driven threats and risks are not alien to Azerbaijan.
For almost 30 years, Azerbaijan suffered from the occupation of one-fifth of its
territories by neighbouring Armenia, which inflicted a devastating impact on the
economy and the environment. The illegal activities carried out by Armenia in
those territories included the illegal exploitation of natural, agricultural and water
resources. The consequences of such illegal activities can be clearly evidenced in
the destroyed forests, burned and degraded soil and polluted water resources. Along
with the occupied territories, those illegal activities affected adjacent regions of
Azerbaijan. The exploitation of the Sarsang water reservoir by Armenia as a tool
of environmental terror led to the deliberate deprivation of Azerbaijani civilians of
much-needed water resources and the serious environmental degradation of lands,
including soil erosion, affecting biodiversity and productivity in residential areas
along the former occupation line. As a result of the counter-offensive operation
launched by Azerbaijan in response to Armenia’s recent act of aggression starting
from 27 September 2020, occupying forces of the Republic of Armenia were forced
to withdraw. In total, 10,000 square kilometres of Azerbaijani lands were deoccupied, allowing the return of more than 700,000 internally displaced persons to
their homes.
Following the signing of the trilateral statement by the leaders of the Republic
of Azerbaijan, the Russian Federation and the Republic of Armenia on 10 November
2020, which announced an end to all military activities, Azerbaijan has embarked
on a large-scale plan for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and reintegration of all its
conflict-affected territories, including those inhabited by its citizens of Armenian
origin, where the Russian peacekeeping contingent is temporarily deployed.
The Government has already initiated practical steps to remove the harsh
consequences of the military occupation of territories with a view to enabling the
safe and dignified return of all displaced populations to their places of origin and
restoring the peaceful co-existence of all its citizens affected by the conflict within
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Unfortunately, that process is challenged by the massive contamination of the
recently liberated Azerbaijani territories with mines and other explosive devices
deployed by Armenia. In blatant violation of international humanitarian law, with
a view to inflicting as much damage as possible, as well as creating additional
obstacles for the return of civilians, Armenia also deliberately planted mines on
a massive scale during its forced withdrawal from the Azerbaijani territories and
has been refusing to release information regarding the minefields. That has already
resulted in major casualties among the Azerbaijani military and civilians, negatively
affects the realization of the inalienable right of the hundreds of thousands of
Azerbaijani internally displaced persons to return to their homes in safety and
21-0363047/147

S/2021/250

dignity, and seriously impedes the realization of the wide-ranging rehabilitation and
reconstruction plans launched by the Government of Azerbaijan.
In cooperation with international partners, Azerbaijan will first of all conduct
damage assessment and proper planning of rehabilitation and reconstruction works
in the conflict-affected territories. Rehabilitation activities will, among other things,
include setting up “smart” residential areas, restoration of the agricultural sector
and food security, restoration of the damaged water infrastructure and polluted
and depleted water resources, ensuring proper technical maintenance of reservoirs,
the revival of tourism and the creation of employment opportunities for the
returning population.
In eliminating the severe consequences of the conflict for the economic
and social infrastructure, Azerbaijan counts on the support of the international
community, including the United Nations and its relevant agencies. We expect the
activities of international organizations in all conflict-affected territories of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, including those where the Russian peacekeeping contingent
is temporarily deployed, to be carried out in full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan within its internationally
recognized borders and to be agreed and coordinated through with the Government
of Azerbaijan.

48/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Belgium aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 33).
First of all, we would like to express our sincere condolences following
the attack on a World Food Programme (WFP) convoy last month in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which the Italian Ambassador,
his colleague and a WFP employee were brutally killed. The circumstances of that
tragedy must be fully investigated so that the perpetrators can be brought to justice
as soon as possible.
Belgium would like to commend the work and constant dedication on the
ground by Oxfam International, the World Food Programme and the entire United
Nations system and their partners.
This briefing reminds us once again of the tragedies taking place in many
countries — the suffering too often ignored, the risks of famine, the increased level
of needs and the lack of funding for humanitarian actors. Continuing our collective
solidarity efforts and supporting political reforms therefore remain essential.
Once again, we are witnessing conflicts that intensify economic decline and
exacerbate hunger, as conflicts are the cause of 6 of the 10 worst food crises in
the world and of almost 60 per cent of humanitarian needs. In addition, climate
shocks, such as floods and droughts, force displacement and push millions of people
into extreme poverty. Those people are not only experiencing all these shocks at
once — conflict, violence, climate events, displacement, the economic crisis and
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) — but they now also face the threat of extreme
food insecurity and sometimes even starvation.
In the week of 8 March, International Women’s Day, it is particularly
important to highlight the gender disparities that currently also exist in the context
of global hunger. Women are disproportionately affected by food insecurity due to
socioeconomic inequalities, deep-rooted gender norms, war, conflict and a lack of
equal rights and representation. A world without hunger can be achieved only if
everyone has equal opportunities, equal access to resources and equal capacity to
shape their future.
At the last Security Council briefing on this topic (see S/2020/929), particular
emphasis was placed on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan, Yemen and north-eastern Nigeria. The situation in those countries is
not improving. On the contrary, the lack of humanitarian access, the devastating
socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, worsening political situations and additional
climatic stresses could lead to a further deterioration of food insecurity. In Yemen,
the highest levels of acute malnutrition are among children under five, while the
humanitarian response remains severely underfunded. Without immediate support,
many Yemenis are at risk of death from widespread hunger.
As WFP points out, Syria also urgently needs our support, as the number of
people who cannot survive without food aid has doubled in the past year. A record
12.4 million Syrians, nearly 60 per cent of the population, are now food insecure.
Renewing the cross-border mechanism for Syria is key to trying to alleviate
such needs.
21-0363049/147

S/2021/250

We hear the call for more preventive action and the implementation of
resolution 2417 (2018). As outlined in that landmark resolution, the Security Council
should take action to break the vicious cycle of conflict and food insecurity, condemn
the use of starvation as a method of warfare and help ensure that food aid reaches
those in need.
That requires strengthened means as well as full coherence. Belgium agrees
that the Security Council and Member States should take more preventive measures
to avoid conflicts from causing or further aggravating hunger.
First, all parties to armed conflicts should respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the prohibition of the threat of
starvation of the population as a method of warfare, and allow and facilitate the
unimpeded passage of humanitarian aid. In that regard, we recall that in 2019,
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court voted unanimously to extend the war crime of starvation to non-international
armed conflicts.
Secondly, States must respect and uphold international humanitarian law,
encouraging Member States to ensure accountability through national investigations.
If national jurisdictions fail to act, the Security Council has the tools to trigger a
range of international investigation and accountability mechanisms.
Thirdly, humanitarian access must be guaranteed to ensure security, the
protection of populations affected by crises and access to assistance. In that regard,
humanitarian actors must be able to work in accordance with humanitarian principles,
while maintaining the necessary flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances. The
Security Council should continue to sanction individuals or entities that impede
humanitarian access.
Fourthly, parties to armed conflict should endorse the Secretary-General’s call
for a global ceasefire to ensure an adequate response to the pandemic, as supported
by resolution 2532 (2020). We also call on them to support the Security Council’s
recent call for equitable access to vaccines and a humanitarian pause to facilitate
such access, as outlined in resolution 2565 (2021).
In conclusion, we must redouble our efforts to address the root causes of and
put an end to conflicts, prevent the outbreak of new conflicts and uphold international
humanitarian law. More attention and financial support are fundamental to ensuring
that humanitarian operations can meet the needs. In addition, particularly in these
contexts of hunger and conflict, we must step up our efforts to strengthen the work
on the humanitarian-development-peace nexus in fragile contexts.
In that spirit, Belgium is grateful for the cooperation with, among others,
Oxfam on projects aimed at building youth resilience. Those experiences demonstrate
the need for more adaptable, localized, flexible and innovative programmes in
fragile contexts.
We thank the Secretary-General for having risen to the task entrusted to
him by resolution 2417 (2018), in particular by alerting the Security Council when
the risk of famine and widespread food insecurity in the context of armed conflict
occurs. We also support the organization of the Food Systems Summit, which will be
held this year and which will be an important step towards the achievement of each
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. You have sounded the alarm; we cannot
ignore it.

50/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil thanks the United States for organizing this open debate about a
crucial issue for the effective protection of civilians. The United Nations Global
Humanitarian Overview 2021 forecasts unprecedented levels of food insecurity this
year. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) worsened an already dire situation — the
World Food Programme has estimated an increase of more than 80 per cent of people
facing acute food insecurity since the onset of the pandemic.
There is no doubt that hunger and armed conflict overlap. The majority of
people at risk of food insecurity are in conf lict-affected situations. Nevertheless,
it would be oversimplistic to draw a unilateral causal link between food crises and
armed conf lict. The outbreak of conf lict derives from a multitude of structural
drivers, which may vary in each individual situation. Similarly, food insecurity
results from several factors, including protectionism policies. What is clear is that
hunger and conf lict reinforce each other in a vicious cycle, which highlights the
moral imperative to tackle both problems with the urgency and seriousness that
they deserve.
Most issues on the Security Council’s agenda involve societies that have to
varying degrees suffered conflict in the context of pre-existing situations of poverty,
inequality and hunger, which have then been worsened by war and instability. Only
strategies based on the interdependence among peace, security and development in
all its dimensions will be able to break this vicious cycle. In this regard, there are
three issues that deserve our immediate attention.
First, ceasing hostilities is a major step to effectively protect civilians from
hunger and minimize their suffering. Brazil congratulates the Security Council’s
adoption of resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) and reiterates its support for
the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global ceasefire in the light of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Beyond the efforts to halt hostilities, it is also imperative to
prevent conflict and to adhere to the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes.
Secondly, there is a need to urgently tackle other factors besides conflict that
lead to food insecurity. It is key that we keep global supply chains functioning,
particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic. We have witnessed, since the onset of
the pandemic, trade-restrictive measures applied to agricultural products. For our
part, since last year Brazil has been taking all necessary measures to keep our trade
corridors open, especially for food products. But this is not enough.
We have also been advocating that this is no time for protectionism.
Nowadays, trade barriers abound in international agricultural trade on both
export and import sides. This is aggravated by massive agricultural subsidies,
which jeopardize the environment and block the development of the agricultural
sector in developing countries. Brazil welcomes the Security Council’s interest
in addressing the challenges of food insecurity in conf lict-affected countries and
invites its members to lead by example, by working towards the elimination of
unjustified import trade barriers to agricultural products, as well as by capping
and reducing all forms of trade-distorting subsidies. Countries should also refrain
from imposing export restrictions or extraordinary taxes on food and agricultural
products purchased for non-commercial purposes by the World Food Programme
and other humanitarian agencies.
Thirdly, while ceasing hostilities and correcting agricultural trade distortions
may tackle structural factors of conflict and hunger, some situations demand
additional emergency action. In this regard, the Security Council, while recognizing
21-0363051/147

S/2021/250

the primary responsibility of States to protect the populations throughout their
territories, has a key role to play in ensuring safe and unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance for countries in conflict situations, particularly where
there is an increased risk of famine. It may also contribute to guaranteeing that the
parties to armed conflicts comply with international humanitarian law, including the
prohibition of deliberate starvation of civilians as a method of warfare.
A few days ago, leaders across the world gathered at a pledging event for
Yemen, a country where the vicious cycle of conflict and hunger has yielded its most
devastating consequences. It is no surprise that the world’s worst food crisis has
resulted from a dreadful combination of armed conflict, economic shocks, rising
food prices and obstruction to humanitarian access. Preventing massive famine
and alleviating civilian suffering is essential to achieving a lasting solution to the
conflict. During the high-level pledging event, Brazil pledged a $50,000 contribution,
through the World Food Programme, to help fight COVID-19 in Yemen. We hope
that this small contribution, made in times of severe constraints, may help generate
wider support for the cause of alleviating the distress of the Yemeni people.
Complex problems demand multifaceted responses. Strategies aimed purely at
security will not, by themselves, be able to adequately deal with the overwhelming
majority of the situations on the Security Council’s agenda, including its food security
dimension. Hence, increased cooperation with the Economic and Social Council is
clearly needed, as is greater interaction between this body and the Peacebuilding
Commission. As a candidate for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council
for the 2022-2023 term, Brazil will strive to strengthen this cooperation, thereby
advancing an integrated approach to peace, security and development.

52/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cambodia to the
United Nations, Sovann Ke
I wish to begin by congratulating Her Excellency Ambassador Linda ThomasGreenfield on her appointment as Permanent Representative of the United States
to the United Nations. I would also like to express my thanks to the Mission of the
United States, in its capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of
March, for organizing this high-level open debate on conflict and food security.
Conflict directly influences food security. As such, conflict-stricken areas
often do not have the ability to produce and supply food for the people. According
to the World Food Programme, the ongoing conflicts in different parts of the world
combined with the impacts of climate change and the coronavirus disease pandemic
threatened to push around 270 million people to the brink of starvation in more than
50 countries by 2020.
Owing to the nature of these issues, the effective implementation of relevant
mandates of the Security Council and collaboration among Member States are
necessary to put an end to the ongoing conflicts in different regions across the world.
The concerned parties to conflict must allow the United Nations focal point and
humanitarian assistance full access to the conflict zones to ensure that all civilians
can receive unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance. More importantly, all
parties to the conflicts must abide by the principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including the 1949 Geneva Convention and resolution 2417 (2018),
which explicitly addresses the link between conflict and hunger.
In Cambodia’s history, our people went through food shortages and food
insecurity over three decades during the civil war, which immensely impacted the
health of our population, especially women and children. In this regard, Cambodia
calls for an end to all ongoing conflicts through dialogue and peaceful resolutions
with all involved parties to the conflicts.
Through our win-win policy initiated in 1998 by Samdech Akka Moha Sena
Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, Cambodia has
become a peaceful nation. Cambodia has enjoyed an average economic growth of 7
per cent per annum over the past two decades. The country has produced a surplus
of more than 1 million tons of rice annually for export. From this, we can further see
that peace and stability are prerequisites for food security as farmers can produce a
stable food supply for the population.
Cambodia supports the Security Council’s efforts, among other measures,
to address conflict-driven food insecurity through a specific programme of action
designed to assist countries in conflict. In this connection, Member States, relevant
United Nations agencies and countries in conflict must work closely to mobilize
resources to implement this programme of action.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express that Cambodia looks
forward to the Food Systems Summit to be convened by the Secretary-General
towards the end of 2021. We believe that its outcomes will also address the issues of
conflict and food security.

21-0363053/147

S/2021/250

Annex 25
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Canada

to

the

[Original: English and French]
As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its secondary impacts have
spiked humanitarian and protection needs globally, the effects are particularly
acute in situations of armed conflict. Climate change, hunger and food insecurity
are further heightening the vulnerability of conflict-affected populations and, along
with conflict, fuelling historic levels of forced displacement.
Three years on, resolution 2417 (2018) remains as relevant as ever. With
hunger and starvation on the rise and some parties to conflict disregarding their
obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, the international community must shift from awareness to action and accelerate
the implementation of this resolution.
Canada condemns the use of starvation as a method of warfare and is gravely
concerned about growing food insecurity and the threat of famine for millions of
people in situations of armed conflict today.
For example, in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, conf lict and access
impediments have exacerbated pre-existing acute malnutrition and food insecurity.
Canada welcomes recent efforts by the Government of Ethiopia to improve access
in the region. With life-saving assistance still out of reach for millions of people,
humanitarian and medical personnel must have rapid and unimpeded access to
all civilians without further delay. Civilians, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, continue to be at grave risk and parties to the conf lict must
ensure their protection.
Food insecurity and malnutrition have reached untenable levels in Yemen,
with urgent action needed to avert widespread famine and stem the rise in hunger.
The protection of humanitarian and medical personnel must be upheld so they can
provide relief to civilians without threats to their safety and security.
We will continue to call on parties to conflict to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure the protection of civilians and
civilian objects. Human rights and humanitarian principles must be upheld.
Canada is also deeply concerned by the broader impacts of COVID-19 on
food security, including disruptions to supply chains and the provision of life-saving
humanitarian assistance. Global levels of acute and severe food insecurity are
alarming, and an increasing number of people require emergency food and nutrition
assistance. For example, in Haiti, about 40 per cent of the population is food insecure
and requires humanitarian assistance. The situation could further deteriorate as the
risk of fiscal and debt crises are high for many developing countries, including least
developed, low-income and conflict-affected countries. These same countries are
already notably vulnerable to food insecurity.
The magnitude of needs cannot be ignored. In 2020, Canada increased funding
to the World Food Programme (WFP) by 27 per cent for a total of CA$286 million
to help support WFP’s humanitarian food assistance and logistics efforts in response
to COVID-19. In 2021, Canada will continue to support WFP, including in conflictaffected areas, as it integrates its COVID-19 response into existing programming at
the country-level.

54/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Looking forward, civilians must be at the centre of our collective response
and their rights and dignity upheld. A comprehensive and integrated approach to
the protection of civilians is needed, which appropriately accounts for the gendered
and intersectional needs and priorities of those facing violence and increased
vulnerabilities.
Anticipatory action could prove to have an important role to play in protecting
civilians from the adverse effects of food insecurity and climate change. Canada
is supportive of efforts to pilot anticipatory responses to humanitarian crises, for
instance through the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF). We look forward
to the results of the CERF impact evaluations on their anticipatory action pilots.
Scaled-up, joint humanitarian diplomacy is needed to rapidly respond to
looming threats of starvation and famine, preserve humanitarian space and foster
greater respect for international law. This requires strengthened dialogue and
collaboration at the country-level among States, the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian partners and civil society at all levels,
as well as with affected populations, including women and girls, in accordance with
humanitarian principles.
Ultimately, political solutions are needed to end conflict, restore peace and
ensure respect for human rights.
Canada will continue to play a leading role in responding to hunger and food
insecurity, and in prioritizing the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

21-0363055/147

S/2021/250

Annex 26
Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
We appreciate the opportunity to participate in today’s open debate and to
allow us to refer to food security in conflict settings in a multidimensional perspective
based on resolution 2417 (2018).
We are concerned about the linkages between food security and conflict
functioning as a trigger or multiplier. In this regard, we would like to refer to
the priority approach we give to protecting the most vulnerable populations and
implementing comprehensive responses in this regard, involving the international
community and regional organizations.
In our view, there are three key elements warranting consideration to this
end: a resilient supply chain, humanitarian access and respect for international
humanitarian law. In this context, international cooperation and assistance are
crucial, and Chile is therefore committed to participating in the Secretary-General’s
Food Systems Summit process. We hope that it will explore initiatives to strengthen
the protection of food security in different contexts and all regions of the world.
It has been almost a year since the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
struck us all, highlighting how uncertain our lives can be and the crucial meaning of
resilient societies and robust national and global institutions. However, the figures
we heard today are a sobering encounter with reality; they make it clear just how the
wide the gaps are in places affected by violence and hunger as well as the pandemic.
Therefore, let us focus further on the current situation in our own region,
with the understanding that this open debate is the appropriate context for echoing
the concern expressed by Special Representative of the Secretary-General La
Lime during the recent presentation of the report on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (S/2021/133), on which the Council was briefed on 22 February (see
S/2021/174). Not only was the Council informed about Haiti’s current political and
socioeconomic crisis; it was also once again alerted as to the depth of the food crisis
on the island, where about half of the total Haitian population is in acute need of
humanitarian assistance in 2021, according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
In the case of Haiti, we must understand that the humanitarian situation has
critically deteriorated, with the number of people in need of assistance rising from
2.6 million people in 2019 to 4.4 million today. More than ever, a strong, cohesive
and resilient society, along with political and socioeconomic stability, are essential
to promoting the principle of national appropriation, which Chile has strongly
supported over the past few decades and is vital for focusing on the acute food needs
of the population.
Haiti is recognized as a country vulnerable to, in addition to the other
drivers of instability, natural disasters, which impact the health infrastructure and
add further obstacles to achieving food security in the country. It is therefore of
the utmost relevance to provide international assistance to Haiti moving forward
to build back better, aiming not only to address peace and security but to achieve
economic development, strengthen democratic institutions and uphold the rule of
law. The alarming number of 4.4 million people in acute food insecurity, together
with the disproportionate impact of the whole situation on women and girls, means it
is urgent for the international community to adopt a gender-sensitive programming
approach, including child protection and the involvement of civil society and youth
in decision-making.
56/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

We believe that a comprehensive solution to food security-risk situations is
essential not only in Haiti but in all the situations raised during this open debate,
through the creation of a sustainable institutional framework over time, working
not only on preparedness but also response to such emergencies. In this regard,
Chile firmly believes that the role and inclusion in this framework of civil society,
youth and women provides not only for cooperation between the parties concerned,
but also for building capacity and supportive networks at the local, regional and
international levels.

21-0363057/147

S/2021/250

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
[Original: Spanish]
At the 1996 World Food Summit, President Fidel Castro Ruz warned that
“Hunger, the inseparable companion of the poor, is the daughter of
unequal distribution of resources and the injustices of this world. The rich
never experience hunger. Millions of people in the world have perished in the
fight against hunger and injustice.”
Twenty-five years on and the figures are still shocking: almost 690 million
human beings suffer from hunger. In 2019 alone, around 750 million people, or
almost one out of every 10 people in the world, faced serious levels of food insecurity.
Should this trend continue, the number of hungry people will surpass 840 million by
2030. In contrast, it is an outrage that billions of dollars are squandered on military
spending instead of being devoted to protecting life.
The persistence of an unjust and unsustainable international order, burdened
by decades of unbridled neoliberalism, is at the foundation of the exponential growth
in poverty, exclusion, hunger and food insecurity. The proliferation of protectionist
policies and speculative practices of big capital driving up food prices, the impact
of immense external debt, already repaid several times over, exhausting the
resources available to developing countries; unsustainable patterns of production
and consumption and their effects through climate change and soil and ecosystem
degradation — all these also severely hold back aspirations to achieve food security.
In addition, there is the systemic crisis triggered by the devastating
coronavirus-disease pandemic, which has worsened living conditions for millions of
human beings on the planet.
This complex scenario further dampens hopes for achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
reducing the aims of ending hunger, achieving food security, improving nutrition
and promoting sustainable agriculture to nothing more than fantasy for most peoples
of the world.
It is therefore urgent to undertake profound transformation and instil a just,
democratic and equitable international order so we may eradicate the root causes
of hunger and inequalities and promote sustainable development for all people,
thereby eliminating potential triggers for conflict that impact international peace
and security.
For Cuba, food security is a priority enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic.
In July 2020, Cuba adopted its National Plan for Food Sovereignty and Nutrition
Education, developed in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO). This document envisions four strategic objectives aimed at
reducing dependence on importation of food and basic goods, strengthening local food
systems, ensuring food quality and safety and mobilizing educational, cultural and
communications systems to strengthen food and nutrition education.
Ensuring the food security of our people has been a challenge due to the
impacts of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United
States, more ferocious than ever these past four years, including during the pandemic,
together with a policy of unprecedented hostility. It has had a particularly significant
impact on vulnerable sectors like agriculture and food. To give just one example,
58/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

between April 2019 and March 2020, damages totalling $428,894,637 could have
been avoided had Cuban businesses been able to access the United States market
without unjust and illegitimate restrictions.
Cuba does not have access to financing through United States banks, or to
the international credit system, thanks to the so-called “country risk” due to the
implementation of embargo regulations. And neither can we make payments
in United States dollars to third parties, all of which heightens the expense and
difficulty of normal access to international markets to obtain food and essential
basic commodities.
At the same time, the brutal persecution unleashed by the Government of
Donald Trump against Cuba’s fuel supply led to interruptions in the productive
cycles of multiple components of the agrifood sector as well as in various crops.
The embargo is undoubtedly the main obstacle to economic and social
development in my country and to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. This unjust and criminal policy is a serious, f lagrant
and systemic violation of the human rights of the Cuban people, including the right
to food.
On 31 March 2020, then-United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to
Food Hilal Ever stated in a communiqué that “the continued imposition of crippling
economic sanctions […] severely undermines the fundamental rights of ordinary
citizens to sufficient and adequate food”. She added that the immediate lifting of
such unilateral sanctions was an urgent humanitarian matter.
The Security Council must stick to its mandate and stop interfering in matters
outside its jurisdiction, in particular those concerning the General Assembly, as the
most representative and democratic body of the United Nations, whose role includes
leading, together with specialized agencies of the United Nations system, such as
FAO, international efforts to meet the targets established under SDG 2.
In the face of the world’s heightened major challenges, including poverty,
food insecurity and hunger, which aff lict millions of human beings, it is urgent to
strengthen international cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism to guarantee
the full and universal realization of the right to food. Cuba is firmly committed to
these purposes.

21-0363059/147

S/2021/250

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Denmark to the
United Nations
I am honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries,
namely, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
As Nordic countries, we strongly welcome this open debate on the impact of
conflict on food security and the continued and increasing relevance of resolution
2417 (2018). We would like to thank the United States, as Security Council President,
for convening this meeting.
When unanimously adopted in May 2018, following an initiative by Sweden
and the Netherlands, resolution 2417 (2018) was a landmark. It was the first time that
the Security Council had explicitly addressed the link between conflict and hunger
and recognized the need to break the vicious cycle of conflict and food insecurity.
In the resolution, the Council emphasizes the obligation of Member States to help
ensure that food assistance reaches those in need and condemns the use of starvation
as a method of warfare. The world will never be able to eliminate hunger unless there
is peace, and, conversely, food insecurity is a key driver of conflicts, so we would
like to highlight again the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
Our debate today is timely. Increasing food insecurity and famine require
urgent action at scale. The hope of achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2, on
ending hunger, by 2030 is slipping through our fingers. Hundreds of million people
face acute food insecurity across the world. We are deeply concerned that 34 million
people are now assessed to be at the highest risk of, or already in, famine or faminelike conditions, which require immediate life-saving action. South Sudan, Yemen
and Burkina Faso already showed famine-like conditions in 2020. In 2021, food
crises are also escalating in Tigray/Ethiopia, north-east Nigeria, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, Syria, Mozambique and
Afghanistan.
Famines do not occur naturally in 2021; they are human-made. Conflict is the
single-most important driver of hunger, and nearly all countries with risk of famine
or famine-like conditions — in Integrated Phase Classification 4 or 5 — are affected
by protracted conflict. In most of these conflict-affected countries, constraints to
humanitarian access are aggravating the problem. This is unacceptable.
As long as armed conflicts continue to drive food insecurity, Sates Members
of the United Nations have an obligation to provide flexible and rapidly disbursable
humanitarian funding to support the prevention of famine and hunger through
timely, independent, effective and efficient humanitarian action.
We would like to draw attention to three areas we believe are crucial for
bringing change and positive development to the millions of food-insecure people
living in areas of conflict and fragility: humanitarian access and the protection
of civilians, the implementation and roll-out of the humanitarian-developmentpeacebuilding nexus in fragile crisis settings and the strengthening of systems for
early warning and anticipatory action, including in areas of conflict.
First, in line with resolution 2417 (2018), the Nordic countries urge all parties
to armed conflicts to fully comply with international humanitarian law. In our view,
it is fundamental to ensure compliance with international humanitarian law and
work towards accountability for violations. Humanitarian access is widely hampered
by violence, insecurity, corruption and bureaucratic constraints. Humanitarian and
medical personnel must be protected, and humanitarian access to those in need must
be ensured. When violations do occur, those responsible must be held accountable.
60/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Secondly, when we discuss the humanitarian-development-peace nexus, there
is a need to shift focus more towards the actual implementation and roll-out of the
nexus approach — of course, with full respect for humanitarian principles and the
unique mandate of humanitarian actors. While doing what we can to ensure early
action and to strengthen resilience, we also need to focus more on peacebuilding and
conflict prevention within a coherent framework. In areas where food insecurity and
conflict reinforce each other, all actors must work together. Humanitarian action —
including longer-term humanitarian interventions — cannot stand alone.
Thirdly, there is a need for a shift towards a more forward-looking humanitarian
system in relation to food insecurity, including in areas of conflict and high levels
of fragility. Strengthening anticipatory humanitarian action will help save lives and
mitigate the impact of crises. For this to happen, we all need to work on stronger
coordination and better sharing of data, analysis and information. Developing
comprehensive early-warning systems in fragile contexts is not an easy task, but it
will need humanitarian and development actors to join efforts. The Nordic countries
support the linking of early-warning systems with anticipatory action. We welcome
initiatives such as the collaboration between the World Food Programme and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on early-warning analysis
of acute food insecurity hotspots.
Although conflicts, together with climate change, are the main drivers of
hunger, the added dimension of the socioeconomic consequences of the coronavirus
disease is aggravating food insecurity. There is a need for a more integrated approach
to climate adaptation and mitigation, protecting the environment and addressing
poverty, fragility and food and nutrition insecurity, as well as for better coherence
among our humanitarian, development-policy and climate-adaptation instruments in
the localities and countries where this is relevant. Environmental impacts of armed
conflicts can also cause or aggravate food insecurity. The ongoing work of the
International Law Commission on the protection of the environment in relation to
armed conflicts is compiling and clarifying the relevant norms of international law.
The recently updated International Committee of the Red Cross Guidelines on the
Protection of the Natural Environment in Armed Conflict can help in the adoption of
concrete measures aimed at better protection of the environment in armed conflicts.
Finally, I would like to draw your attention to two food crises where the
situation is deteriorating quickly and where action is urgently needed. Conflictinduced starvation is currently rising in both Ethiopia and in Yemen, underlining the
need for compliance with resolution 2417 (2018).
The Nordic countries are very concerned about the humanitarian crisis in
Tigray, in Ethiopia, which is driving increased food insecurity and displacement and
creating severe protection concerns, including sexual and gender-based violence.
Indeed, 4.5 million out of 6 million people within the region are acutely food-insecure,
and humanitarian access is severely restricted. The Nordic countries welcome the
announcement by the Ethiopian Government on unhindered humanitarian access
and call for immediate, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in
need throughout Tigray. The situation in Tigray warrants preventive action by the
Security Council to address the risk of conflict-induced food security, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018).
In Yemen the humanitarian situation is dire — it has, in fact, never been
worse; 50,000 people are already living in famine-like conditions, with 5 million just
one step away. Action and more funding for the United Nations-led humanitarian
response are urgently needed to avert large-scale famine, as was done in 2018. Since
the beginning of the humanitarian crisis, the Nordic countries have contributed
significant funding for humanitarian operations, including by pledging a total of $77
21-0363061/147

S/2021/250

million for 2021 at the recent high-level pledging conference. While continued and
increased support to humanitarian operations is needed to save lives, it is no longterm solution. The humanitarian situation in Yemen clearly underlines the need for
a political solution to the conflict, and we fully support the efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths in that regard.
We thank the Security Council’s commitment to address conf lict-induced
food insecurity, and we will closely follow how it will play its part in this
important area.

62/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa Cañizares
[Original: Spanish]
I wish to highlight the work done by the United States delegation during its
presidency of the Security Council in the first half of March. I also congratulate you
for having organized this open debate, which makes it possible to follow up on the
implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), adopted on 24 May 2018, which requested
the Secretary-General to report to the Council when the risk emerges of conflictinduced famine and widespread food insecurity in contexts of armed conflict.
Ecuador followed with interest and concern the report presented by the
Secretary-General in September 2020 on threats to food security in several countries,
including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen and South Sudan.
For that reason, Ecuador supports international initiatives, including in
particular those promoted by the United Nations and the Security Council itself,
aimed at overcoming the cycle of conflict-induced food insecurity, which poses the
threat of famine and acute malnutrition. Once again, I must stress that the best way to
improve access to the civilian population in need of vital assistance is by promoting
the implementation of a ceasefire at the local and global levels.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated food crises. Food
insecurity leads to increased displacement and causes conditions on the ground to
deteriorate, exacerbating obstacles to peace. Two fundamental tools in both the fight
against the pandemic and in efforts to eradicate hunger are safe drinking water and
sanitation. In the Security Council debate held on 23 February (see S/2021/198),
Ecuador recalled that the loss of biodiversity, desertification and drought also
exacerbate food insecurity.
All those factors are interrelated and require a coordinated international
response. For that reason, at the Security Council meeting held on 6 January, on
fragile contexts (see S/2021/24), we reiterated that peace and development are
mutually reinforcing.
For that reason, we are also extremely concerned about the food situation
in Haiti, as reflected in the humanitarian assistance plan presented yesterday, 10
March, by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as well as in
the report of the Secretary-General dated 11 February 2021 (S/2021/133), which
indicates that some 4 million people were affected by acute food insecurity between
August 2020 and February 2021.
All of that contrasts with the unjustifiable loss and waste of more than 1
billion tons of food in the world each year. That is why we also look forward to the
2021 Food Systems Summit convened by the Secretary-General.
Ecuador reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to healthy, sufficient
and nutritious food, in keeping with the right to adequate food and the fundamental
right of everyone to be free from hunger. We recognize that a significant number of
the world’s poor people live in rural areas and that rural communities play a central
role in development and peacebuilding.
Finally, Ecuador condemns and rejects the practice of starving civilians as
a method of warfare. We reiterate the importance of protecting civilians in armed
conflict, in the same terms as set forth in presidential statement S/PRST/2020/6, of
29 April 2020.
21-0363063/147

S/2021/250

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
Allow me at the outset to express our appreciation for the initiative of the
United States, as the President of the Security Council for the month of March 2021,
for having convened this high-level open debate on conflict and food security.
Egypt is fully cognizant of the severe impacts that hunger and the failure to
achieve food security have on human livelihoods, as well as in contributing to an
increase in the risk of conflicts, especially in countries that suffer from economic
vulnerability; hence, we stress the strong and deep linkage between food security
and conflict.
We would like to emphasize that famine does not always reflect a shortage
of the food available to those who are vulnerable to these phenomena. Rather, in
many cases, it is the result of a lack of justice in the distribution of food resources
between regions and remote areas, a situation that is further exacerbated by conflicts,
especially given their negative impact on local and regional value and supply chains.
Moreover, conflicts have a significant impact on the purchasing power of citizens in
conflict-affected areas.
Failure to achieve food security and end hunger will threaten the security and
stability of countries and further fuel ongoing conflicts. The challenges of achieving
food security are further deepened by other factors such as the ongoing impacts
of climate change, which exacerbate the risks related to energy production, food
security, the availability of water, economic development and social inequality.
Water scarcity in several regions in the world, especially in Africa, has severe
repercussions on agricultural activities and efforts to achieve food security.
In the light of the above, we would like to highlight the following points.
It is vital to address the challenges facing countries affected by and emerging
from conflict. Special attention must be paid to food security and to providing health
care to the civilian population based on the principles of international humanitarian
law and in accordance with national sovereignty. It is also important to ensure the
delivery of food aid to the civilian population in conflict areas and to protect them
from the risk of famine, including, in that regard, the provision of food to forcibly
displaced persons, while also taking into account the negative repercussions of the
coronavirus disease pandemic on food supplies. We would also stress in that regard
the responsibility of the Security Council to protect civilians at risk from armed
conflict, including the risk of famine.
It is vital for the United Nations system, including the Security Council, to
develop a proactive approach that enhances early-warning capabilities in order to
monitor the regions most vulnerable to famine as a result of armed conflict. In that
connection, we would like to highlight the importance of resolution 2417 (2018),
which requested the Secretary-General to report swiftly to the Council when the
risk of conflict-induced famine and widespread food insecurity in armed conflict
contexts occurs.
We look forward to the convening of the World Food Systems Summit,
scheduled to take place in New York in September 2021. The summit includes Action
Track 5, entitled “Build resilience to vulnerabilities, shocks and stress”, which
focuses on the sustainability of food systems and on the ability of poor families
around the world to obtain adequate, healthy and nutritious food. We hope that the
Food Systems Summit will support developing countries in enhancing their food
security in a sustainable manner and invite partners and international organizations
to fulfil their responsibilities in that regard.
64/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

In conclusion, we would like to stress the urgency of addressing the challenges
of food security and its linkage to conflicts using a comprehensive approach that
aims at its core to achieve the sustainable development of developing countries while
ensuring their stability and prosperity.

21-0363065/147

S/2021/250

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the presidency of the United States for having included
this open debate in its programme of work for the month of March 2021. Promoting
dialogue on this issue makes it easier to find effective means to break the cycle
of food insecurity, including that caused by political and economic instability and
armed conflicts in various regions of the world.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly
SDG 2, aimed at achieving zero hunger. Despite the socioeconomic challenges it
faces as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Government of El Salvador
reiterates its commitment to continuing to develop plans and programmes that
directly benefit the Salvadoran population and ensure their food security. With that
in mind, since May 2020 it has been carrying out a plan to deliver food parcels to
approximately 70,000 needy families throughout the country every day.
At this stage of great global challenges, El Salvador will continue to deploy the
full potential of its institutions and to do everything in its power to ensure that the
most vulnerable segments of its population have availability of and access to food.
According to the report entitled The State of Food Security and Nutrition in
the world in 2020, some 690 million people suffer from hunger worldwide — an
increase of 10 million people in one year. That is cause for concern and alarm about
the path that we have taken to achieve our zero-hunger goals by 2030, as well as a
call to action.
The report recognizes that food insecurity can be caused by various factors,
including economic crises and climate change as well as conflict and political
instability. In that regard, it reiterates the importance of maintaining in force and
strictly complying with resolution 2417 (2018), and supports the efforts of this body
to provide effective responses to humanitarian needs in armed conflicts, particularly
the threat of famine, and condemns the starving of the civilian population as a
method of war.
It is concerning that the reports of peacekeeping missions are indicating
an increasing number of potential threats to food security, such as obstructing
access to or the distribution of humanitarian aid, threats against their personnel
and non-compliance with the agreements between the United Nations and host
countries. These actions jeopardize access to food and the other needs of civilians
in conflict situations. Faced with that situation, the Security Council must act and
demand accountability from those who oppose this important work, in keeping with
international humanitarian law.
We call on all parties to armed conflict to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and underline the importance of humanitarian
personnel having safe and unhindered access to the civilian population.
Given that concern, we deem important the establishment of a United Nations
coordination centre or the post of a special envoy on food security issues and for
the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018). In addition, the quest for financing
activities that help mitigate climate-change-induced food insecurity, conflicts and
pandemics could be included in its work, particularly in countries and regions that
are facing armed conflicts or political instability.
66/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Another activity that that official could carry out is the elaboration of
humanitarian aid agreements based on the principles of international cooperation
recognized by the United Nations, including various forms of food assistance that
safeguard and enhance access to food for those most in need in conflict situations.
An independent mechanism would help to build trust among those involved while at
the same time contributing to improving transparency and accountability.
It must be recalled that multilateralism is the best way to find answers to the
major global problems. That is why we see the Food Systems Summit, set to take
place this year, as an opportunity to debate these aspects, and, more importantly,
find answers to the larger issues of challenges to food safety. El Salvador sees the
summit as an opportunity to prioritize attention to groups in vulnerable situations,
including civilian populations living in conflict situations. It believes it important to
focus attention on food security and the plans of action emanating from the Security
Council and other bodies. They must take into account the specific needs of children,
youth, women and other vulnerable sectors of society.
Finally, El Salvador reiterates its interest in finding creative and innovative
responses to food and nutritional needs, through, among other options, the
coordination of humanitarian assistance and ensuring that it is timely, effective and
efficient, based on independence and the principles of international law.

21-0363067/147

S/2021/250

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie Amde
We commend the United States for dedicating today’s open debate to this
worthy topic. I am pleased to address the members of the Security Council and
other participants on the situation in Ethiopia, with a focus on recent developments
pertaining to humanitarian challenges.
My country, Ethiopia, has struggled with food insecurity as one of the
core challenges to its national and human security. The vicious cycle involving
climate change and extreme weather conditions, underdeveloped adaptation and
resilience, competition over resources, conf lict and food insecurity has long been
an existential challenge.
Over the years, we have made progress in addressing food insecurity through
effective national policies, the efficient administration of available resources and
effective international cooperation. Nonetheless, Ethiopia remains vulnerable to
the risk of food insecurity emanating from natural and anthropogenic disasters,
including conflict.
Allow me to share some facts on the situation in Ethiopia so that the members
of the Council can have a well-rounded and accurate picture of the situation.
On 4 November, the Tigray People’s Liberation Front attacked the national
army. The treasonous crime against those unsuspecting men and women in uniform
goes beyond what any other country has faced in recent history. The Government
of Ethiopia had to take the necessary measures to preserve the unity and sovereign
integrity of the State of Ethiopia.
The unabashed destructive acts of the criminal group cost Ethiopians a great
deal, devastating their infrastructure and disrupting their normal private and public
lives. That resulted in a food shortage in Tigray and adjacent regions, as well as
the displacement of citizens, thus compounding the pre-existing food security
challenges in the Tigray region, where 1.7 million people were participating in a
safety net programme.
Furthermore, developments in the Tigray region have increased the
humanitarian burden on a system already strained by the conflicts instigated by
Tigray People’s Liberation Front and its affiliates in other parts of Ethiopia.
In accordance with our disaster management policy, we utilize our national
resources, first and foremost, to address humanitarian needs. Nevertheless, we
also work closely with local and international partners to fill the gaps created by
resource constraints.
Accordingly, on 29 November, we signed an agreement with the United
Nations for enhanced coordination on humanitarian access. That agreement allows
unimpeded, sustained and secure access to the humanitarian community. Due to the
progress in the security situation in the Tigray region, we opened a “notification
only” procedure for humanitarian actors starting 3 March.
We also have an effective coordination mechanism between the Government
authorities and humanitarian actors, as evidenced by the testimony provided by Mr.
David Beasley, World Food Programme (WFP) Executive Director and Mr. Filippo
Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who visited the region.
I would also like to take this opportunity to relay the gratitude of my
Government for the response of the international community, including the WFP
68/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

and other United Nations agencies and Governments who stood with the Government
and the people of Ethiopia in this time of need. I also wish to echo the appeal made
by our humanitarian partners for more resources in order to scale up our progress
thus far.
Alleged human rights violations have also been a focus of the international
community. The Government authorities and the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission will continue to investigate and report on the status of human rights.
In that respect, we stand ready to receive assistance and to explore the possibility of
collaborating in joint investigations. We unequivocally reaffirm our full commitment
to respect and protect human rights and to bring all who violate such rights to justice.
The Government is also committed to ensuring transparency and access
to information. Accordingly, we facilitated access to both local and international
media to report from the ground and, as a result, numerous international media
organizations are present in the Tigray region. We hope that the responsible and
diligent work of the media will counter the flurry of disinformation that has been
dominating the platform.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment to sparing no effort in
fulfilling our solemn responsibility to ensure the safety and well-being of our
people. Rest assured that we are ready and willing to engage with the international
community in a constructive manner. In that regard, we reiterate the need to place
a global focus on increasing support for ongoing relief and reconstruction efforts in
order to restore lasting peace and normalcy.

21-0363069/147

S/2021/250

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I welcome this open debate on the impact of conflict on food security, which
is of the utmost relevance at this moment.
The World Food Programme (WFP) is projecting a sharp rise in food insecurity
in 2021 as result of the combined effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, extreme weather events, climate change, water scarcity and, indeed,
conflicts.
The 2020 Global Report on Food Crises shows that conflict was to blame for six
out of the ten worst food crises in the world and for nearly 60 per cent of humanitarian
needs. This means that, in the absence of conflict, the number of people affected by
food crises could be reduced by more than half, and the humanitarian funding gap
dramatically reduced. The link between conflict and hunger was also the reason for
the initiative of two EU member States, the Netherlands and Sweden, which led to
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018). This landmark resolution was the
first to address the link between conflict and hunger, recognize the need to break the
vicious cycle of conflict and food insecurity, emphasize the obligation of Member
States to help ensure that food assistance reaches those in need and condemn the use
of starvation as a method of warfare.
To combat hunger and malnutrition, we therefore need to focus on conflictridden regions and step up efforts to address the root causes of conflict and mitigate
their effects on populations, including food insecurity — all without abandoning the
longer-term goal of developing more sustainable, resilient, equitable and inclusive
food systems, with empowered women, girls, youth and families, and taking into
account the specific needs of those in vulnerable situations, thus ensuring that no
one is left behind.
Given the magnitude and complexity of the challenge, as well as the limited
resources, international coordination is essential. The EU and its member States
already actively participate in multiple processes and initiatives in this area and are
strong supporters of collective responses, in close cooperation with the WFP, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Committee on
World Food Security and others.
For the purpose of this debate, we would like to address three main points —
ensuring safe access to humanitarian assistance, securing sustainable funding
and reaching innovative long-term solutions based on early-warning systems, and
highlighting specific situations where food insecurity must urgently be addressed so
as to avoid a worsening of tensions and conflicts.
First, unimpeded, sustained, rapid and safe access to affected populations is a
critical enabler to ensure the efficient and effective delivery of assistance as a means
to address food insecurity. This is especially important in conflict areas.
The EU is concerned about ongoing blatant violations of international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles, the shrinking of the humanitarian
70/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

space and continued attacks on humanitarian and medical workers. Actions
taken by various players, including Governments, continue to deny or restrict —
directly or indirectly — humanitarian access, and remain a major obstacle to an
effective response.
The EU calls on all parties to armed conflicts, State and non-State alike,
to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law, including the
prohibition of the use of starvation of the civilian population as a method of warfare,
and to allow and facilitate the free passage of humanitarian relief. We recall, in
that respect, that in 2019, the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court voted unanimously to extend the war crime of
starvation to non-international armed conflict.
The international community needs to take a more outspoken stance in
calling on all parties to conflicts to respect international humanitarian law, condemn
access restrictions and find political and practical solutions to remove access
constraints. The Security Council plays a critical role in steering this forward and
ensuring accountability.
This also means addressing continued attacks on humanitarian and medical
workers. The EU — together with France, Germany, Mexico, Norway, the Niger
and Switzerland — will organize a discussion series in the coming months on the
protection of humanitarian and medical workers in armed conflict, with the aim of
finding solutions and contributing to the development of key elements of the “Call
for Action to strengthen respect for international humanitarian law and principled
humanitarian action”. On the fifth anniversary of resolution 2286 (2016), we also
recognize the efforts of co-penholders Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Uruguay and
Spain, in that regard.
Secondly, if we are to ensure timely and adequate responses to food insecurity,
the funding gap needs to be addressed.
The international community should explore all ways to increase funding,
especially for the most acute crises, and must strive to make it more sustainable and
predictable. That would help to ensure that resources are used as effectively and
efficiently as possible. Efficiency also requires a switch to prevention when possible,
in addition to well-coordinated interventions and joint approaches based on highquality analysis.
As crises are volatile, we need to monitor them in an ongoing way, in close
cooperation with local civil society actors, so that we can understand how needs
evolve and be able to intervene at the right moment where it is most needed, and in
the most appropriate manner.
Moreover, as conflict and hunger are unlikely to disappear any time soon,
we have to intensify efforts to work across the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus in fragile contexts. We must develop tools and mechanisms that will help us
provide more efficient interventions to strengthen food security and build resilience.
That may include monitoring tools that provide information on inaccessible areas
by making use of technologies such as satellite imaging and developing anticipatory
action mechanisms. To do that, we need to build on structures such as the Global
Network against Food Crises to generate evidence-based information and analyses
and leverage strategic investments to prepare, prevent and respond to food crises.
Thirdly, let me briefly highlight certain crises that, in our view, require
close monitoring and immediate action, in accordance with resolution 2417 (2018).
Conflict-induced food insecurity and the risk of famine in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Yemen, north-eastern Nigeria and South Sudan was examined most
recently in September (see S/2020/930).
21-0363071/147

S/2021/250

Furthermore, the WFP and FAO, under the auspices of the Global Network
Against Food Crises, in October issued its “Early warning analysis of acute food
insecurity hotspots”, which identifies four areas at risk of famine: Burkina Faso,
north-eastern Nigeria, Yemen and South Sudan.
The situation in those countries is not improving. On the contrary, the lack
of humanitarian access, the worsening political situation and climatic stresses may
lead to a further deterioration of food security. The international community must
prioritize this issue.
Other quickly deteriorating food crises also urgently need our attention.
In the Central African Republic, acute food insecurity is projected to affect an
additional 400,000 people in 2021. The escalation in violence following the recent
elections has reduced access for humanitarian actors, exacerbated food insecurity
and caused more than 200,000 new displacements. Coordination among humanitarian
actors, especially on advocacy with all parties to the conflict, is paramount.
In Ethiopia, the EU is extremely concerned about the risk of famine in the
country’s Tigray region. According to reports, 80 per cent of the population, as well
as 100,000 Eritrean refugees, have been cut off from humanitarian assistance for more
than 100 days now. More than 4.5 million people face pre-famine conditions and the
situation is deteriorating rapidly. Humanitarian agencies have been denied access to
people in need, and there are reports of starvation being used as a weapon of war.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo now has 20 million acutely food
insecure people — the highest number ever recorded in a single country. Rampant
conflict and insecurity, aggravated by COVID-19 and its broader consequences, are
the main drivers, while natural disasters and recurrent epidemics take another toll on
the population. Tragically, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is also one of the
most underfunded crises in the world.
After 40 years of war, Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous places
for civilians. It is the world’s third largest food crisis, and the COVID-19 pandemic
has further aggravated the situation. The latest analysis estimates that 17 million
Afghans — more than 45 per cent of the population — are acutely food insecure and
in need of urgent humanitarian assistance. Meanwhile, the humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan remains greatly underfunded, with less than half of the needs covered.
In conclusion, while the specific crises I just mentioned require our attention,
it does not mean that we have to concentrate the available resources in a small number
of locations. Without an increase in humanitarian funding and with many crises
severely underfunded and millions of people in very fragile situations, combating
hunger in only a few places could create new famines elsewhere.
Instead, we need to redouble our efforts to address the root causes and put
an end to conflicts. We must prevent new conflicts from erupting and uphold
international humanitarian law. We also need to explore all avenues to increase
humanitarian funding, improve international coordination and efficiency, and
continue to monitor the worst crises, with the key support of the Global Network
Against Food Crises, launched by the EU, FAO and the WFP during the 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit.
The Secretary-General’s 2021 Food Systems Summit will be a major
opportunity and is a testimony of inclusive multilateralism. We are fully committed
to achieving an ambitious Summit outcome.
The COVID-19 crisis demonstrates just how crucial multilateral action and
institutions are to our collective health, prosperity and security. We count on the
Security Council to play its part.
72/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
Fiji congratulates the United States of America for its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March.
Fiji welcomes and is grateful for the opportunity to contribute to this important
high-level debate on conflict and food security. As a non-Council member, Fiji
supports and welcomes a more open and inclusive Security Council. Open debates
are a helpful way for canvassing broader inputs on the peace and security challenges
that are growing across the world. I thank the President for her commitment to a
more open Security Council. It is only through the broadest possible discussions that
we will find solutions to these increasingly complex peace and security challenges.
Resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict-induced food insecurity and famine, has
been one of the most pressing challenges before the Security Council. Food insecurity
has become immeasurably more protracted and complicated since the advent of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has warranted the Council’s most
careful scrutiny.
The Secretary-General has warned that there is a risk of famine and
widespread food insecurity in four countries and that the food-security situation
has deteriorated in other conflict-affected countries around the world. This looming
catastrophe will affect more than 200 million people worldwide. The numbers and
the intensity of these challenges have grown, owing both to climate change and
extreme weather, on the one hand, and COVID-19-pandemic-induced supply-chain
failures and disruptions and declining international humanitarian support, on the
other. They have compounded food insecurity in conflict settings and indeed more
broadly as well. The Secretary-General also stated that what is needed to turn this
around is the will and sustained commitment of leaders and States Members of the
United Nations.
Food insecurity is a driver of conflict in an increasingly vicious way. Conflicts
fuel food insecurity, and food insecurity is a major contributing cause of conflicts.
The control, manipulation of supply and weaponization of food by parties to conflicts
calls for urgent attention. Today, in some of the most violent conflict areas around
the world, we will find the highest levels of hunger, malnutrition and stunting. The
effects of climate change and the disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic
have exacerbated already-dangerous levels of food insecurity across these and other
vulnerable countries.
Fiji would like to highlight the following points.
There should be a clear and stronger commitment by the United Nations
system to supporting and protecting humanitarian staff, ensuring that the levels of
support needed are calibrated with threat levels and challenges, and that the required
resources are predictable.
Humanitarian assistance should be operationalized in a way that enhances the
security of local food producers, suppliers and markets and not undermine or weaken
them. The development and humanitarian interventions need to be better aligned.
The Security Council should explore opportunities for engagement through
the Peacebuilding Commission to encourage and support interventions that help
to build peace and cohesion across the food supply — in terms of marketing and
distribution — and across the food system generally in conflict and fragile settings.
Governments are responsible for the protection of all their populations
regardless of age, gender, ethnicity, religion or affiliation. Governments and
21-0363073/147

S/2021/250

competent authorities must ensure that food supply and humanitarian aid to vulnerable
populations are prioritized and accessible. Restricting humanitarian access under
various pretexts needs to be more systematically called out. The Security Council
should focus on the relevant agencies and missions capable of assessing, documenting
and reporting on these aspects.
The Council should enforce accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law in relation to access to humanitarian aid when such violations result
in widespread fatalities. Weaponizing the food supply and access to humanitarian
aid should not be allowed to continue with impunity, and the Security Council should
prioritize implementing accountability measures.
Climate change is fuelling growing food insecurity. The majority of United
Nations peace operations are already in highly climate-stressed countries. Climate
change is a multidimensional threat-multiplier. The Security Council has an obligation
to improve the quality of analysis of how short- and medium-term and catastrophic
climate changes affect food security and the most vulnerable populations.
I thank the President for convening today’s crucial open debate. Some 200
million people across fragile and conflict settings, mainly women and children, are
extremely vulnerable to hunger and extreme malnutrition today. Delays in vastly
improving the quality and depth of a United Nations response will only worsen an
already unacceptable situation. Fiji stands ready to play its small part in supporting
United Nations peace operations to protect civilians and humanitarian assistance.

74/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 35
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Georgia

to

the

I wish to begin by extending my heartfelt gratitude to the United States
presidency of the Security Council for organizing today’s high-level open debate on
conflict and food security.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations (annex 33). Let me add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Conflict-induced food insecurity represents one of the most acute challenges
for international peace and security. According to the World Food Programme’s
2020 Global Report on Food Crises, conflict and insecurity remain the main drivers
of food crises around the world. Yet unmitigated climate change, and the devastating
humanitarian, social and economic impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, pose a further threat to the state of global food security.
No country can meet these rapidly evolving challenges alone. Only with a
renewed commitment to inclusive and coordinated international action is it possible
to ensure food security and nutrition for those living in conflict-affected and the
most fragile situations. We believe that the Security Council must play a central
role in this process. The landmark resolution 2417 (2018), which addressed the link
between conflict and hunger for the first time, represents an important step towards
preventing food insecurity and addressing the humanitarian needs of millions of
civilians trapped in conflict-affected areas today. At the same time, we consider the
Secretary-General’s upcoming Food Systems Summit to be a vital opportunity for
spearheading global action against the emerging threats to global food security.
Key steps for addressing the conflict-related food security crises entail, inter
alia, reinforcing respect for obligations under international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law. We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare in conflict situations. We
also deplore other blatant violations of international humanitarian law and disrespect
for humanitarian principles. In this context, we call on all parties to conflict that
have not yet done so to strengthen their commitment to the universal application
of international humanitarian law, including, in this specific context, through
endorsing and implementing global international humanitarian law instruments on
the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in armed conflict.
Secondly, the Security Council must lead international action to ensure
unhindered delivery of humanitarian relief to those who endure prolonged lack of
access to sufficient amounts of safe and nutritious food, clean water and adequate
health care. To this end, addressing and preventing appalling attacks on humanitarian
and medical workers must stand as a top priority. International humanitarian agencies
must be granted full and unimpeded access so that they can deliver humanitarian
relief in a timely manner in complex emergencies where food insecurity is rampant.
In this context, we express a hope that the adoption and subsequent unwavering
implementation of the resolution 2565 (2021), calling for strengthened international
cooperation to facilitate equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, will substantially improve the global
humanitarian environment.
At the national level, maintaining food security remains one of the key
priorities of the Government of Georgia. We are following our strategy for
agricultural development, which lays out mechanisms for addressing food security
21-0363075/147

S/2021/250

in emergency and crisis situations, including implementing an early-warning system
for food security, especially for the most vulnerable regions and segments of the
population. The global pandemic has tested our ability to maintain self-sufficiency
in the country’s supply chains. In the early phases of the COVID-19 emergency, the
Government of Georgia has taken rapid steps to support farmers, food producers and
other actors in the country’s food-supply chain in continuing to provide citizens with
affordable, high-quality food without disruptions.
Drawing lessons from the potential impacts of the pandemic on global food
security, we have to direct coordinated efforts to the most fragile situations, including
in conflict-affected and post-conflict areas, where the risks of fierce competition
over scarce resources can only compound existing humanitarian emergencies.
Unfortunately, Russia’s occupation of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali prevents the Government of Georgia from addressing food security needs
of civilians living on the other side of the occupation line who must bear on a daily
basis the heavy burden of grave human rights abuses.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our appreciation for the Security Council’s
increased attention to the risks of conflict-induced food insecurity and express
Georgia’s readiness to contribute to the multilateral efforts aimed at addressing
global food-security challenges.

76/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield and her
delegation, as the current President of the Security Council, for convening today’s
timely virtual open debate on conflict and food security. We wish Ms. ThomasGreenfield the best in her endeavours.
As the Executive Director of the World Food Programme has said, the world
is on the verge of one of the greatest humanitarian crises as a result of hunger,
which, if we do not act immediately and decisively, will have devastating longterm consequences. The entire world is struggling with the various socioeconomic
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which includes the likelihood
that a quarter of a billion people will be pushed into extreme poverty by 2030.
Guatemala urgently calls for keeping the hunger crisis as a top priority on the
international agenda. It is necessary to protect the most vulnerable and act
immediately to save lives, especially in emergency situations, disasters and crises,
implementing humanitarian actions focused on building more resilient communities,
while protecting those whose lives are dedicated to saving others.
In resolution 2417 (2018), the Security Council stressed that “using starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare may constitute a war crime”. Guatemala strongly
condemns both the use of famine to hurt civilians as a method of war and the illegal
denial of humanitarian access. We reiterate our call to defend international obligations
arising from international human rights law and international humanitarian law,
since the protection-of-civilians component is intrinsically linked to them.
The President of Guatemala, Mr. Alejandro Giammattei Falla, has stated that
it is an act of responsibility to join all actions that are undertaken to guarantee
the fulfilment of the entire population’s right to food. The highest priority must be
protecting life and health and ensuring respect for all human beings. Accordingly,
we have joined the efforts made within the framework of the Food Systems Summit
convened by the Secretary-General. It is of utmost importance to join international
efforts that are aligned with our national priorities in relation to the fight against
malnutrition and hunger. This approach will allow incremental opportunities for
real economic and social development in favour of the full achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In line with this priority, Guatemala
has already completed its first national dialogue on our top action priority, namely,
ensuring access for all to safe food, with a view to identifying good practices,
challenges and solutions.
We must have the determination to rise to this challenge and fulfil the promise
made 75 years ago to avoid the scourge of war and promote peace among peoples
and nations. To properly address food and nutritional security problems, we must
foster true political will and deliver assistance in a coherent manner and without
discrimination as a way to avoid the scourge of war and to promote peace among
peoples and nations.

21-0363077/147

S/2021/250

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Guyana, Carolyn
Rodrigues-Birkett
I have the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
At the outset, I would like to thank the President of the Security Council for
convening today’s important high-level open debate on conflict and food security.
We also wish to thank the briefers for their sobering briefings, which depict a very
worrying future if urgent action is not taken.
Additional evidence and several important data updates, including a revision
of the entire prevalence of undernourishment series for China from 2000, show that
almost 690 million people in the world — 8.9 per cent of the world population —
are estimated to have been undernourished in 2019. Revision in the light of the new
data, which results in a parallel downward shift of the entire global prevalence of
undernourishment series, confirms the conclusion of past editions of this report,
namely, that the number of people affected by hunger in the world continues to
increase slowly. This trend started in 2014 and has extended through 2019. There are
nearly 60 million more undernourished people now than there were in 2014, when
the prevalence was 8.6 per cent, which is an increase of 10 million people between
2018 and 2019.
Despite the progress achieved in recent years, the previous steady decline in
food insecurity has ended; food insecurity is now on the rise. In fact, the 2020 report
The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World noted that, in 2019, more than
690 million people suffered from hunger, which is 60 million more than in 2014.
When we look at acute food insecurity, the 2020 Global Report on Food Crises
indicates that, in 2019, almost 135 million people, in 55 countries or territories,
or 16 per cent of the total population analysed, were classified as living in acute
food insecurity, which marks the highest number of acute food insecurity in four
years. Unfortunately, these figures are expected to trend upwards with the onset of
the coronavirus pandemic, with the Global Report projecting that the number will
double to 270 million people living in acute food insecurity.
While weather extremes and economic shocks lead to the phenomenon,
conflict remains the main driver of food insecurity. In fact, the nexus between food
insecurity and conflict is well documented. Conflicts damage farming resources and
infrastructure, thereby limiting the ability to produce and distribute food and causing
loss of assets and incomes. Moreover, limiting access to food is constantly used as a
weapon of war. This remains the case, notwithstanding resolution 2417 (2018), which
evinces the link between armed conflict and violence and conflict-induced food
insecurity and the threat of famine. The resolution also calls on all parties to armed
conflict to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law
with regard to respecting and protecting civilians and taking constant care to spare
civilian objects, including objects necessary for food production and distribution.
In order to eradicate food insecurity, the underlying causes of conflict must
be addressed. In the interim, the Security Council should reinforce early-warning
systems established by resolution 2417 (2018), which requires the Council to be
briefed when the risk of conflict-induced famine and widespread food insecurity in
armed conflict contexts occurs and to take the appropriate action to ensure peace
and food security, as well as physical security. To that end, we urge the Secretariat
and all Member States to closely monitor such situations and report those matters to
the Security Council without delay.
78/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

We call on all parties to armed conflicts to fully comply with their obligations
under international law, including international human rights law, as applicable,
and international humanitarian law, in particular their obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949.
Noting that 183 million people were at risk of slipping into acute food
insecurity, CARICOM remains concerned about the impact of the coronavirus
pandemic on food security, especially its effect on the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children, refugees, the elderly and persons with disabilities.
Accordingly, CARICOM urges that there be exceptions to trade/travel restrictions,
border closures and quarantine orders, which may preclude persons suffering from
food insecurity from accessing humanitarian aid. Furthermore, unimpeded access
to the means of production must be maintained and agricultural workers at varying
levels must be protected. In a similar vein, regard must be had to the impact of
economic sanctions on countries living in food insecurity, which may serve only to
compound the already dire circumstances that prevail in those countries.
Ending hunger and achieving food security, as set out by Sustainable
Development Goal 2 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, is achievable
once there is the political will and collective action by all Member States to leave no
one behind. Ending conflicts is critical in that equation.

21-0363079/147

S/2021/250

Annex 38
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba

Indonesia

to

the

At the outset, I would like to thank the United States for organizing this open
meeting on conflict and food security.
Indonesia firmly believes that hunger and famine should never be used as
a method of warfare. Yet food security remains a major issue facing civilians in
numerous conflict-affected areas. Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight three
pertinent points.
First, we need to avoid a conflict-induced humanitarian catastrophe. During
Indonesia’s latest tenure in the Security Council, we consistently pointed out that
food security is an inseparable part of the protection of civilians. We underlined
the importance of preventative measures to ensure that such a catastrophe never
happens.
To that end, my delegation welcomes reporting by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs as an early warning system to ensure that the international
community can respond and prevent possible humanitarian catastrophes promptly.
Nevertheless, the presence of an early warning system should not distract us from
addressing the root causes of conflict. In the end, the only answer to preventing any
conflict-induced humanitarian catastrophe is peace.
Secondly, we remain concerned about recurring hindrances to the freedom of
movement of United Nations peacekeepers in numerous areas of operation, especially
in delivering humanitarian assistance. The role of peacekeepers in ensuring the safe
and orderly delivery of humanitarian assistance, especially food, to conflict zones
is critical. That is particularly so given the geographical challenges that United
Nations missions face in areas of operation, such as South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Indonesia calls on all parties to ensure the safety, security
and health of peacekeepers, as well as humanitarian and aid workers, in performing
their duty.
Thirdly, it is important to strengthen international cooperation. Indonesia is
always at the forefront of advancing multilateralism. We call on the international
community to enhance cooperation in funding and delivering humanitarian
assistance, especially through the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme. Indonesia also highlights the crucial role of
regional organizations in supporting that endeavour. At the same time, international
efforts to ensure food security in conflict-affected areas need to work hand in
hand with efforts to enhance the capacity of countries to protect their populations,
including their food security.
In conclusion, it is clear that ending hunger and famine in conflict areas
requires all countries to work together. Indonesia remains committed to working
together with other States Members of the United Nations in enhancing our collective
effort in that virtuous endeavour.

80/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 39
Statement by the Delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross
I thank you, Madam President, and the United States for convening this
important debate today to discuss the risks, vulnerabilities and responses to conflictdriven food insecurity.
Famine is preventable, and, for the millions of people for whom every day
is a question of survival, we must do more to prevent the level of food insecurity.
Hunger, food insecurity and the risk of famine are often consequences of deeper
problems. In many places where we in the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) work, we see that the drivers of food insecurity can at times stem
from armed conflict or be independent in themselves. Those drivers can range from
environmental degradation and climate change to food systems disruptions and the
damage or destruction of key infrastructure, foodstuffs, crops and livestock, as well
as uncertain humanitarian access.
Warning signs, such as broken health systems, damaged or non-existent
infrastructure and economic shocks, are often present for months, if not years.
Today, the coronavirus disease pandemic has added enormous and acute pressure to
those stressors. It is important to address the humanitarian consequences of hunger,
but we must also treat and prevent its causes. To that end, the ICRC would like to
provide three key recommendations.
First, we should work with all parties to armed conflict for better respect of
international humanitarian law. International humanitarian law provides rules that, if
respected, can help mitigate hunger and food insecurity and prevent famine in armed
conflict. Rules on the conduct of hostilities protect civilians and civilian objects,
which include infrastructure, land and other objects that are vital for preventing
scarcity of resources and ensuring that the civilian population has sufficient access
to food.
It is prohibited to attack, destroy, remove or otherwise render useless objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, including foodstuffs,
agricultural areas, crops and livestock, as well as drinking water installations and
supplies. Furthermore, starvation of civilians as a method of warfare is prohibited.
Secondly, we must act early to prevent famine and food insecurity, including
to safeguard child and maternal health. While rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access is key during an acute food crisis, humanitarian and development actors must
work together before emergencies to address the restrictions and challenges that
disrupt food systems in conflict-affected areas, which ultimately prevent populations
from remaining food secure.
The importance of ensuring the proper functioning of food systems and local
markets is an important element reflected in resolution 2417 (2018) that must not be
overlooked. That requires better acknowledgement of how different components of
food systems are made fragile by conflict and how various actors can play either a
mitigating or exacerbating role at the local, national and transnational level. Women,
for example, play a mitigating role. They are responsible for half the world’s food
production, and in conflict-affected countries that percentage is often much higher.
Finally, we are increasingly seeing that combined armed conflict and climate
risks exacerbate food insecurity and have dramatic humanitarian consequences.
Food insecurity and malnutrition are significantly worse in countries with
agricultural systems that are highly weather-dependent and where livelihoods are
21-0363081/147

S/2021/250

largely agricultural. The impact of armed conflict lowers people’s resilience and the
ability of institutions to mitigate those combined shocks.
To respond to that, greater multi-year investment in adaptation efforts for
conflict-affected States will help to ensure that populations receive the support
necessary to strengthen their resilience to a changing climate, including the impact
on their food security.
Those three recommendations taken together can address some of the main
causes of food insecurity and, in turn, help to prevent famine.

82/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
According to The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2020
report, currently, almost 690 million people, representing 8.9 per cent of the world
population, “are hungry”. It is “up by 10 million people in one year and by nearly 60
million in five years”. The number of people affected by “severe food insecurity”
shows a similar upward trend. Likewise, “the COVID-19 pandemic may add between
83 and 132 million people to the total number of undernourished in the world”.
Those alarming facts indicate that we are back to 2015 hunger levels and are
far from achieving zero hunger by 2030. That trend also underlines the necessity and
urgency of addressing food insecurity.
To that end, the general rule must be to ensure the realization of the right
to food for everyone, everywhere and at all times, in peace and war alike. As the
1974 Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition states,
“to be free from hunger and malnutrition” is an “inalienable right”. The full
realization of that right requires a comprehensive approach and decisive action at
the national and international levels, particularly by focusing on addressing all
underlying causes of food insecurity, as well as coherent international cooperation
and assistance. Accordingly, States, which have the primary responsibility for their
own socioeconomic development, must take all necessary measures to “respect,
protect and fulfil the right to food” at the national level. To succeed, efforts to ensure
national food security must be supported by an enabling international environment.
The essential role of international cooperation is recognized in numerous
international instruments, including in Articles 1, paragraph 3, 55 and 56 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Therefore, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, as well as the relevant bodies and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, must redouble their efforts to that end.
Equally, conflict-driven acute food insecurity should be considered by the
Security Council by urging all parties to conflicts to ensure strict compliance with
international humanitarian law, which, inter alia, protects the access of civilians to
food during armed conflicts and occupation and prohibits the starvation of civilians
as a method of warfare. It is to be emphasized that, when applying sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council should not,
under any circumstances, impose sanctions, directly or indirectly, on humanitarian
trade, particularly food and medicine.
In that context, nothing is more urgent than the immediate removal of the
inhumane blockade imposed against the people of Yemen, causing the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis in contemporary history. Likewise, the unlawful blockade of
Gaza, which is seriously hampering the right to food of the oppressed Palestinian
people, must be removed forthwith.
One of the main factors hampering the full realization of the right to food,
in peace times and conflict situations, is the application of sanctions. As a tool for
the collective punishment of an entire nation, sanctions violate all human rights of
targeted nations, including their right to food, causing food insecurity.
By any measures, unilateral coercive measures, including sanctions, are
inhumane, immoral and unlawful and, due to their broad, devastating and long-term
implications, are as brutal as terrorism and as criminal as such core international
crimes as war crimes and crimes against humanity. During the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, sanctions are insult to injury for the targeted nations.
21-0363083/147

S/2021/250

In that context, the United States sanctions on Iran have seriously restricted
our access to humanitarian goods, including food, medicine and medical equipment,
and inhibited our ability to fight COVID-19 more effectively. Indeed, in these trying
times, nothing is more humanistic than confronting policies such as weaponizing
humanitarian items, particularly medicine and food.
As the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States declares, “No State may use or encourage
the use of economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another
State”. Accordingly, all States must refrain from taking measures, which, inter alia,
undermine the enjoyment of the right to food in other countries.
In 2002, in the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, the
world leaders reiterated that “food should not be used as an instrument for political
and economic pressure” and reaffirmed the “necessity of refraining from unilateral
measures … that endanger food security” (A/57/499, annex). The immediate removal
of sanctions must therefore be considered as a main element in efforts to address
food insecurity.
No less important is the promotion of international cooperation and assistance
to address food insecurity. In article 11, paragraph 2, of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, States have recognized “the fundamental
right of everyone to be free from hunger” and have undertaken to “take, individually
and through international cooperation,” the measures needed for the full realization
of, inter alia, the right to food.
Last but not least, as stated in the Universal Declaration on the Eradication
of Hunger and Malnutrition, “society today already possesses sufficient resources,
organizational ability and technology and hence the competence” (E/CONF.65/20,
chap. I, para.1) to eradicate hunger. Accordingly, the full realization of the
“inalienable right to be free from hunger and malnutrition” and ensuring the key
elements of food security, namely, the availability, accessibility, adequacy and
sustainability, hinges upon the full and effective compliance of all States with their
respective obligations, particularly strict observance of the purposes and principles
of the United Nations.

84/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 33) and wishes to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
Since 2018, when the Security Council recognized for the first time the link
between armed conflict and hunger through resolution 2417 (2018), the number of
people at risk of food insecurity has dramatically increased. As indicated in the
relevant United Nations reports, the number of children suffering from severe
malnutrition continues to rise exponentially due to conflicts.
That worsening situation is bound to produce multifaceted and long-lasting
effects. Food-insecure children are exposed to long-term health problems and more
prone to early school leaving. Food insecurity also makes girls more vulnerable to
early forced marriages and sexual exploitation.
In some cases, the link between conflict and famine reaches an unacceptable
climax, when parties to the conflict use the starvation of civilians as a method of
warfare. That clearly goes against international humanitarian law and should be
investigated and prosecuted as a war crime by the International Criminal Court.
Conflict-induced hunger also stems from the denial of safe, rapid and
unhindered humanitarian access, which prevents humanitarian actors from reaching
all vulnerable communities and further contributes to the growing number of
internally displaced people and refugees, especially in the light of the ravaging
consequences of the pandemic and its spillover effects on humanitarian assistance.
It is therefore of paramount importance to renew our international commitment to
respecting international humanitarian law by ensuring not only the protection of
civilians but also humanitarian access to the affected populations.
Another absolute necessity is to ensure the full protection of all humanitarian
actors in the field. The tragic death of Italy’s Ambassador to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Luca Attanasio, his military protection officer, Carabiniere Vittorio
Iacovacci, and the driver of the World Food Programme (WFP) convoy, Mustapha
Milambo, was a shocking reminder of the importance of ensuring the safety and
security of all humanitarian operators, in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and international humanitarian law.
Food crises call for urgent and effective responses, especially in situations
of famine exacerbated by conflict. This is why Italy has progressively increased its
financial contribution to the Central Emergency Response Fund in support of timely
and effective humanitarian interventions. At the same time, we have increased our
humanitarian contribution in the field of food security, allocating more than $50
million in 2020, particularly in Central Sahel and the greater Horn of Africa.
Food security and nutrition have always been a prominent feature of Italy’s
foreign policy and continue to be central to our overall approach to sustainable
development, in accordance with the peace-humanitarian-development nexus.
This is reflected also in our long-standing support to the Rome-based agencies —
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the WFP and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development — and in our chairmanship of
the Group of Friends of Food Security and Nutrition in New York. More recently,
Italy has promoted, in partnership with the Food and Agriculture Organization, the
constitution of a multi-stakeholder platform — denominated “the Food Coalition” —
for unified global action in response to the impact of the coronavirus disease on food
systems.
21-0363085/147

S/2021/250

Promoting a coordinated, collective action that can help local food systems to
survive a prolonged cycle of crisis will be at the centre of the Food Systems Summit,
which provides a timely opportunity to make important advancements towards the
realization of sustainable food systems. One of the five action tracks of the summit
is devoted to building resilience to vulnerabilities, shocks and stress and to ensuring
the functionality of food systems in areas prone to conflict, natural disasters or
future pandemics — two objectives that are particularly relevant to today’s debate.
Italy is actively contributing to the preparation of the summit and will be pleased to
host the pre-summit in Rome.
Last but not least, Italy is engaged in keeping food security and nutrition
centrally positioned in the agenda of its Group of 20 presidency — especially
through the works streams leading to the meetings of the Development and
Agriculture Ministers — with the aim of promoting a transformational and systemic
approach that can deliver for all, especially the most vulnerable and in the most
vulnerable contexts.

86/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by thanking the United States for convening this
important meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and others for
their briefings.
As a staunch supporter of the concept of human security, Japan attaches great
importance to access to quality nutrition across the world. Japan echoes the urgent
need to respond to the deteriorating global food security situation resulting from the
socioeconomic impact of the coronavirus disease, which has resulted in the highest
number of undernourished people. Rapid and effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance is needed.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2286 (2016), on health care
in armed conflict, to which Japan contributed as a co-penholder in 2016. Despite
the adoption of this resolution and the subsequent resolution 2417 (2018) on conflict
and hunger, it is regrettable that we continue to witness increased attacks against
medical and humanitarian personnel and their facilities in conflict zones. Safe and
unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to civilians under conflict continues to
be a matter of high priority. The Security Council must use its influence to the fullest
extent to facilitate the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions and
to ensure that the key provisions of international humanitarian law are respected.
Japan wishes to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the World Food
Programme (WFP) for its dedicated efforts to end global hunger, as the Nobel
Committee did last year in awarding its Peace Prize to the organization. The news
was warmly welcomed by Japan, a major donor to the WFP, which contributed $196
million last year. At the beginning of this year, we decided to make an additional
contribution of over $158 million to the WFP.
Japan has been a consistent partner of the WFP to improve food security around
the world, particularly to support the most vulnerable people affected by conflict.
In Yemen, Japan decided to provide $25 million to the WFP this year to respond
to the acute food crisis, ensuring nutritional support to over 2.8 million people. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the protracted conflict and violence
have caused serious food insecurity, Japan decided to contribute over $8.3 million
to the WFP this year to provide 66,000 people with emergency food assistance and
31,000 children with school meals for 10 months. We also decided to contribute
$20.5 million to refugees, internally displaced persons and host communities in the
Sahel region, where more than 668,000 people will have access to food and nutrition
this year through the WFP.
Japan is determined to continue making every effort to address food insecurity,
particularly in situations of armed conflict. We fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative of the Food Systems Summit, which will take place during the
General Assembly high-level week in September. Japan will also host the Tokyo
nutrition for growth summit 2021 in December to accelerate global efforts to fight
against malnutrition. We look forward to working closely with the United Nations in
this endeavour.

21-0363087/147

S/2021/250

Annex 43
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan, Ayman Safadi
[Original: Arabic]
May the peace, mercy and blessings of God be upon you.
Food security has become a global concern and is one of the most significant
challenges facing all of us, particularly in the Middle East, where conflicts have
exacerbated suffering and restricted access to food, medicine and basic necessities.
The conflicts are also a major obstacle to the work of the international agencies that
are leading aid efforts and their ability to reach the neediest groups.
About 690 million people around the world are short of food. Every year,
nearly 9 million people die of malnutrition.
In Yemen, the scene of the worst humanitarian crisis in the world today, more
than 16 million people are suffering from hunger, including 5 million who are one
step away from famine. Malnutrition rates have reached record levels, with nearly
400,000 children under the age of five suffering from acute malnutrition in the
country. In Syria, 12.4 million people do not regularly receive enough food, with 4.5
million entering that category in the last year.
It is therefore more urgent now than ever before to strengthen international
cooperation and coordination to prevent a global crisis of food shortages and
malnutrition. Food security and conflict are interlinked, and dealing with them
requires comprehensive solutions based on a solid international approach and
effective international coordination.
The response to food security, particularly in fragile and conflict-affected
areas, must address the interconnected causes and factors that impede development;
to do so, it must, for example, strengthen social cohesion, develop the private sector
and create jobs, and reduce the risks and consequences of conflicts. Addressing all
these factors can improve food security.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has significantly increased food insecurity
in the poorest and most vulnerable countries. A number of serious challenges to food
security, however, predate the pandemic, in particular climate change, a shortage
of drinking water around the world, global economic crises, regional unrest and a
global asylum crisis. All these challenges have cast a shadow over food supplies for
refugees and host communities alike.
Jordan, which hosts the second highest number of refugees per capita globally,
remains committed to protecting refugees and providing them with the food,
medicine and basic necessities that they need for a decent existence. As part of its
pandemic response plan, Jordan recently became the first country in the world to
vaccinate refugees free of charge.
The food and agriculture sector in Jordan provides a livelihood for about a
quarter of the population and is one of the largest sources of jobs for refugees and
women in Jordanian society. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the sector has
proved to be a strong link in the global supply chain, with the potential for major
expansion through more investment and greater reliance on technology, alternative
energy and regional projects. Jordan is ready to marshal all its capabilities, particularly
in relation to food and the pharmaceutical industries, to become a regional supply
and storage centre.
88/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Jordan supports your worthy
endeavours. To quote from the address given by His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein as part of the Davos Agenda at the World Economic Forum in January:
“This pandemic has made us all equal, and let that be one of the positive
lessons we take from this difficult time as we look ahead. Let our empathy
drive our progress and recovery, as we build bridges to allow the better
exchange of not only vital supplies and expertise but also the exchange of
hope and positive ideas. I hope that we let our humanity lead the way.”

21-0363089/147

S/2021/250

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to
the United Nations, Magzhan Ilyassov, on behalf of the Group of
Landlocked Developing Countries
We thank the United States presidency for focusing attention on resolution
2417 (2018) as the pathway for the convening of the Food Systems Summit during
the high-level week in September 2021. It is hence my honour to speak on behalf of
the 32 landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) of the world and present a pathway
by which agriculture and food systems can be made the backbone of our economies
and sustainable development.
However, first, we need to acknowledge the many complex challenges that
LLDCs encounter. These arise from their geographic remoteness, the lack of direct
access to the sea and the high transport and trade tariffs connected to traversing
through transit countries. This accounts for why one third of the population of LLDCs
lives in extreme poverty, with moderate to severe food insecurity still persisting.
The 2020 Global Report on Food Crises indicates that 16 LLDCs were among the 50
countries with severe food crises.
Secondly, it is necessary to understand that this fragile situation stems from
the costs of imported food items, as well as domestic food prices, which are three
times higher in LLDCs than the coastal regions.
Thirdly, the brunt of this burden is often borne by vulnerable populations who
are threatened by climate change, with its devastating impact on some 54 per cent of
the terrain of LLDCs, which is comprised of arid and semi-arid areas or dry lands
and not conducive to agriculture.
Fourthly, since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic, increasing
food insecurity and potential instability have soared in LLDCs faster than their
capacity to cope with these spiralling conditions.
In the light of the abovementioned, we realize that we can have a sustainable
impact on peace only if food security and nutrition initiatives are implemented as
part of a larger and broader set of multisectoral, humanitarian, development and
peace-related strategies to avert conflicts. So, instead of short-term responses,
LLDCs will need sufficient financial and technical support for investments in
longer-term resilience building and disaster preparedness, in addition to their own
resources. Therefore, the international cooperation of the United Nations system,
development partners and donors will help build resilient livelihoods and riskinformed programmes to reduce poverty and effectively implement resolution
2417 (2018).
However, the situation is complex. Many conflict-induced food crises elsewhere
can compound the economic crises in general in LLDCs or the neighbouring transit
countries. Hence, we see the valuable role of a focal point or envoy for food security
in directing and monitoring this process at the regional and global levels. Sustaining
peace for LLDCs must be not a mere post-conflict activity, but rather a priority right
in the pre-conflict phases with livelihood support, facilitated community-based
approaches and capacity-building of governmental and civil society institutions.
Only then can we prevent food security disruptions and displacements.
Furthermore, implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on the women and peace
and security agenda, will greatly promote women’s economic empowerment. It
will also enhance social protection measures and thereby close the gender gap in
agriculture, together with the engagement of youth groups.
90/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Finally, the Group also calls on all to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect food-related civilian objects, including
farms, markets, water systems, mills, food processing and storage sites, and hubs
and means of food transportation.
In conclusion, LLDCs must be central to the international food security
agenda. The Group will cooperate fully to make the 2021 Food Systems Summit a
historic event for our common and secure humankind.

21-0363091/147

S/2021/250

Annex 45
Statement by Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
I would like to congratulate you, Madam, and the United States on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March and commend you for
choosing food security for this open debate.
When children go to bed hungry, this should be the most important peace and
security issue for our world and for the Security Council.
The world is facing one of its most challenging tests in our modern history.
A pandemic that has left our world on its knees is also leaving millions of people
hungry and with empty stomachs around the globe. Hunger and the rise in food
insecurity preceded the pandemic. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) has estimated that the number of undernourished people
increased from 624 million in 2014 to 688 million in 2019. But the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) has exacerbated the situation.
The direst warning came from the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme when he predicted, the world “could be facing multiple famines of
biblical proportions” (S/2020/340, annex II). He foresaw, as a result of the economic
crisis and the conflicts combined with the decline in aid, a “perfect storm”, where
the real danger is “that more people could potentially die from the economic impact
of COVID-19 than from the virus itself” (ibid.).
The drivers underlying food insecurity and hunger include economic shocks,
conflict and protracted crises, access to food, climate change and extreme weather.
The economic slowdown of economies around the world prior to the pandemic led
to negative growth in many areas and hardships for people especially in vulnerable
and low-income countries. This, combined with the decline in oil prices, could lead
to at least a 14 per cent decline in remittances to low and middle-income countries
in 2021, according to the World Bank, adding 33 million people to those at risk
of hunger.
Conflict is one of the most prevalent of causes of hunger. Eleven of the 12
countries that the World Bank designates as food-security hotspots — areas at the
highest risk of food insecurity crises — are on the World Bank’s list of fragile and
conflict situations for 2021.
Climate change and droughts were already causing disruptions and hardships
in many countries around the world. In some countries, wheat production decreased
by 50 per cent due to drought.
Then the COVID-19 pandemic struck. It plunged the global economy into the
worst recession since the Second World War, according to Columbia University’s
Earth Institute. The World Bank reported that the pandemic was estimated to push
150 million people around the world into extreme poverty by 2021.
Hunger increases on every continent and disproportionately affects lowincome and poor countries. This effect of COVID-19 on hunger is projected “to
continue for decades or even up to 2050”, according to Cynthia Rosenzweig, a senior
researcher at the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s
Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
The pandemic’s heavy toll on food security is due to the enormous disruptions
that it placed on the food supply chain, long lockdowns, job losses, increased consumer
prices — with world food prices hitting a six-year high in 2020, according to the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations —and trade restrictions
92/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

adding to the severity of the food-security crisis. All of this reversed decades of
progress against hunger.
The food-security crisis hit low-income and fragile States the most due to the
lockdown and their weak infrastructure, and because most of them depend on food
imports. Issues of inclusion of vulnerable groups and internally displaced persons
added to their hardships due to the volatility in food commodities.
Nowhere is this situation more pronounced than in the Middle East, where
conflict, climate change, economic shocks and disruptions led to the worst food crisis
that many countries have seen. The Middle East region is among the most vulnerable
of the world as far as food security is concerned. It is among the world’s largest food
importers, which makes it more vulnerable to trade and supply-chain disruptions.
The region was suffering from negative growth in 2020, oil prices were at
their lowest in decades, affecting local economies and expatriates alike, in addition
to a drop in tourism and travel. Droughts due to climate change wiped out production
of some food products, and access to food became a major problem because of
the lockdowns.
Conflicts in Yemen, Syria and Libya created food crises of unprecedented
magnitude. In Yemen, 80 per cent of the population required humanitarian assistance.
In Syria, half of the population is now food insecure, requiring food and livelihood
assistance, according to the Global Network against Food Crisis.
The region’s displaced are the most vulnerable, but their host communities
are not faring better now, especially in Lebanon. The Palestinians, mostly in Gaza,
are food insecure and need assistance, according to humanitarian organizations.
Refugees in Lebanon and Jordan have also been hit hard because of the situation in
the region.
Global food prices rose everywhere around the world by close to 20 per cent
from January 2020 to January 2021. For example, the monthly food costs in Syria
increased by 240 per cent, and the number of food-insecure people rose by 1.4
million. Since 2019, the price of wheat in South Sudan increased by 62 per cent; that
of rice in Nigeria rose by 30 per cent; and that of maize in Kenya rose by 60 per cent.
This added to the food insecurity of hundreds of millions in developing countries.
In addition to all of that, the invasion of locusts in Africa had a devastating effect
and pushed millions more into hunger. The pandemic pushed over 1 billion children
out of school, from Africa to Latin America and the Middle East, tipping millions
of school children into hunger because, in poor countries, they depended on school
meals for nutrition.
In Lebanon, the pandemic hit a country reeling under the weight of a financial
crisis, political gridlock and an explosion that destroyed not only a large part of the
city of Beirut but also the country’s wheat silos in the port, where Lebanon’s wheat
supplies are stored.
A report of the Secretary-General states that Lebanon’s worsening economic
and financial crisis has resulted in over half the population sliding into poverty. The
report notes the contraction by 20 per cent in gross domestic product in 2020.
People have lost their life savings and have limited access to their deposits.
This in the middle of a debilitating financial crisis, which saw the Lebanese pound
loses 85 per cent of its value since October 2019. The consumer price index rose by
145 per cent from November 2019 to November 2020, and food and beverage prices
increased by around 402 per cent for the same period.

21-0363093/147

S/2021/250

This past week, the situation got worse with the Lebanese pound dropping to
a near-record-breaking 10,750 pounds to the United States dollar, as compared to
1,500 pounds to the dollar in 2019. The World Bank has estimated that “poverty and
extreme-poverty rates in Lebanese households during 2020 have reached levels as
high as 45 per cent and 22 per cent, respectively”.
The impact of this crisis translated into a food-security crisis and hunger
among the most vulnerable population, never before seen Lebanon. The Prime
Minister warned of a food crisis, and World Food Programme officials warned last
year, even before the crisis worsened, of over 1 million Lebanese dropping under the
food-poverty line in 2020.
The situation of displaced Syrians in Lebanon has also become more difficult
as a result of the rise in food prices and the loss of the value of the Lebanese pound.
Food security and hunger resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic should
be tackled on the local and global levels. International institutions are scaling up
their assistance, but the international pool of donors and the resources are shrinking
because the crisis is global now and everybody is hurting. The solution rests in
international cooperation, working with multilateral international organizations, to
keep the “food trade flowing” among nations and to stop trade restrictions.
But, most important, food security can be safeguarded only in a peaceful
environment. It is incumbent on the Security Council to engage seriously in ending
the conflicts around the world to stop food insecurity and fight hunger. Conflicts
are the fires that are eating up peoples’ livelihoods and daily bread. To put food on
poor people’s tables, we need to silence the guns depriving them of their daily bread.
Just as we are fighting the COVID-19 virus with a vaccine, we need to fight
hunger and food insecurity by spreading peace and conflict resolution. Prevention
should remain at the core of the collective actions of the Security Council and
Member States, while addressing root causes so that crises do not morph into fullfledged conflicts, thus aggravating the humanitarian situation.
The implementation of Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2417 (2018), and compliance with international humanitarian law obligations are
effective tools to that end. Keeping humanitarian assistance lines open during
conflict is essential to prevent starvation and hunger.
Let us commit to not letting anyone go hungry. Let us end world hunger by
making peace.

94/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 46
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Relations of the Kingdom of Lesotho, ‘Matšepo Molise-Ramakoae
Allow me to begin by commending you, Madam President, for convening this
high-level open debate of the Security Council on conflict and food security. Today’s
meeting is a clear demonstration of our resolve and determination to ensure that
necessary measures are taken towards the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018).
Fostering food security is one of the daunting challenges confronting the
international community. Sub-Saharan Africa appears to face harsh constraints with
regard to attaining food security due to several factors, including conflict, climate
change and other development challenges, such as weak political institutions, a
fragile macroeconomic environment and fledgling fiscus. The situation has been
exacerbated by the adverse impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As a
result, the upsurge of armed conflict in Africa is a menace to what little progress
there would otherwise be towards achieving global food security.
The most destructive of all the factors fuelling food insecurity appears to
be conflict, which disrupts livelihoods and increases the numbers of refugees and
internally displaced civilians in conflict-ridden areas around the globe. The Sahel,
the Horn of Africa, the Great Lakes region, Yemen and Syria have degenerated into
the most conflict-prone parts of the world.
Some academics have expanded the debate by broadly classifying the causes
of armed conflict into natural and human-made factors. On the one hand, the natural
factors include, but are not restricted to, climate change, population size, competition
and diversity, while on the other hand the human-made factors include religious
extremism, security deficiency, a sense of alienation, endemic elite corruption,
inadequate and deceptive reporting systems, military brutality, adverse economic
conditions, decrepit systems and underdeveloped infrastructure.
There is an intricate relation between food insecurity and violent armed
conflict, as conflict can affect food security through other means and food security
itself has been identified as a conflict determinant by some scholars. Conflict
potentially reduces food availability and access, as the fighting may disrupt
agricultural production and markets. During the course of a conflict, food systems
are often damaged; this includes direct damage, such as the destruction of crops or
arable land, but also labour diversion away from the agricultural sector, according
to reports on this topic. Indeed, the 2017 report on The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the World, by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), the International Fund for Agricultural Development, UNICEF,
the World Food Programme and the World Health Organization, found that after a
long declining trend in the number of people undernourished, recent increases were
observed most notably in areas affected by conflict.
Africa has taken encouraging steps to address food security and nutrition
challenges. At the African Union summit in Equatorial Guinea in 2014, Heads of
State and Government adopted a remarkable set of concrete agricultural goals to
be attained by 2025. The Malabo summit reaffirmed that agriculture should remain
high on the development agenda of the African Union and a critical policy initiative
for African economic growth and poverty reduction. The Malabo Declaration on
Accelerated Agricultural Growth commits to accelerating agricultural growth by
at least doubling current agricultural productivity levels by the year 2025. This
resonates with the key principles and values of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme.
21-0363095/147

S/2021/250

During the review progress towards Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
2 at the 2017 High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, increased
understanding of interlinkages among all SDGs was evident. SDG 2, about “ending
hunger, achieving food security and improved nutrition, promoting sustainable
agriculture”, highlights the complex interlinkages among other development goals.
Turning to the southern African subregion, with particular focus on Lesotho,
it is of paramount importance to note that the absence of armed conflict in recent
years in the country has enabled the Kingdom of Lesotho to make an undertaking to
modernize her agricultural systems.
With the assistance of the Millennium Challenge Corporation of the United
States of America, the Parliament of Lesotho enacted the Land Administration
Authority Act of 2010, which went a long way to addressing the issue of security
of land ownership, including by removing impediments to women’s access to
land. With the assistance of development partners, Lesotho has started applying
farming methods intended to be resilient to climate and weather hazards. However,
the country still faces major challenges. Climate change is one challenge. Severe
drought conditions devasted the entirety of southern Africa in recent years and
resulted in severe food shortages. Another challenge relates to the malnutrition and
even malnourishment among children under the age of five, particularly those who
reside in rural areas.
Lesotho also adopted its food and nutrition policy in 2016. The policy serves
as the reference framework for all sectors and implementers to align their policies
and programmes, guide the identification of food security-specific interventions as
well as create an enabling the environment for food security. We are also proud
to report that our Head of State, His Majesty King Letsie III, has, for a number of
successive years, been the African Union Champion for Nutrition and also FAO
Special Ambassador for Nutrition, positions through which he raises awareness and
mobilizes Governments, international organizations and the general public to end
hunger and malnutrition.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight that the ability to promote food security and
sustainably feed a growing population by 2030 depends on dedicated investments in
agriculture, social protection, disaster risk reduction, education, health and efforts to
develop the capacities of farmers and fishers to produce food and manage the natural
environment.
Finally, I wish to point out that it would be prudent for a United Nations focal
point to help guide the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018) in order to ensure
unhindered humanitarian access to civilians affected by armed conflict. Better
coordinated efforts are required to meet the needs of people in conflict-ridden areas
who are affected by major food crises and abnormal weather patterns. These efforts
can be achieved through targeted emergency responses as well as medium- and longterm assistance to support recovery and build resilience, or, in other words, to build
back better.

96/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 47
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Culture
of Liechtenstein, Katrin Eggenberger
Liechtenstein welcomes you, Madam President, to the United Nations and to
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I applaud you for your decision to
focus the Council’s attention on the complex interplay between conflict and hunger,
and I am grateful for the invitation to participate in this debate. While we eagerly
wait for the Security Council to restore established levels of transparency, inclusion
and accountability — as other Charter bodies are making strides to do — we also
hope that, in the meantime, contributions like these will help inform the Council’s
deliberations and decisions on a topic that is of concern to all of us.
Resolution 2417 (2018) was a landmark decision in the Security Council’s
overall approach to preventing and resolving conflict. It is a strong case in point
that the Council must adopt a comprehensive concept of security to implement its
mandate effectively. It also shows that the Security Council is part of an overall
United Nations system aspiring to realize the generational promise enshrined in the
Sustainable Development Goals — a perspective that the Council would benefit from
adopting more comprehensively. The potential for the Security Council to address
food insecurity as a root cause of conflicts is vast and mostly untapped. At the same
time, the Security Council is ultimately responsible to address conflict-induced food
crises by ensuring humanitarian access to those in need. The Council’s track record
in that respect is, unfortunately, also very limited.
Only two weeks ago, the Security Council was briefed about the harrowing
fact that 60 per cent of the population of Syria — 12.4 million people — does not have
regular access to enough safe and nutritious food. In Syria’s north-west, children
suffer at unprecedented levels from hunger and its grave health consequences. Ten
years of war by the Syrian authorities against its own population also represent 10
years of the Security Council failing the Syrian people — a singular and lasting
stain on the Council’s legacy. While a direct consequence of the armed conflict, the
current humanitarian crisis in Syria no doubt has complex causes. They need to be
addressed in the context of a comprehensive political solution to put Syria on the
path to peace, prosperity and justice.
At the same time, it is evident that hunger continues to be a used as an instrument
of warfare and that those responsible are relentless in their efforts to sustain the
suffering in a climate of pervasive impunity. Humanitarian access continues to be
restricted or blocked arbitrarily by the Syrian authorities in a systematic abuse of the
consent principle for cross-line aid deliveries. Therefore, the remaining cross-border
humanitarian channel is a lifeline for 3 million people that the Security Council must
preserve, ideally complemented by further cross-border channels in accordance with
the humanitarian needs on the ground. Should the Council fail in its responsibility
to ensure that assistance can be provided to all those who need it, the General
Assembly should be prepared to take complementary action. The arbitrary denial of
humanitarian access is a war crime, as is the starvation of a population, which has
been included in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
In the past 10 years, the Security Council has consistently failed to hold the
perpetrators of atrocity crimes in Syria to account, with devastating effects in terms
of civilian suffering. The work of the General Assembly-mandated International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism is thus of key importance and today provides
the most direct pathway to justice, in addition to national prosecutions such as those
undertaken recently in Germany. In the light of the far-reaching legal tools that
the Security Council has at its disposal, it should urgently revisit its hostile stance
21-0363097/147

S/2021/250

against international justice efforts and use its authority to ensure that the parties to
conflict respect international humanitarian law.
The conflict in Yemen stands out as one of the most massive food security
crises. The United Nations has tirelessly stressed the need for compliance by all
sides with the fundamental rules of war, as enshrined in the Geneva Conventions, to
prevent a humanitarian catastrophe. Instead, the war has been characterized by the
utmost disregard for international law. Hostilities continue to be fuelled by foreign
intervention, and their consequences are borne by the Yemeni people, 80 per cent
of whom are now in need of humanitarian assistance. Two thirds of all districts are
pre-famine, an unconscionable state of affairs. Time and again we have seen the
politicization of humanitarian access. To break the cycle of the conflict-induced food
insecurity in Yemen, the Security Council must make humanitarian access its highest
priority and not accept restrictions for United Nations and other humanitarian actors
to safely and efficiently deliver assistance. The Council is credible in doing so only
if it is ready to enforce its position. That is also a responsibility the Council has visà-vis the humanitarian actors on the ground, including the many dedicated United
Nations staff.
The reports on the conflict in the Ethiopian Tigray region are extremely
concerning, both from a humanitarian and an accountability perspective. The
Security Council must ensure urgent access to the region for humanitarian actors, an
end to the communications blackout and an investigation into the reports of atrocities.
Liechtenstein welcomes the agreement between the World Food Programme and the
Government of Ethiopia on humanitarian access as well as the leadership shown by
Ireland in the Council’s discussions. It should be the primary interest of the Security
Council to ensure that its terms are fully honoured in order to prevent a worsening
of the humanitarian crisis, and the worst-case scenario of a famine in the region.
While the Security Council’s support for regional mediation efforts will,
hopefully, soon lead to political progress towards the resolution of the crisis, the
Council has also a responsibility to take the necessary steps to reduce human
suffering and increase the prospects for a political solution wherever possible. It is
regrettable that the Security Council has so far failed to express itself clearly in that
respect, but today’s debate should provide additional impetus for a Council product.

98/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks the United States presidency for having organized this important
high-level open debate on conflict and food security and also takes this opportunity
to underline the tireless and invaluable work of David Beasley and his team at the
World Food Programme and to congratulate them on having won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 2020 for their remarkable work and contribution to humanity.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 33) while also delivering a few additional remarks in our national capacity.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) in 2018 was a watershed
moment, and its provisions continue to be as relevant as ever. It is a matter
of deep concern that food insecurity is projected to increase in 2021, also
considering the gender dimension of food insecurity, where women and girls are
disproportionately impacted.
As highlighted by the World Food Programme in its response plan published
in February, there are more than 30 million people in emergency conditions across
41 countries, and conflict has been identified as the single most important driver of
humanitarian needs.
It is therefore highly appropriate for the Security Council to continue focusing
on this issue and to address the link between conflict and food insecurity. This
remains even more pressing given the exacerbating circumstances of the coronavirus
disease and the grave humanitarian crises and food-insecurity situations that we are
witnessing in multiple countries.
In Ethiopia, tensions are hindering the movement of goods, a situation that is
having, and will continue to have, a negative impact on access to food. In Yemen,
between January and June 2021, the number of food-insecure persons is projected
to increase by nearly 3 million, to 16.2 million people. In Syria, 12.4 million people
do not have regular access to enough safe and nutritious food. Other countries, such
as Iraq, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Afghanistan, are experiencing food insecurity linked to conflict and urgently need
our collective focus.
We need to redouble our efforts to address the root causes of conflicts, prevent
new hostilities from emerging and acknowledge the essential framework provided
by international humanitarian law in preventing and addressing the prevalence of
conflict-induced food insecurity.
Allow me to outline three principles that will serve as our guiding light should
Malta be entrusted with the responsibility to serve as a member of the Security
Council in 2023-2024.
First, in line with international humanitarian law, we stress the importance
of all parties facilitating rapid, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian actors.
The unhindered, immediate delivery of life-saving assistance to the intended
beneficiaries is first and foremost crucial to addressing food insecurity. More
broadly, it is a basic norm of humanity that should serve as a unifying factor for
the international community. We remind all entities of their obligation to allow and
facilitate humanitarian access, and to ensure that humanitarian operations are not
subject to targeted attacks or other direct and/or indirect forms of obstruction such
as access and/or movement restrictions.
Secondly, we encourage all parties to abide by the explicit, and codified,
prohibition against the use of starvation of a civilian population as a method of
21-0363099/147

S/2021/250

warfare. Such an account reflects an utmost contempt for human life. Those crimes
cannot go unpunished, and the Security Council is a fitting body to highlight this.
Thirdly, Malta reaffirms its wholehearted support for the role and presence
of the United Nations agencies and other humanitarian organizations that ensure
vital humanitarian assistance reaches the intended destination in very challenging
circumstances, often paying the highest price for their selfless endeavours.
Malta has sought to play its part by proactively tackling cases of food
insecurity, both conflict-induced and beyond. Most recently, Malta pledged a
financial contribution during the 2021 virtual high-level pledging event for the
Humanitarian Situation in Yemen.
In conclusion, we echo the message that international coordination through
multilateral entities provides the appropriate avenue to face this challenge. In that
vein, we would support the establishment of a United Nations focal point to better
facilitate and coordinate the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018). Similarly,
we look forward to the upcoming Secretary-General’s Food Systems Summit and
to producing concrete deliverables that alleviate the suffering of millions of people
throughout the world.

100/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent M ission of Morocco to the
United Nat ions
[Original: French]
I would like at the outset to thank the United States of America for having
organized this open debate in the Security Council on the crucial issue of conflicts
and food security. This debate is a good opportunity to shed light on the global
humanitarian situation in 2021 and on the historic levels of food insecurity that lie
ahead for several countries, particularly those in instability and conflict situations.
Morocco also welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General in convening,
at the level of Heads of State, the Food Systems Summit during the General Assembly
high-level week to be held in September 2021. Morocco represents the Group of
African States on the Summit Advisory Committee and is sparing no effort to
mobilize the relevant national and African stakeholders around the Summit’s vision,
which is to reform food systems towards sustainable and inclusive models while
raising awareness of the security consequences of climate change and the resulting
impact on food security and international peace and security.
Making agriculture an engine of economic growth and an effective tool in
the fight against rural poverty is the objective of the Green Morocco Plan strategy
launched by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God be with him, in 2008. In
2021, Moroccan agriculture continues to be at the centre of sustainable development
and food security concerns. In addition to its contribution to the national economy of
nearly 14 per cent, its real socioeconomic impact is much higher thanks in particular
to its spillover effects upstream, downstream and through household final monetary
consumption expenditure.
As such, the Green Morocco Plan has created a new dynamic in the agricultural
sector in Morocco. Since the implementation of the plan, private investment in
the agricultural sector is estimated at nearly 56 billion Moroccan dirhams. In 50
years, Moroccan agriculture has made great progress in terms of modernization and
diversification, and agricultural activity continues to constitute one of the pillars of
the Moroccan economy.
Morocco has also improved its self-sufficiency in certain foodstuffs in a
context marked by a growing integration of the international market. The Kingdom
thus meets 100 per cent of its meat, fruit and vegetable needs; 82 per cent of its milk
needs, 50 per cent of its sugar needs, 60 per cent of its cereal needs; and 20 per cent
of its oil needs.
Internationally, Morocco considers the promotion of the national agricultural
sector and its integration into its global and continental environment as a priority.
As such, Morocco provides support to several African sister countries and finances
several programmes in the field of agriculture and marine fisheries. Thus, Morocco
contributes, through the concerted action of its Government and its private sector, to
strengthening food security in African countries by supporting sustainable agricultural
production and improving water management and soil quality and nutrition.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has highlighted certain global
vulnerabilities: the global response to the pandemic has not been coordinated and has
been unable to help the poorest countries and their peoples owing to the weakness of
the existing health-care infrastructure. Nor has it been able to manage the economic
consequences. In addressing the issue of food security, the Security Council should
focus on those shortcomings while addressing other major challenges ranging from
climate change and growing inequality to technological disruptions and terrorism.
21-03630101/147

S/2021/250

In addition, fragile agricultural and food systems, especially in Africa and
other low-income regions, have multiplied the impact of the pandemic. If left
unchecked, those systems’ shortcomings could intensify the shock of fresh crises in
the coming decades.
The World Food Programme warns that the number of people suffering from
acute food insecurity in low- and middle-income countries, especially in Africa,
could almost double in 2021, to 265 million, as a result of the pandemic. Strengthening
African agricultural systems is vital in order to make the continent more self-reliant
and resilient when faced with fresh shocks.
Ensuring the functioning of agricultural and food systems in Africa and in
developing regions is equally vital, as food and agriculture play a central role in the
elaboration of health-care and socioeconomic systems.
Lockdowns and social distancing measures linked to COVID-19 have not been
sufficient in the least developed countries, whose economies are largely based on
the informal sector, mainly because of fears that such measures could significantly
affect people’s ability to earn enough to feed their families.
Strengthening global security also requires transforming agricultural and
food systems. Terrorism feeds on the deprivation of rural populations in regions
such as the Sahel, where they can earn more by engaging in illegal activities than by
working in the legal economy and public services.
The reorganization of agriculture is a prerequisite for sustainable nutrition for
the global population, which could reach nearly 11 billion by the end of this century.
A host of international events will offer an excellent opportunity to move
forward on those issues, including the African Green Revolution Forum, which
Morocco will host this year in preparation for the United Nations Food Systems
Summit, to galvanize African voices around that event.
Morocco reiterates the importance of the need for Africa to speed up, with the
support of the international community, the transformation of its agricultural and
food systems in order to enable the world to meet the targets set by the Sustainable
Development Goals.

102/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the
United Nations, Neville Melvin Gertze
Namibia is pleased to be participating in this high-level open debate on conflict
and food security. Food insecurity, especially in conflict areas of the world, features
prominently and repeatedly in one report of the Secretary-General after another. In
some cases, food insecurity arises as a result of conflict. It is therefore clear that in
order for conflict-driven food insecurity to end or to diminish, conflicts must stop.
For that to happen, peace, dialogue and reconciliation should be nurtured and
sustained. However, those are not the only solutions. Strong rule of law, improved
governance and putting the interests of the people above personal interests also play
an indispensable role in conflict prevention, mediation and resolution.
Not all conflicts are the same. For example, some are driven by power, others
by ideology. As such, in some cases the eruption of conflict cannot be attributed
to any measure of poor governance, but rather to external influence in a country’s
domestic affairs for political reasons, regardless of how that influence is framed and
projected. In such cases, the Security Council has an obligation to pay attention not
only to the manifestation of the conflict but also to the underlying causes.
The emergence and persistence of conflicts and food insecurity challenge
the moral conscience of humankind to extend love and show care to the displaced
and other affected people. It also puts diplomacy to the test. In that connection,
His Excellency Mr. Hage G. Geingob, President of the Republic of Namibia,
keeps reminding Namibians that the failure of diplomacy is the beginning of war.
Humanitarian personnel who are assisting those experiencing acute food insecurity
must be protected, and measures must be put in place and implemented to ensure that
aid is delivered in a timely way and without hindrances. Humanitarian personnel
do not cause conflict, and neither are they agents of conflict. Namibia therefore
condemns all attacks on humanitarian personnel and civilian infrastructure, as they
are merely the victims of the disagreements of others.
Early warning signs for conflicts, if ignored, may lead to the evolution and
unfolding of more diverse risks in the form of political intolerance, deliberate
disruption of the electoral process, incitement to violence and conflict, among others.
Peace cannot reign with weak or non-existent peacebuilding measures, or
when these remain unimplemented due to the lack of political will. To fend off
food insecurity and their pernicious consequences and to end conflicts, fragile and
deteriorating States should be assisted in order to build their capacity to preserve
their sovereignty. Considering the degree of interdependence in the world today,
assistance rendered to strengthen any State’s institutions should be regarded as
a pre-emptive, indirect manner to address food insecurity that — in one way or
another — could otherwise affect other States in future.
Climate change remains a serious challenge that directly impacts every
sector of the economy. As such, water cooperation is all the more important. The
world is witnessing the interlinkages between water and population migration.
Acute migration is affecting food security in many parts of the world, which poses
a direct challenge to Government legitimacy and resilience. Migration brings its
own challenges, including the emergence of water rights and land disputes, which
contribute to food insecurity and precipitate conflicts. Investment in water, climate
adaptation and mitigation should therefore be viewed as an investment in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
21-03630103/147

S/2021/250

Namibia has no objection to a United Nations focal point to help guide the
implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), but the resolution is meant to ensure the
smooth delivery of aid to civilians, to protect humanitarian personnel and to safeguard
international law — not to resolve conflicts. While we appreciate the importance of
this resolution, we can reduce food insecurity only if it is implemented alongside
other instruments designed to end conflict.

104/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
On 24 March it will be three years since the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2417 (2018). Three years on, the link between conflict and hunger
is more apparent than ever.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has long been a prominent advocate for
addressing that link. The unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), initiated by
the Netherlands, Sweden, Côte d’Ivoire and Kuwait, was a key milestone in the fight
against conflict-induced hunger. Not only did it for the first time put the spotlight on
conflict as the most important driver of food insecurity, it also condemned the use
of starvation as a method of war. We are therefore pleased to see that other Security
Council members are taking this issue forward.
With the resolution approaching its third birthday, it remains, unfortunately,
as relevant as ever. The 2021 Global Humanitarian Overview, published by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, projects a historic level of food
insecurity, with famine looming in several countries, due in large part to conflict.
While climate and economic shocks are increasingly driving needs, conflict remains
the root cause of acute food insecurity in an increasing number of countries. In 2019,
77 million people in 22 countries experienced hunger due to armed violence.
I would like to highlight three elements that need more attention if we are to
successfully fight hunger and implement the spirit of resolution 2417 (2018).
First, prevention should be on top of all our agendas. Addressing the root causes
of conflict and mitigating their effects on populations is the most sustainable way to
fight hunger. If we want long-term stability, we need to develop more sustainable,
resilient, equitable and inclusive food systems. Only then can communities provide
for their families when exposed to a shock. The Secretary-General’s Food Systems
Summit in 2021 represents a major opportunity and serves as a testimony of inclusive
multilateralism. We are fully committed to achieving an ambitious outcome from
that Summit.
The Netherlands has also taken the initiative, through the regional Food and
Nutrition Security Resilience Programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, to operationalize resolution 2417 (2018) and contribute to
resilient food systems in protracted crises by addressing the causal link between
conflict and food insecurity. The overall outcome of the Programme will be resilient
livelihoods and food systems that contribute to sustainable peace at the local level.
Secondly, we stress the importance of early warning. Resolution 2417 (2018)
gave the Security Council the tools to play a pivotal role in averting famine. It
enables the Security Council to call on the Secretary-General to inform the Council
as soon as famine is looming. The resolution has proven to be effective. In 2018,
the Security Council triggered resolution 2417 (2018), leading to better access and,
ultimately, to averting famine in South Sudan. In October, resolution 2417 (2018)
was triggered again, but did not yield any improvements in the situation in Burkina
Faso, north-eastern Nigeria, Yemen or South Sudan. More in-depth and frequent
reporting to the Security Council could strengthen the early-warning mechanism
and be an important step towards action.
That brings me to my third point — action. The deliberate starvation
of civilians is unlawful and amoral and must be stopped. With the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) and the amendment to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, extending the application of starvation as a war crime
21-03630105/147

S/2021/250

to non-international armed conflicts, the international community has made clear
that deliberate starvation is unacceptable and punishable.
I therefore think that we need to take previous successes to the next level and
discuss more concretely how we can make sure that justice is done for the victims
of starvation. Preparing for criminal accountability starts with data collection.
Information and evidence are needed about the scale and occurrence of starvation,
but also about its perpetrators. To that end, we need to build capacity. When evidence
is clear and attributable, consequences must follow because action is what the victims
of war crimes deserve. The Netherlands stands ready to do its part.
Lastly, I would like to focus on two specific crisis contexts — Yemen
and Ethiopia.
To start with Yemen, alarm bells regarding the dire food situation in the country
have rung steadily over the past years. In its food security and price monitoring, the
World Food Programme reports that the food security situation in Yemen continues
to be alarming. The causes are ongoing conflict and the combination of a cumulative
deterioration in macroeconomic conditions, the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, a reduction in food assistance, the fuel crisis in the areas under the control
of Sana’a-based authorities and flash floods across the country. In a briefing to the
Security Council in January (see S/2021/56), Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark
Lowcock called for immediate action to prevent a conflict-induced massive famine
in Yemen.
Reports by the United Nations Panel of Experts and the Group of Eminent
International and Regional Experts on Yemen have consistently highlighted cases in
which warring parties compromise access to basic food and objects indispensable for
the survival of the Yemeni population. That happens either directly, through attacks
on vital infrastructure or mining agricultural areas, or indirectly, by restricting
access, halting the payment of salaries, hampering humanitarian efforts or exploiting
the war economy. Starvation in Yemen is a human-made consequence of warring
parties that prolong a conflict at the expense of the Yemeni population. Action
must be taken to ensure accountability in Yemen. That is why the Netherlands has
helped to strengthen the Group’s mandate in the Human Rights Council to enable it
to independently investigate human rights abuses in order to prevent impunity for
those responsible.
The theme of the today’s Council discussion is particularly acute with
regard to Tigray, Ethiopia. The outbreak of the hostilities that started in November
poses a serious risk of leading to mass starvation. Detailed information on what is
happening on the ground is scarce, but the reports we do receive are disconcerting.
That includes United Nations reports of widespread and ongoing violence, forced
displacement and looting by various armed groups. It also includes reports of attacks
on objects critical to the survival of the civilian population and of restrictions on
humanitarian access in a region where 950,000 people already depended on food
assistance prior to the hostilities. It is worth remembering that such acts may be in
violation of international law, which prohibits the use of starvation as a method of
warfare. As such, it is paramount that both the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights conduct
investigations into those alleged violations. Perpetrators must be held to account.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore calls for full and unfettered
humanitarian access to the more than 4.5 million people in need and for a wellfunded humanitarian operation that reduces the risk of hunger. The announcement by
the Ethiopian Prime Minister, on 3 March, that aid agencies can operate in the region
and are no longer restricted by the need to obtain access permits is a promising step,
106/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

if fully implemented by the Ethiopian Federal Government and forces supporting its
military operations in Tigray. The current situation reinforces my country’s belief
that a full cessation of hostilities, followed by a political process, is the only way to
effectively address the risk posed by a combination of hunger and conflict, which
could further afflict the people of Tigray.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the importance of breaking the cycle
of conflict-induced food insecurity, highlight the critical role resolution 2417 (2018)
can play and stress that action needs to be taken. Making conflict-induced hunger
morally toxic requires persistence. Today’s Security Council meeting, under the
presidency of the United States, demonstrates that persistence.

21-03630107/147

S/2021/250

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the
United Nations, Jaime Hermida Castillo
[Original: Spanish]
As stated in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, given the intrinsic
link between the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the peace and stability
of our nations, there can be no sustainable development without peace, and no
peace without development. Without peace, all the other goals will be impossible to
achieve, especially the main goal of eradicating poverty.
Conflicts and disruptions caused by the negative impact of climate change
and economic shocks continue to be a major driver of food crises around the world,
which traps the most vulnerable populations in a situation of severe food insecurity,
poverty and hunger.
We stand in solidarity with all countries affected by conflict and insecurity,
especially those facing the food crisis in the Horn of Africa. We hope that the
international community will implement the necessary measures in order to resolve
that crisis.
Nicaragua is a faithful advocate of a world with a culture of peace, harmony
and love among nations, where multilateralism with all its international norms
prevails, in conjunction with international and regional organizations, over the greed
and avarice of the most powerful, in order to promote solidarity, cooperation and
relations on an equal footing, for the benefit of the sustainable development of all
our peoples.
The reality is that, given the current pace of the implementation, SDG 2 of
the 2030 Agenda — “End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition
and promote sustainable agriculture by 2030” — will not be achieved. Therefore,
a profound change in the global food and agriculture system, as well as increased
agricultural productivity and sustainable food production, is needed to help reduce
the risk of hunger for millions of people.
Nicaragua believes that, as long as the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures on developing countries continues, zero hunger will not be achieved, thus
also jeopardizing the achievement of the other 16 SDGs. All coercive economic
measures unilaterally imposed on our peoples by certain powerful countries must
be immediately suspended, as these sanctions or aggression are one of the main
obstacles to the eradication of poverty and hunger. Moreover, the imposition of such
measures in times of pandemic is tantamount to a crime against humanity.
It is important to bear in mind that food security requires equitable economic
growth, job creation, income generation and technological progress, particularly in
the agricultural sector.
It is imperative that the international community continue to take urgent and
coordinated action to address the pandemic, without neglecting efforts to protect and
strengthen global, regional and local food value chains.
Nicaragua is a country that lives off of its own national production, with the
natural resources and capacities of the population and the productive sectors in
competitiveness strategy, improving the quality of products, the agro-industrialization
of primary products, dialogue and good relations with all productive sectors so as to
take full advantage of the domestic market for national production.
The Government of Nicaragua is implementing programmes such as the Bono
Productivo Alimentario and the Microcrédito Justo Usura Cero, in line with the
108/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

priority of guaranteeing that Nicaraguan families have access to sufficient, nutritious
and healthy food.
The implementation of measures aimed at transforming the food systems
of developing countries to ensure greater benefits for our peoples requires greater
political will on the part of developed countries, particularly with regard to financing
and technology transfer to developing countries.

21-03630109/147

S/2021/250

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations, Tijjani Muhammad Bande
Let me thank the delegation of the United States for organizing today’s
debate. We also thank other briefers for sharing their perspectives on this very
important subject.
Food security happens when the entire population of a country has access
to enough safe and nutritious food to maintain a productive and healthy life. The
provision of nutritious food within a society guarantees the security and protection
of a country from the negative effects of hunger. Sadly, not all countries across the
globe are self-sufficient in terms of food security. A nation that has food insecurity
is at the mercy of other nations that are food secure, exposing itself to the dangers
associated with food insecurity, including unfair economic and trade relations.
According to the 2009 report of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO), over a billion people across the globe are not food
secure. Most food-insecure people live in the developing world. Conflict exacerbates
the situation.
The World Health Organization highlights three elements that must define
food security across global communities: food availability, food access and food
utilization. Any country that is short of these three elements is deemed to be food
insecure and would, more often than not, heavily rely on importation from other
countries to supplement its needs.
The United Nations estimates the number of people suffering from chronic
malnutrition in Africa at 257 million, with sub-Saharan Africa accounting for 237
million of this number, according to the 2018 FAO report. Clearly, conflict, including
terrorism, accounts for the worsening situation. Other factors are environmental
and technical.
In collaboration with the FAO, the African Union is developing policies and
strategies for country-specific plans to reduce post-harvest losses, in line with the
2014 Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation
for Shared Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods. Apart from reducing the total
amount and quality of food availability, food insecurity also exacerbates alreadyfragile poverty-ridden rural economies by eroding income generation along the food
value chain, which affects the accessibility and sustainability of food security.
At the subregional level in West Africa, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has developed an agricultural policy under the umbrella
of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme to address some
of the challenges related to productivity and competitiveness in the agricultural
sector of ECOWAS member States.
At the national level, Nigeria has undertaken certain measures to achieve
Goal 2 of the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. For example, it is transforming its rain-fed agriculture and artisanal fishery
to modern and commercial irrigated agriculture and aquaculture using the reservoir
created by the impoundment of over 200 dams to achieve food security and nutrition.
Furthermore, as part of its continuous efforts to drastically reduce dependence
on rain-fed farming, Nigeria launched, with the support of the World Bank, the
Transforming Irrigation Management Nigeria Project with a credit facility of $495
million. In addition, in January 2020, the Government, in collaboration with the
World Bank, put in place the Agro-Processing, Productivity Enhancement and
110/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Livelihood Improvement Support Project, with over $200 million to cover six states
ravaged by the Boko Haram terrorist group in the north-east of the country.
The Government of Nigeria believes that sustainable agricultural production,
food security, food safety and nutrition are key elements for the eradication of
poverty. It acknowledges the commencement of the United Nations Decade of
Family Farming (2019-2028) and the global action plan for the Decade in support
of the development, improvement and implementation of public policies on family
farming, as well as national plans based on inclusive and effective governance,
including timely and geographically relevant data within the first five years of the
stipulated duration of the Decade.
Let me conclude by informing the Council that, for optimal utilization of the
land and irrigation facilities under the auspices of the River Basin Development
Authorities in Nigeria, my country has successfully developed several hectares of
irrigated land to support diversification of the economy, guarantee food security
and create jobs for its teeming population. Efforts must therefore be sustained
at the national, subregional, regional and other multilateral levels to ensure food
sufficiency and security for all. It is most fitting that the issue of food security is now
garnering the attention it has in the Security Council.

21-03630111/147

S/2021/250

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
We thank the United States for convening today’s high-level open debate
in the Security Council on conflict and food security, and we welcome this
important initiative.
Situations of conflict and foreign occupation remain among the principal
sources of global hunger and starvation. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, nearly 60 per cent of some 700 million chronically
food-insecure people around the world live in conflict-affected countries. Likewise,
of the world’s 144 million stunted children, 80 per cent live in countries affected by
conflict. The World Food Programme has warned of the danger of famine in some of
the poorest countries and conflict zones.
It is a matter of great concern that starvation and collective punishment have
often been used as tools to advance military or political objectives, in stark violation
of international humanitarian law and resolution 2417 (2018). A case in point is
the inhuman military siege imposed by India on Indian illegally occupied Jammu
and Kashmir since 5 August 2019 to forcibly change the status and demographic
composition of the United Nations-recognized disputed territory, as well as to deny
the Kashmiri people their United Nations-prescribed right to self-determination.
According to estimates, the direct economic loss incurred by the civilian
population in Indian illegally occupied Jammu and Kashmir as a result of this
military siege is well over $ 5.3 billion. Nearly half a million jobs have been lost.
The agriculture sector, which is a mainstay for the majority of Kashmiris, has been
systematically crippled.
The complete communications blackout, the imposition of shoot-at-sight
curfews and the severing of all transport links, which have been imposed for nearly
600 days now, has prevented Kashmiri farmers from reaching their farmlands,
which has triggered acute food shortages. Thousands of acres of farmland remained
untended. Kashmiris have watched helplessly as the produce in their apple orchards
has rotted away. Farm products, constituting the entire year’s worth of income for
most Kashmiri farmers, have perished without reaching markets.
Such deliberate actions to coerce the civilian population into submission
constitute violations of resolution 2417 (2018), which, inter alia, calls for protecting
civilian objects, including sources of food production and distribution, and
condemns actions that deprive civilian populations of all essentials indispensable
for their survival. Those measures run counter to General Assembly resolution 3201
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, which, among other things, guarantees for peoples living
under foreign occupation effective control over their natural resources and economic
activities. Pakistan supports the resolution of ongoing conflicts through dialogue and
diplomacy on the basis of United Nations resolutions and international agreements.
A peaceful and stable Afghanistan is indispensable for peace and stability
in our region and beyond. The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Imran Khan, has
consistently maintained that the conflict in Afghanistan can be ended, not by
military force, but through a political settlement that engages the full spectrum
of Afghanis across the country’s political landscape. We believe that sustainable
peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only through an Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process. We have therefore fully facilitated the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process.
112/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Pakistan is Afghanistan’s largest trading partner and continues to help provide
support in the areas of agriculture, health, education and infrastructure development.
Pakistan has committed $1 billion to development in Afghanistan, of which nearly
$500 million has already been used for infrastructure and capacity-building projects.
Pakistan believes that infrastructure development and regional connectivity
through Afghanistan can spur economic growth for the entire region. Pakistan and
Afghanistan naturally link the Central Asian and Eurasian heartland to the Arabian
Sea, which offers immense opportunities for regional connectivity through mutual
cooperation. Such projects will benefit the Afghan people by generating economic
activity and helping lift millions of Afghans and other people in the region out of
poverty and isolation.
Conflict-induced food insecurity has assumed even greater significance
in the wake of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which will push around 100
million people into extreme poverty and add 83 to 132 million to the total number
of undernourished people around the world. Failure to address this challenge will
exacerbate existing global and national inequalities, thereby feeding the vicious
cycle of hunger, deprivation, poverty and conflict.
The world faces multiple challenges in recovering from the pandemic and
achieving the vital first two Sustainable Development Goals: “No Poverty” and
“Zero Hunger”. There is lack of financing, shortage of investment, trade distortion,
unsustainable production and consumption patterns, the degradation of agricultural
lands and forests, an impending water crisis, loss of biodiversity, and polluted rivers
and oceans. The world needs a common plan and strategy for global recovery and
the survival and prosperity of all humankind. We must address the systemic causes
of poverty and hunger, eliminate rural poverty and protect our food systems, which
are the main source of livelihoods for nearly 4.5 billion people.
The huge agricultural subsidies provided by certain richer economies distort
global markets and make it impossible for farmers in developing countries to compete.
International agricultural trade must therefore be rationalized. Governments need to
be more active in ensuring adequate and fair prices for agricultural and food products
and not leave farmers at the mercy of corporations. Moreover, we need to invest
in sustainable agriculture infrastructure, apply new technologies to enhance food
production and ensure efficient usage of water and land, and rethink our patterns of
food consumption and production.
While discussing the linkages between conflict and food security, we must
also take into account the impact of unilateral coercive measures designed to
intensify food insecurity, aggravate poverty and endanger livelihoods in the targeted
countries. The negative impact of such measures has been repeatedly affirmed in
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and by the Human Rights Council.
Both the General Assembly and the Security Council have recognized that people
should not be deprived of their means of subsistence, especially food and medicines,
even when enforcement action may have been authorized by the Security Council.
Overcoming the challenge posed by linkages between conflict and food
security requires a comprehensive response and concerted international efforts. We
must address not only the symptoms but also their underlying causes. Pakistan hopes
that today’s debate will help generate momentum for meaningful action to this end.

21-03630113/147

S/2021/250

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the initiative of the United States presidency of the Security
Council this month in convening today’s high-level open debate focused on the links
between food insecurity and conflict. This problem takes on even greater meaning
against the convulsive and uncertain backdrop we are facing today, which calls for
a united response from the international community and concerted action by the
Security Council. We are grateful for the lucid briefings delivered by the briefers.
Peru notes with great concern the current estimates and future projections of
historic levels of food insecurity in countries involved in situations of armed conflict
as well as the devastating impact this has had on millions of civilians, including
women, children and persons with disabilities. It is clear that ongoing violence in
various parts of the world translates into unemployment, lack of basic goods and
services, poverty and marginalization — factors which, combined with the obstacles
that parties often impose on an effective humanitarian response, significantly
increase the risk of famine. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has exacerbated this
scourge, deepening income loss and unemployment, and exacerbating and making
more visible internal inequalities, creating a scenario that the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme (WFP) has described as a “hunger pandemic”.
For example, we know that conflict is the main driver of serious food insecurity
in Yemen, which affects 16 million of its citizens, 5 million of whom are already on
the brink of famine. Peru notes with regret the extreme vulnerability of the Yemeni
population, intensified by the collapse of public services and the economy, the
interference by Ansar Allah authorities in the delivery of humanitarian aid, and the
recent forced displacements resulting from the evolving war in the town of Ma’rib.
Similarly, we are following with concern the ever-present threat of famine
in Syria, Gaza, Libya, Afghanistan, South Sudan, Somalia, Tigray and other areas,
which makes it clear that we must urgently recognize — in word and in deed — that
there is no military solution to these conflicts, and that there is a need to consistently
prioritize the protection of civilians.
In this delicate context, we underscore the importance of resolution 2417
(2018), adopted in 2018 after five months of arduous negotiations, in which Peru
played a crucial role. The resolution’s value lies in recognizing, for the first time
and unequivocally, the close correlation between belligerent confrontations and food
insecurity, and in highlighting the proactive role the Council can play in addressing
this challenge. We wish to highlight the resolution’s reaffirmation of the obligation of
the parties to allow safe, timely and unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance, to
facilitate the import and distribution of essential goods and to refrain from attacking
infrastructure related to food supply, in line with the Geneva Conventions of 1949 —
in short, to establish that famine as a method of warfare will not be tolerated.
In the light of the importance of resolution 2417 (2018), we support any initiative
that contributes to its more effective and robust implementation, which certainly
includes the designation of a focal point, more exhaustive monitoring by the Security
Council of possible or imminent cases of conflict-induced food insecurity, pursuit
of a preventive approach, and the energetic imposition of sanctions against actors
that hinder humanitarian assistance or divert food. Accordingly, Peru commends
the work of the United Nations and non-governmental organizations in alleviating
human suffering in very complex logistical circumstances and despite a high risk
of contagion of such diseases as COVID-19. At the same time, we note that their
114/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

capacities are being overwhelmed by the scale of the tragedy and that, in various
scenarios, the battle against the famine is being lost.
That makes it essential to continue mobilizing the support of the international
community, whether by providing the necessary financial resources to the respective
humanitarian response plans led by the United Nations, increasing contributions to
stabilize and reactivate the local economy or influencing the parties to return to the
path of moderation, avoid new escalations and promote an easing of tensions.
Similarly, it is crucial to strengthen coordination with countries that border
conflict zones and those that have food production surpluses in WFP-led efforts to
ensure a more efficient supply of essential goods to the most vulnerable populations.
The establishment of food banks could also be explored to mitigate possible situations
of famine caused by fighting, with the participation of the private sector and civil
society. For example, Peru has a food bank that has played a decisive role during the
current pandemic.
Peru hopes that, in the coming weeks and months, there will be new and
substantive progress on the sensitive issue that brings us together today, as it is our
moral and legal obligation to put an end to the suffering of millions of civilians
trapped in conflict situations.

21-03630115/147

S/2021/250

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Let me begin by thanking the United States delegation for organizing this
timely debate on an incredibly important set of concerns.
Two years ago, during Poland’s presidency of the Security Council, the
Council voted unanimously to adopt resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict-induced
food insecurity. The adoption of that document marked a milestone towards the
general understanding that the connection between armed conflict and famine
is undeniable. It also recognized the important role that the Council can play in
addressing such an emergency.
Unfortunately, in the past two years, the situation regarding food security in
conflict-affected areas, as indicated in the relevant report of the Secretary-General,
has not only failed to improve, but continues to deteriorate as we speak.
Poland firmly believes that conflict remains one of the root causes of acute
food insecurity. The World Bank estimates that geographical areas at the greatest
risk of hunger are concentrated in 12 countries, out of which 11 are on the list of
fragile and conflict situations.
The ongoing pandemic is yet another challenge that has emerged as a severe
problem contributing to food insecurity. The epidemiological situation has put many
places in a constant danger of supply chain disruption, which, unfortunately, is one
of the negative consequences of the sanitary restrictions. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
is considered to have increased the total number of acutely food-insecure people
from 149 million in 2019 to 272 million by the end of 2020. Those numbers are just
unacceptable and require an urgent response from the international community.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also exacerbated previous inequalities, leading
to complex and severe consequences for multiple levels of human existence. It is
greatly impacting human mobility. Due to restrictions, assistance to asylum seekers
has slowed, and the economic situation of many refugees and internally displaced
persons has significantly deteriorated. One of the most dangerous consequences
is the growing threat of hunger and malnutrition, the gravest for populations in
conf lict zones.
We also draw attention to the impact that conflict‑induced famine and food
insecurity in situations of armed conflict may have on vulnerable groups of civilians,
including, inter alia, children and persons with disabilities.
In war-torn Yemen, for example, as indicated by the United Nations,
childhood cases of life-threatening malnutrition rose by 15.5 per cent in 2020 to
98,000. With that being acknowledged, we reiterate the critical need to respect the
rights of vulnerable groups and to guarantee adequate protection and the assistance
they require.
No less significant is the necessity to ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to civilians, which is often hampered by violence, insecurity and bureaucracy.
Unfortunately, delays in the provision of humanitarian aid still remain very high on
the international agenda.
We urge all parties to armed conflict to respect international humanitarian
law in all circumstances. Poland strongly condemns the use of starvation of civilians
as a method of warfare. Responding effectively to humanitarian needs in armed
conflict settings is of paramount importance.
116/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

In that regard, I would like to stress that in Polish aid programming for the
current and upcoming years we indicate that food security has become one of the
most pressing issues within the global humanitarian and development policy.
We welcome the prioritization of food security in the COVID-19 emergency
by relevant United Nations agencies and international organizations in their plans for
2021 and beyond. We recognize in particular the role of the World Food Programme
in that matter. In that respect, Poland is a proud contributor to its activities in Kenya
and Syria, with donations amounting to 1.47 million zlotys in total.
Malnutrition and hunger still represent a serious challenge in many countries
of Africa and Middle East. Poland remains an active donor, taking actions focused
on combating and preventing malnutrition, especially among children. During the
past two years, through our project implemented in Senegal, Polish aid provided
assistance to more than 2,000 households. We believe that knowledge-sharing with,
and training for, local societies by Polish experts could bring us closer to the common
goal, which is hunger eradication.
In Palestine, to overcome water shortages and ongoing deprivation of farmed
land, Polish aid, together with the Polish Centre for International Aid, implemented
several projects focusing on the installation of hydroponic and tank systems that
allow multiple harvests of fresh vegetables and herbs per year. In addition, Poland
successfully implemented a pilot project in which wastewater from sewage treatment
plants is used for farming purposes.
Poland also supports agricultural cooperatives in Palestine and Lebanon in
capacity-building for the better management of the cultivation cycle, as well as
professional marketing of food products.
Food security is a growing global concern that cannot be adequately addressed
without a truly global response. It is now time to act so that we are not caught off
guard. The current pandemic, which has affected each and every one of us with no
explicit prior warning, should be our wake-up call to step up our efforts in addressing
other global challenges, with food security definitely being one of the most pressing.

21-03630117/147

S/2021/250

Annex 57
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
Portugal aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 33) and, in its national capacity, would like to add the following points.
In recent years, we have been witnessing an increasing number of violent
conflicts and wars and their devastating impact on civilians, especially rural
populations, and their means of survival, affecting their livelihoods, agriculture,
infrastructures and economy and leading to hunger and malnourishment.
Phenomena such as inter- and intra-State conflict, forced migration,
displacement and food insecurity are mutually reinforcing, and the emergence of
non-traditional threats to security, such as terrorism and climate change, inter alia,
are further exacerbating that link.
No sustainable solution to food insecurity and famine in conflict-affected
environments can be achieved without peace. Portugal therefore reiterates its
support for full compliance with the call for a global ceasefire, as expressed by the
Secretary-General and echoed by resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021), in the
wake of the coronavirus disease pandemic, as it compounded an already alarming
situation and increased vulnerabilities in countries with pre-existing food crises.
Responding to food insecurity and famine in conflict-affected environments
requires a comprehensive approach, focusing on the most fragile food-insecure
contexts, particularly in protracted and forgotten crises. In that context, initiatives
such as the Framework for Action for Food Security and Nutrition in Protracted
Crises, developed by the Committee on World Food Security of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, may provide relevant bases for
further work.
Such further work, in our view, should privilege an increase in triple nexus
collaboration, bridging humanitarian, development and peace actors and capitalizing
on the comparative advantages of each pillar, while taking into account their
respective mandates, in order to reduce vulnerabilities and unmet needs, strengthen
risk management capacities and address the root causes of conflict and food crises.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development International Network
on Conflict and Fragility on the triple nexus approach has been conducting valuable
work in that regard, encouraging lessons learned and the sharing of good practices.
Furthermore, Portugal supports the designation of a United Nations focal point
to help guide the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), namely, by facilitating
collaboration between United Nations food-related agencies, reinforcing preventive
measures, including food security clusters, to improve coordination and ensure
timely and accurate information on food and nutrition needs. Coordination among
different actors on the ground remains of paramount importance to maximize the
response capacity and to ensure immediate to long-term solutions, while increasing
accountability to national and local authorities.
Concurrently, we should promote inclusive and participatory processes on
access to and governance of natural resources, including the participation of women,
considering the disproportionate impact of food insecurity on women and girls.
The development of early-warning/early-action systems that are risk-informed
should also be fostered and complemented by shock-responsive social protection and
by efforts to build resilience, helping countries and households to prevent, anticipate,
prepare for, cope with and recover from conflicts.
118/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Allow me to draw attention to two concrete situations.
In Mozambique, with more than 660,000 people displaced in the region of Cabo
Delgado, according to estimates by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, humanitarian partners and the international community should prepare for
continued and significant needs in food assistance, as households focus on fleeing
conflict-affected areas, not on agriculture or fisheries.
The tragic attack on a United Nations/World Food Programme convoy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in February was a gruesome example of acts
of interference in life-saving aid delivery in conflict contexts, an infringement of
international conventions. Portugal condemns in the strongest terms all recent armed
attacks on aid workers and facilities.
This very timely meeting underscores the Security Council’s responsibility in
maintaining humanitarian access, with the cross-border mechanism for humanitarian
aid delivery into Syria being a concrete example. The role played by several
peacekeeping operations in facilitating humanitarian assistance and protecting
civilians and humanitarian personnel makes it possible to bring help and hope to the
most vulnerable. Breaking the vicious cycle between conflict and food insecurity
will continue to require the engagement and mobilization of the entire international
community. I affirm Portugal’s continued commitment in that regard.

21-03630119/147

S/2021/250

Annex 58
Statement by Permanent Representative
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani

of

Qatar

to

the

[Original: English and Arabic]
At the outset, we would like to express our appreciation to the United States for
convening this timely open debate in the light of the alarming estimates indicating
high levels of acute food insecurity. We thank His Excellency Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and the briefers for their valuable and
comprehensive interventions. We commend the important efforts made by the World
Food Programme in response to the growing needs.
While many of the factors that contribute to food insecurity cannot be
overlooked, conflicts and protracted crises remain the most prominent factor
conducive to the creation of ripe conditions for food insecurity and its dire
humanitarian consequences. There is therefore a need for a consistent, sustainable
and people-centred approach in addressing the nexus between conflicts and high
levels of acute food insecurity and in addressing its underlying causes.
Accordingly, the nexus between armed conflict and food insecurity rightfully
deserves its prominence on the global agenda and in the work of the Security
Council, as highlighted in resolution 2417 (2018), which calls for compliance with
international humanitarian law to ensure respect for and the protection of civilians
and strongly condemns the use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare in a
number of conflict situations.
In the light of the unprecedented level of food insecurity plaguing many
regions of the world, the clear adverse impact of conflicts on food security, the
risks associated with climate change and the extraordinary challenges and additional
burden on food systems resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic, it is
important to hold the United Nations Food Systems Summit, to be convened by the
Secretary-General in September. We trust that the Summit will be a pivotal event
that will drive and induce transformative efforts geared to fully leveraging food
systems in order to accelerate progress and achieve the vision set out in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The issue of food security constitutes a strategic priority and is a particular
focus of the development policy of the State of Qatar, resulting in the country
consistently achieving a high ranking in terms of food security indicators. In line
with the well-known commitment of the State of Qatar to international cooperation
in addressing common challenges, and given the disastrous effects of desertification
on countries suffering from such a phenomenon, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin
Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, launched an initiative to establish the
Global Dryland Alliance, a mechanism aimed at achieving food security in droughtafflicted countries and, by extension, at promoting international peace and security.
The foundation treaty of the Alliance, concluded in Doha in 2017, entered into force
following ratification by the States parties, in accordance with its provisions. The
Alliance was also granted observer status in the General Assembly last December.
Guided by the principle of cooperation with its partners in the international
community, the State of Qatar will remain committed to working towards creating
favourable conditions for strengthening global food security.

120/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea to
the United Nations
Resolution 2417 (2018) represented a clear wake-up call to the alarming “link
between armed conflict and violence and conflict-induced food insecurity and the
threat of famine” (resolution 2417 (2018), para. 1). Conflict has nonetheless been
one of the main drivers of food insecurity, with its impacts further compounded by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate shocks and natural hazards, such as the
recent locust outbreak.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about what we are witnessing as a
result. The year 2020 marked the most severe increase in global food insecurity and,
according to the World Bank, that worsening trend is likely to continue into 2021 and
beyond. In addition, the Global Humanitarian Overview 2021 indicates that funding
requirements for food security in humanitarian appeals almost doubled in five years.
Food insecurity does not merely constitute a crisis of today. Indeed, the
resulting hunger, malnutrition and forced displacements would also stunt future
opportunities for sustainable peace and development in conf lict-affected and
fragile States. As such, our efforts must focus on holistically addressing various
factors of food security to save the lives and livelihoods of both the current and
future generations.
In this respect, the Republic of Korea sincerely appreciates the United
States leadership, as well as the critical role of the Security Council, in placing a
renewed spotlight on this urgent and critical issue for all Member States. In hopes of
contributing to today’s timely debate, we would like to highlight the following three
points.
First, we believe that immediate action is needed to ensure full, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to populations in need. It is critical that all parties to
armed conflicts engage immediately in a durable humanitarian pause, in accordance
with resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2532 (2020), as well as international humanitarian
law, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions. We also reiterate our strong support for
the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire.
More attention should be given to strengthening protection for humanitarian
personnel. It is essential, in this respect, to comply with all international instruments
that govern the safety and protection of humanitarian workers, including the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. The protection
of civilians mandate for United Nations peacekeepers could be enhanced to help
create an environment more conducive to humanitarian assistance, including by
securing a humanitarian corridor. It is also important to raise awareness of respect for
humanitarian action and personnel, including by engaging with local communities.
Of particular importance is ensuring that humanitarian assistance is scaled
up to meet soaring needs. It is crucial not only to increase the volume of support for
people facing emergency levels of acute food insecurity. Longer-term preparedness
also needs to be strengthened to respond more swiftly to future incidences of food
insecurity and the risk of famine. The Republic of Korea, for its part, is committed
to providing a timely response to humanitarian needs, including by expanding
assistance to conflict-affected and fragile countries. We have continuously increased
our contribution to the World Food Programme, the Central Emergency Response
Fund and country-based pooled funds to this end.
Secondly, we believe that now is the time to build the resilience of today’s
food systems against future crises. The pandemic has exposed one of the weakest
21-03630121/147

S/2021/250

links in the current food systems: global agricultural value chains. Their restoration
and reinforcement should therefore be prioritized in our efforts. As Governments
around the world were quick to introduce restrictions on the movement of goods,
services and persons as part of their response to the pandemic, there have been
lingering disruptions to global value chains. This, in turn, aggravated uncertainties
surrounding food systems. Indeed, the World Bank estimates that global food prices
rose close to 20 per cent last year alone, which inevitably had greater impacts on
populations in low-income and fragile countries. Mindful of these consequences,
the Republic of Korea has been advocating multilateral cooperation to keep the food
trade flowing among countries, including by stressing that export restrictions should
be based on scientific evidence and kept to a minimum.
Priority should also be given to increasing the productivity and resilience
of the food and agricultural sector in fragile States where stronger international
support is needed. While small-scale farmers and food producers comprise up to 85
per cent of all food producers in the developing world, they are the ones hit hardest
during crises. Women, in particular, often find themselves more disadvantaged in
food systems, when they are the mainstay of small-scale agriculture. In this regard,
targeted support for small-scale farmers and women is crucial for more productive
and resilient agriculture.
Lastly, we believe that the ultimate solutions to food insecurity lie in tackling
its root causes from a longer-term perspective.
Humanitarian needs resulting from conflict can be reduced when violent
conflict is successfully prevented from occurring or recurring. We believe that this
can be achieved through a holistic approach to the interlinkages among humanitarian
assistance, development and peace. This humanitarian-development-peace nexus
aims to meet people’s immediate needs while securing longer-term investment in
measures aimed at avoiding the systematic causes of vulnerability before, during
and after crises.
As a member of the Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Republic of Korea has been prioritizing the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus in its efforts to contribute to lasting peace and development.
We have continued our financial contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund, a catalytic
instrument to help the nexus, as well as to the Multi-Year Appeal of the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. We are also currently coming up with a
Government-wide strategy to operationalize the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus, with a view towards aligning our humanitarian and development assistance
with it.
It is also crucial to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women throughout the entire peace continuum. This is not only a goal in itself, but
also key to sustaining peace. The Republic of Korea will continue to work towards
more gender-responsive peace operations, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and
the United Nations Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy. In particular, the upcoming
peacekeeping ministerial, which the Republic of Korea will host in Seoul at the end
of this year, will offer a unique opportunity to further mainstream the women and
peace and security agenda.
In addition, the interactive dynamics among food, energy, climate and conflict
must be taken into consideration in order for our response to be truly effective.
Today’s food systems are estimated to consume approximately 30 per cent of total
energy production, as well as account for more than one-fourth of global emissions.
The climate crisis, in turn, causes extreme weather events only to disrupt global food
supply, worsen humanitarian situations and fuel conflict and instability particularly
122/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

in fragile States. In this respect, the Republic of Korea has been incorporating this
food-energy-climate nexus into our official development assistance for sustainable
rural development.
Our collective action to achieve food security should span from respecting
international humanitarian law to building the resilience of food systems and
mainstreaming the humanitarian-development-peace and food-energy-climate
nexuses. Nevertheless, its starting point must be securing an immediate humanitarian
pause and adequate humanitarian assistance. As such, global solidarity is the key;
it is about helping children, women and men in desperate need of assistance to
survive the worst humanitarian crisis and famine. In this regard, the Republic of
Korea commends the instrumental role of the Security Council in advancing this
noble cause. We will continue to actively participate in international cooperation
to address food insecurity and look forward to further engagement of the Council
going forward.

21-03630123/147

S/2021/250

Annex 60
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Rwanda to the United Nations
The Government of Rwanda congratulates the United States on its presidency
of the Security Council during the month of March and for organizing today’s
important high-level open debate on conflict and food security, which is a critical
aspect of international peace and security and concerns the fundamental right of all
peoples to access food at all times, including during conflict.
The Government of Rwanda would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres;
Mr. Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food Programme; and Ms. Bucher,
Executive Director of Oxfam International, for their very useful briefings.
In the lead-up to the Food Systems Summit to be convened in September by
the Secretary-General and aimed at building more resilient, sustainable and equitable
global food systems, Rwanda welcomes this important discussion on conflict and
food security.
After decades of decline, hunger has drastically increased over the
past few years. The situation is alarming, as the current coronavirus disease
pandemic crisis could add 83 million to 132 million more people to the number of
undernourished people.
While the root causes of food insecurity are multifactorial, one of its underlying
common factors results from human intervention. This is especially the case for food
insecurity in conflict situations, with its consequences on forced displacement and
its devastating impact on agricultural production and livelihoods.
Out of 10 chronically hungry people, 6 live in countries affected by conflicts.
If we, as humans, are the main cause, we are responsible for taking action against
it. To this extent, resolution 2417 (2018), unanimously adopted in 2018, is a first
crucial step towards collectively breaking the vicious cycle of conflict and hunger.
Resolution 2417 (2018) rightfully condemns the use of starvation as a method of
warfare and represents a significant milestone in promoting accountability, as well as
ensuring the compliance of conflicts’ stakeholders with international humanitarian
law, to limit the adverse impact of conflicts on civilians, including on their access
to food and livelihoods.
In practice, to reach the goals we collectively set in resolution 2417 (2018) to
prevent and eradicate conflict-induced hunger, we must first and foremost invest our
resources and efforts in peacebuilding and preventing conflict. To this extent, I would
like to commend the $439 million pledged during the High-Level Replenishment
Conference for the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund.
The cost-effectiveness of conflict prevention and sustaining peace has been
established beyond doubt. The World Food Programme has found that ending conflict
could reduce food assistance costs by over 50 per cent per year. This is of particular
importance at a time when the humanitarian system is overstretched, further putting
pressure on countries hosting refugees fleeing conflicts and hunger.
In this context, we cannot, of course, discuss hunger, including in a conflict
environment, without looking at the bigger picture, leading us to rethink our food
systems and transform the way the world produces and consumes food. Indeed,
sustainable food systems offer a solid ground for peace and strong institutions to
take hold.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Rwanda’s commitment to playing its
part and role in our common goal of ending hunger and food insecurity, including for
vulnerable populations in conflict-affected areas around the world.
124/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Representative of San Marino to the
United Nations, Damiano Beleffi
First of all, I would like to thank the United States for convening this important
meeting which allows us to share our views on such a critical topic. I would also like
to thank the briefers for their presentations and insight.
Food insecurity affects the lives of millions of people across the world and is
mainly concentrated in conflict-affected regions. Furthermore, the vast majority of
stunted children live in countries affected by violence and conflicts. Therefore, there
is clearly a correlation between food insecurity and conflicts.
Conflicts remain the main cause of food insecurity and acute malnutrition
in several countries, such as Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Nigeria, South Sudan,
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in the Sahel region.
Unfortunately, the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the
subsequent health and economic crisis have even worsened the situation in these and
other regions.
We also should not underestimate the effects of climate change and climate
disasters in aggravating food insecurity.
Hunger is both a cause and a result of conflict. Armed conflicts displace
farmers and can destroy agricultural assets and food stocks. Furthermore, they disrupt
markets and vital services for food systems. Hunger drives forced displacement,
resulting in devastating humanitarian crises. Regrettably, the risk of famine has
become a sad reality in different areas.
It is therefore important to keep food security on our agenda and, in this
regard, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for hosting the Food Systems
Summit during the General Assembly in September 2021. San Marino also reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in the context of
COVID-19 — a necessary initiative if we want to guarantee swift and unimpeded
humanitarian access to vulnerable communities.
We are deeply concerned by the inaccessibility of humanitarian personnel
due to increasing violence in areas where vital supplies cannot be delivered to the
most vulnerable.
San Marino underlines the importance of resolution 2417 (2018) and strongly
condemns the use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, as well as the
unlawful denial of access to humanitarian personnel. The use of intentional starvation
of civilians as a war tactic is morally repugnant and prohibited under international
humanitarian law.
We welcome the recent amendment of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court to include the crime of starvation as a war crime in non-international
armed conflicts. The use of intentional starvation of civilians is a war crime, and it
should not go unpunished.
We call on all parties to respect and protect humanitarian relief operations
and to respect their obligation under humanitarian law and to protect civilians, their
farms, their markets, their food storage sites and means of food transportation.
We also urge all parties to refrain from attacking and destroying livestock, crops,
agricultural assets, water installation and supplies, which are necessary for the
survival of civilians.

21-03630125/147

S/2021/250

In conclusion, the Republic of San Marino considers it essential to further
monitor the link between food insecurity and armed conflicts. It is fundamental to
monitor fragile areas and to receive timely information on food insecurity to prevent
and mitigate such crises.
Safe humanitarian access to people in need should be provided by all actors,
and the Security Council should facilitate the conditions for achieving that.
Furthermore, improved coordination between humanitarian and peace actors
is needed in order to address fragilities and to sustain peace and development. As a
matter of fact, food security should be perceived as an important part of peacekeeping
and sustainable development. Only in doing so will we break the vicious cycle of
hunger and conflict and will we build sustainable food systems, which are the basis
of peaceful and stable societies.

126/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Y. Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam, on assuming your
new post as Ambassador of the United States of America to the United Nations.
I wish you and the United States presidency of the Security Council this month
every success.
Many countries around the world are experiencing sharply declining food
security and severe malnutrition owing to drought and other natural disasters that
have reduced food production. Military conflicts are among the most important
causes of displacement, hunger and malnutrition for many people.
The Saudi humanitarian response has had and continues to have a significant
effect on alleviating hunger and malnutrition. With regard to food security and
nutrition, Saudi Arabia has implemented and continues to implement relief and
humanitarian projects to mitigate famine and the deterioration in the food situation
in many countries.
Since the beginning of the coup by the Iran-backed Houthi militias, the
Republic of Yemen has experienced a decline in economic and living conditions,
and has suffered human and material losses because of the militias’ military
operations, indiscriminate bombardment and laying of mines, as a result of which
Yemenis have left for other regions and provinces to avoid the Houthi aggression.
Despite many peace initiatives, the ceasefire and the agreements on Yemen, the
Houthis have persisted in their aggression and continue to violate truces and peace
agreements, and to refuse to observe the ceasefire. The result has been a continuous
deterioration in the living situation of Yemenis, a lack of basic services for civilians
and an increase in the number of displaced persons in the country.
The displacement crisis in Yemen remains a cause for the utmost concern, as
the Iran-backed Houthi militias continue to drive people out of their areas, rob their
houses at gunpoint and destroy their homes. Most recently, the militias attacked
Ma’rib, which hosts a large number of internally displaced persons. In order to stop
this ongoing aggression, the international community must make a concerted effort,
and pressure must be applied by the United Nations and international organizations
whose assistance to the Yemeni people has been looted and destroyed by the militias.
Saudi Arabia has implemented various projects related to food security
in Yemen and continues to provide assistance in that regard by supporting the
humanitarian response plans of United Nations organizations for the country. Most
recently, it provided $430 million in support of the 2021 plan. Saudi support for
Yemen since the beginning of the crisis has amounted to more than $17 billion.
Food security and nutrition have been greatly affected by the outbreak of
conflicts in Syria. Through the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre,
Saudi Arabia has played a major role in providing food assistance to Syrians, both
in Syria and in the refugee-receiving countries of Jordan and Lebanon, on the
basis of humanitarian needs and the areas affected. In total, 75 projects have been
implemented, at an approximate cost of $152 million.
In Afghanistan, conflicts have worsened food insecurity, which affects a large
proportion of the Afghan people. Saudi Arabia, through the King Salman Centre, has
been instrumental in providing displaced Afghans with food assistance, through 16
projects costing approximately $11 million.
21-03630127/147

S/2021/250

In Somalia, through 53 projects carried out by the King Salman Centre at an
estimated cost of $95 million, Saudi Arabia has helped to alleviate food insecurity
and malnutrition, which have been aggravated by escalating violence, conflict and
such natural disasters as drought.
In South Sudan, the King Salman Centre, in cooperation with the World Food
Programme, has implemented three food security projects at an approximate cost
of $370,000. It has also provided food assistance in north-eastern Nigeria and the
countries of the Sahel.
The role of Saudi Arabia in providing humanitarian assistance in the area of
food security worldwide, particularly in conflict zones, is clear. The Kingdom is one
of the leading countries in terms of the speed of its response and in helping people all
over the world; as a result, it is one of the largest aid donors in the world. There will
be no development without genuine peace, commitment to international laws and
norms, and the resolution of conflicts through peaceful diplomatic means to avoid
wars and conflicts, the most prominent consequences of which are poverty, hunger
and displacement.

128/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Thank you, Madam President, for organizing this important debate on food
security under the agenda item “Maintenance of international peace and security”
during these times of unprecedented challenge for us all. Slovakia associates itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) (annex 33). Allow
me to make a few additional observations.
Over the recent years, the Security Council has increasingly recognized the
importance of the issue of food security in armed conflicts. In unanimously adopting
landmark resolution 2417 (2018), the Security Council, for the first time, addressed
the link between conflict and hunger. It recognized the need to break the vicious
cycle of conflict and food insecurity, emphasized the obligation of Member States
to help ensure that food assistance reaches those in need and condemned the use of
starvation as a method of warfare.
As the Security Council has recognized, armed conflict and violence are a major
direct and indirect cause of food insecurity and famine. The situation varies from
country to country, but civilians are being killed, injured and displaced, livelihoods
destroyed and the availability of and access to food disrupted amid growing fragility.
At the same time, humanitarian operations are attacked, delayed or obstructed from
delivering life-saving assistance. Conflict-induced food insecurity is now further
exacerbated by natural disasters, economic shocks and public-health crises, all
compounded by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Combined, these
factors are endangering the lives of millions of women, men and children.
The 2020 Global Report on Food Crises shows that conflict was to blame
for six out of the ten worst food crises in the world, and for nearly 60 per cent
of humanitarian needs. This means that, without conflict, the number of people
affected by food crises could be less than half, and the humanitarian funding gap
dramatically reduced.
State fragility and weak institutions, yielding complex and persistent
humanitarian emergencies, compound the disruptions from food insecurity, natural
disasters and forced displacement. All parties to armed conflicts should respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and facilitate the free passage of
humanitarian relief.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the world is facing “a global health crisis
unlike any in the 75-year history of the United Nations”. Slovakia strongly supports
the Secretary-General’s call for cessation of all hostilities and implementation of
a global ceasefire in all corners of the world to focus together on the true fight —
defeating COVID-19.
Addressing the risk of conflict-induced famine and widespread food
insecurity is a collective problem, which requires a collective response. Developing
regional strategies, strengthening regional cooperation and engaging in preventive
diplomacy are of the utmost importance. We need to enhance our capabilities and
develop common strategies regarding both conflict and food security, which must be
underpinned by a deeper understanding of the linkages between them.
We welcome the idea of convening the Food Systems Summit in September
2021, which will launch bold new actions as part of the United Nations Decade of
Action to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals. Slovakia fully supports the
stated goal of the Food Systems Summit, transforming the way food is produced,
processed, transported, sold and consumed within the context of the 2030 Agenda
21-03630129/147

S/2021/250

for Sustainable Development. We believe that Summit is an opportunity for the
world to meet the challenges of poverty, food security, malnutrition, population
growth, climate change and natural-resource degradation and thus drive peace
and prosperity.
The field of agriculture being one of the main sectoral priorities of the Slovak
development-cooperation programme, we have in the last seven years carried out
over 70 food-security projects, for a total of nearly €4.2 million, in cooperation
with community-based organizations, non-governmental organizations and local
authorities. The overall value includes two financial contributions by Slovakia to
joint programming in Kenya, for the years 2019 and 2020. The aim is to improve food
security and support Kenyan smallholder farmers by providing incentives to invest
in the agrifood sector under the EU Agriculture Financing Initiative. These projects,
implemented in around 20 countries of sub-Saharan Africa, the Western Balkans and
the Eastern Partnership — South Sudan, Kenya, Ethiopia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
North Macedonia and Moldova, to name a just few — had positive long-term effects
in socioeconomic terms, on peacebuilding and on women’s participation.
Given the magnitude and complexity of the challenge, as well as the limited
resources, international coordination is essential to increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of humanitarian and development assistance. Slovakia, together with
other EU member States, is active in multiple processes and initiatives in this
area, and supports significant work of the World Food Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Committee on Food Security
and other partners to achieve zero hunger and break the cycle of conflict and hunger,
especially in rural areas.
The international community needs to take a more outspoken stance in calling
on all parties to conflicts to respect international humanitarian law, condemning
access restrictions and finding political and practical solutions to remove access
constraints. Slovakia wholeheartedly supports the Security Council in its critical
role in steering this issue forward and ensuring accountability.

130/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 64
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the
United Nations
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (annex 33) and would like to add some remarks in our national capacity.
We welcome the decision of the United States to place this item on the
Security Council agenda during its presidency. With growing food insecurity and
malnutrition, the world is facing an impending food emergency, unless immediate
action is taken. In the short term, hunger and food insecurity destabilize individuals,
households, communities and nations, leading, in the long run, to social unrest,
disenfranchisement, displacement and political instability. Consequently, food
security is a major global challenge and risk multiplier of the twenty-first century.
The most recent estimate shows that almost 690 million people, or 8.9 per
cent of the world population, were undernourished prior to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. As a result, the world is not on track to achieve zero hunger.
By 2050, the world will likely have 2 billion more mouths to feed, which is a quarter
more than today, with competition for natural resources remaining a major trigger of
instability and conflict.
COVID-19 has exposed weaknesses and fragilities in every single country and
is likely to double acute hunger, particularly in vulnerable countries and contexts.
A recent Security Council debate on climate-related risks to peace and security
showed that the effects of climate change, biodiversity decline, water scarcity and
conflict exacerbate food insecurity and affect the functioning of food systems (see
S/2021/198). Sixty per cent of people facing hunger live in war-torn areas. War
disrupts all stages of human nutrition, leaving malnutrition, disease and death in
its wake. We must enhance our call to all parties at war to uphold the principles of
international humanitarian law, the Geneva Conventions and human rights norms to
protect people’s lives, health and dignity. The use of hunger as a weapon of war and
conflict could constitute a war crime or crime against humanity.
With food insecurity on the rise, humanitarian aid is becoming increasingly
important. Humanitarian organizations need unimpeded, sustained, impartial, rapid
and safe access to affected populations. Increased attacks on humanitarian personnel
constitute a grave disregard for international law and the protection of civilians. It
must be ensured that those responsible are held to account. We cannot accept the
state of a world in which food cannot get into conflict zones but guns can.
On this occasion, we would like to express our appreciation for the work of
the World Food Programme (WFP) and other humanitarian agencies distributing
food to the most vulnerable groups worldwide at all times, and for WFP’s receipt of
the Nobel Peace Prize, which should serve as a reminder of how acute the situation
really is.
In addressing food security, sustainable, unearmarked funding focused on
people’s livelihoods, nutrition and living conditions needs to be enhanced. Since
2014, Slovenia has doubled its humanitarian and development contribution for food
security. As a member of the Food Assistance Convention, our country also earmarks
10 per cent of humanitarian aid for preventive action and resiliency-building,
focusing mainly on food security. I should also mention that, since 2017, Slovenia
has provided WFP a significant amount of humanitarian aid for food security in
Yemen. Its past contributions to WFP also reached South Sudan, Somalia, Mali,
Syria, Ethiopia, Haiti, Kenya, the Central African Republic and other countries
vulnerable to hunger and food insecurity.
21-03630131/147

S/2021/250

With regard to the response of the international community, we need to
enhance early-warning analysis, such as the identification of food-insecurity hot
spots and capacity-building needs. All this may be achieved through a prominent role
being played by the Security Council and the Secretary-General. We also support the
idea of setting up a United Nations focal point for the implementation of resolution
2417 (2018).
Food security cannot be achieved without water, which is a crucial ingredient
of the necessary agricultural transformation leading to sustainable food systems.
Moreover, the close connection between water, peace, security, health and
development cannot be ignored. Slovenia therefore devotes special attention to
addressing the water and peace nexus.
In light of the general vulnerability of the entire food system, we would also
like to mention the Secretary-General’s Food Systems Summit, which comes at a
crucial moment to scale up our collective action for food systems transformation,
thereby also contributing to peace and security. We welcome the inclusive nature of
the Summit, which is aimed at reaching action-oriented and game-changing solutions,
with a follow-up process. Slovenia will be closely engaged in the preparations for
the Summit, which is to be held during the Slovenian presidency of the European
Council, in the second half of 2021.
The interconnected nature of food security calls for reinvigorated commitment
to multilateralism and efforts to address the root causes of insecurity.

132/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 65
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you and your Government,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and for
convening this meeting focusing on conflict and food security. I also wish to extend
my best wishes to the presidency of the United States.
I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for keeping the Council
informed of developments pertaining to the impact of conflict on food security
and acute malnutrition. I also thank Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the
World Food Programme, and Ms. Gabriela Bucher, Executive Director of Oxfam
International, for their comprehensive and enlightening briefings.
Let me start by stating that South Africa regards the right to access food as a
fundamental human right enshrined in its Constitution and the Bill of Rights, and
I believe this falls squarely within the ambits of international human rights law, to
which my country fully subscribes.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the rising number of civilians
affected by hunger and malnutrition as a result of persisting conflicts. It is regrettable
that most parties to conflicts have failed to heed the appeal for a global ceasefire
made by the Secretary-General. This call presented an opportunity for a cessation
of hostilities. Cessation of hostilities would have increased access for humanitarian
actors, which would have significantly contributed to improving humanitarian
situations in conflict areas.
Regrettably, given the failure to heed the call for a cessation of hostilities, longstanding and protracted conflicts are continuing while new and emerging threats
are on the rise, leading to an increase in the number of worsening humanitarian
situations. Conflict and instability contribute significantly to increasing the high
numbers of civilians affected by food insecurity, which has led to a deteriorating
humanitarian crisis globally, with many experiencing famine-like conditions.
In that context, I would like to underscore the importance of concerted efforts
to end conflicts by the parties thereto, including commitments to earnestly address
the root causes. I also wish to reiterate that holistic approaches to addressing conflict
situations are paramount if optimal success is to be achieved in finding sustainable
solutions and lasting peace. I would like to also stress the need for continued attention
to promoting conflict-prevention mechanisms, dialogue and negotiated political
settlements, as well as close cooperation between regional organizations and the
Security Council in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
South Africa is also concerned that in some conflict situations hunger is used
as a weapon of war. That tactic, used to intimidate and exacerbate the vulnerabilities
of civilians in order to gain advantage over opponents, has had devastating
consequences, especially for vulnerable groups, including children. Clearly this is
a violation of both international humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We therefore call on parties to conflict to put an end to that practice and to
prioritize the interests of civilians and ensure their protection. We further call on
parties to allow the impartial and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in urgent need of it. That should be done in accordance with the principles of
international humanitarian law.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the existing socioeconomic
conditions of civilians and has also contributed to worsening the living conditions
of internally displaced persons, migrants and refugees. The pandemic has also
21-03630133/147

S/2021/250

burdened health systems, affecting the provision of the requisite medical assistance
in conflict areas. In that regard, I wish to emphasize the importance of enhancing
and providing adequate health services in conflict areas so as to deal with infectious
diseases, which should be part of a strategy to eradicate hunger.
Furthermore, in the context of the persistent coronavirus pandemic, civilians
have faced higher prices for food items owing to failing economies and limited
supplies of food. South Africa remains concerned at the fact that the blanket economic
sanctions imposed on countries in conflict areas may inadvertently give rise to
conflict-related hunger, as civilians may have less access to food and medicine. In
order to alleviate the plight of civilians, sanctions should be targeted, balanced and
include realistic benchmarks in order to achieve the goals envisioned. Moreover,
sanctions should no longer be applied as blanket conditions for an entire country,
especially when they relate to the provision of sustenance and/or health care.
Ensuring sustainable and adequate resources for humanitarian assistance
is a serious challenge. The common goal of providing urgent assistance is vital in
order to alleviate the plight of civilians affected by hunger and acute malnutrition
in conflict situations and should be met with adequate funding to achieve that goal.
South Africa acknowledges the continued support of donor countries that have
contributed generous funding to United Nations humanitarian work.
I wish to conclude by highlighting the importance of cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations on this issue. I take this opportunity to express
South Africa’s gratitude to the United Nations for the continued cooperation and
support for the African Union’s commitment to ending hunger and food insecurity in
Africa by 2025. That is one of the various examples of effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, and, in that regard, South Africa
encourages such partnerships to be emulated in similar situations towards the goal
of addressing hunger and food insecurity in conflict areas.

134/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 66
Statement by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, European Union
and Cooperation of Spain, Maria Aránzazu González Laya
[Original: Spanish]
Spain considers this meeting of the Security Council very timely and aligns
itself with the position of the European Union. I would also stress the need to find
solutions to the growing humanitarian problem posed by hunger among the civilian
population, which is sometimes an intentional effect of conflicts.
The worrying increase in food insecurity worldwide, which has been aggravated
by factors such as the spread of the coronavirus disease, the adverse effects of climate
change and the intensification or prolongation of conflicts, as reflected in the “Global
Report on Food Crises — 2020”, has highlighted the obligation to enhance and step
up our humanitarian efforts in the most vulnerable communities.
In addition to the many regions in which food crises have been significant and
have deepened, such as Yemen, we consider it vitally important to expand the focus
to other places where hunger is leading to a sharp deterioration in the conditions
facing the civilian population, including Syria and the countries of the Sahel area.
We must emphasize our efforts to strengthen the triple nexus between humanitarian
action, development and peace, all in accordance with the Agenda for Humanity, the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Spain actively supports the work of the World Food Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Global Network against Food
Crises and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to reduce and
prevent food insecurity. In particular, Spain contributes to the work of the Committee
on World Food Security, which in 2015 approved the Framework of Action for Food
Security and Nutrition in Prolonged Crises.
We are strong promoters of the development and implementation of resolution
2417 (2018) and condemn the use of hunger as a weapon of war, as set out in our
penal code. Our humanitarian diplomacy strategy 2020-2026 specifically considers
hunger and conflict as a primary aspect of humanitarian action and strengthens our
commitment to resolving that problem.
We promoted the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), on medical personnel
in armed conflicts, which, in protecting and promoting access to the population,
contributes to improving the nutrition of people experiencing food insecurity in
armed conflict. In the process of the follow-up and development of the resolution,
we have carried out numerous measures at the national and international levels to
enhance its implementation. We urge the international community and non-State
actors to join in those collective efforts and to promote respect for international
humanitarian law.
We are aware of the need to redouble our joint efforts to combat this scourge,
which affects millions of people throughout the world. We reiterate Spain’s
commitment to and support for the actions of the Security Council.

21-03630135/147

S/2021/250

Annex 67
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland, Pascale
Christine Baeriswyl
[Original: English and French]
Switzerland would like to thank the United States for having organized this
open debate and the speakers for their perspectives.
In 2021, armed conflicts remain the main factor of acute food insecurity. That
is exacerbated by climate change, environmental degradation, economic shocks and
the coronavirus disease. In those conflicts, food insecurity and diseases related to
malnutrition kill silently but surely: they often claim more lives than confrontations.
But hunger is not inevitable: it can and must be prevented and alleviated. More
efforts are urgently needed. That means the prevention of armed conflict, respect for
international humanitarian law, the delivery of humanitarian assistance and a rapid
and effective response to early warnings. Security Council action is vital for the 77
million people suffering from acute hunger in conflict zones.
Switzerland would like to highlight three areas of action that it considers to
be priorities.
First, it urges all parties to armed conflict to assume their primary responsibility
to meet the needs of the civilian population. Failing that, they must allow and
facilitate rapid, long-term and unimpeded humanitarian access to populations in
need. Switzerland calls on the Council to authorize such access when the parties do
not consent thereto while the civilian population is threatened by famine.
Secondly, sanctions and counter-terrorism measures should not increase
food insecurity. Switzerland calls on the Council to include safeguard clauses for
humanitarian action when deciding or extending such measures. Safeguard clauses
must ensure effective and impartial humanitarian engagements. Switzerland
encourages expert groups assisting sanctions committees to monitor and report on
the impact of sanctions on humanitarian action and food security.
Thirdly, Switzerland emphasizes the fundamental importance of accountability
in deterring potential perpetrators of violations and providing justice for the victims.
Upon our initiative, the Rome Statute was amended to allow the International Criminal
Court to investigate and prosecute the crime of starvation in internal armed conflicts.
The Council can now refer to the Court situations of internal and international armed
conflict where that crime appears to have been committed. Switzerland has initiated
the process to ratify that amendment. It strongly encourages other States parties
to the Court to also ratify it and Member States to criminalize those acts in their
national legislation.
Switzerland supported resolution 2417 (2018) from the outset and reaffirms its
unwavering support therefor. It remains committed to the people affected through
an immediate and long-term humanitarian presence and by financing World Food
Programme operations, including in Yemen, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
South Sudan and Nigeria. In addition to food security, Switzerland also supports
access to vital services such as drinking water and shelter. Finally, it is committed
to peace and reconciliation processes and to respect for and the strengthening of the
legal framework.

136/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 68
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
Food insecurity remains a global concern, threatening political stability,
worsening humanitarian crises and derailing hard-won progress in global health.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has further complicated the situation.
Economic downturns and disrupted supply chains have led to a lack of adequate,
safe, affordable and nutritious food for millions of people. Food insecurity is likely
to worsen, with extreme climate events threatening all aspects of agricultural
production as well as distribution channels and market flows. The world’s population
is expected to increase to 10.9 billion in 2100, potentially resulting in a substantial
surge in food demand.
Unfortunately, we are losing sight of our global commitment to ending
hunger by 2030. Failing to achieve that fundamental goal will have dramatic social,
economic and political implications.
Conflict continues to pose the biggest threat to global food security. Clearly,
there is an urgent need to increase cooperation on creating conditions for peace so
as to end conflicts. Through resolution 2417 (2018), the Security Council recognized
for the first time the intrinsic link between hunger and conflict. The effective
implementation of that resolution is essential in humanitarian settings such as Syria
and Yemen and in various parts of Africa.
The use of starvation as a weapon of war is unacceptable. Unfortunately, we
are witnessing this heinous crime as a frequent tactic of war in Syria. For too long,
the Syrian regime has left civilians without access to food and has deprived them of
their most basic humanitarian necessities. The harsh winter conditions in north-west
Syria, the increased morbidity from flooding and the burning of unsafe materials for
heating or cooking have caused the nutrition situation to deteriorate further.
According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, across
the region there has been a 55 per cent increase in cases of severe acute malnutrition
as of January 2021 compared with the same period last year. Chronic malnutrition,
currently affecting one third of children, is also on the rise.
In this human-made disaster, United Nations cross-border humanitarian
operations remain the only hope and a crucial lifeline that is vital to the survival of
the millions of people who are trapped in a vicious circle of violence in the northwest, in lamentable conditions. The response by the international community,
particularly the United Nations, to the victims of the Syrian crisis has been carried
out through that mechanism. Within that framework, more than 40,000 truckloads
of United Nations humanitarian assistance have been sent through Turkey to northwest Syria.
We commend the efforts of the World Food Programme in delivering almost
30,000 truckloads of food assistance under that mechanism as well as contributing
to the devising of better logistical conditions under its status of “cluster lead
agency”. The mechanism ensures that international aid is directly delivered to 4.1
million people in need, including 2.7 million internally displaced persons, in the
north of Syria.
In view of those appalling conditions, the Security Council has no other
option but to renew the United Nations cross-border humanitarian mechanism next
July, with additional border gates and the Bab al-Salam crossing point in particular,
to resume aid delivery for 1.3 million people in northern Aleppo. To that end, the
21-03630137/147

S/2021/250

Council should uphold its responsibility and take action to alleviate the suffering of
the Syrian people.
While reports of hunger and the threat of famine are growing, we cannot stand
idly by. As the international community, we need to adopt a preventive approach to
the growing challenge of acute hunger and food insecurity. We must act before food
emergencies turn into full-blown famines.
We need to put in place solid institutional reforms and strengthen our efforts
to improve the resilience of the agricultural sector against droughts and floods.
Agrotechnology practices could be useful and provide us with valuable solutions in
that regard.
Also vital is preventing speculative food prices in marketing and trade and
supporting the continuation of supply chains. Moreover, the strengthening of existing
financial assistance mechanisms and the establishment of new funds will help
address the needs of the people living in conflict areas or food-insecure countries.
Enhanced cooperation between international financial institutions and humanitarian
organizations will undoubtedly facilitate efforts on the ground.
Rural livelihoods should be supported by investments and additional grants.
Women and girls, especially rural women, have to be empowered in their efforts to
gain full access to land, affordable loans and local, regional and global markets.
Finally, we also need to focus our efforts on delivering basic emergency tools
without delay, including food, water, health and protection services, to conflictaffected regions.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s upcoming Food Systems Summit will
help address those multifaceted issues in relation to global food security. We expect
that the Summit will provide all relevant stakeholders with valuable guidance as
to how we can adapt and adjust our food systems to address current and future
challenges. Turkey remains committed to contributing to the global efforts to achieve
a successful outcome at the Summit.

138/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 69
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the United Nations
The delegation of Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
delegation of the European Union (annex 33) and would like to make a statement in
its national capacity.
The delegation of Ukraine thanks the United States for having organized this
open debate on the topic of conflict and food security.
Global food insecurity continues to represent a serious threat to humankind.
We note with concern that, according to the World Food Programme, more than
200 million people faced acute food insecurity at the end of 2020. That is a mindboggling figure. Yet, there is no end in sight to this crisis. Even more alarmingly,
World Bank projections suggest this figure could further increase to more than 300
million in 2021.
The poorest and most vulnerable countries have been disproportionally
affected by food insecurity due to the compounding impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which disrupted food supply chains, economies and jobs.
The sharp rise in acute food insecurity is likely to roll back much of the
progress made over the past few decades on women and children’s nutrition. With
the COVID-19 pandemic significantly exacerbating hunger, both 2020 and 2021 are
projected to be lost years, from an economic perspective.
As shown in recent years, people living in fragile and conflict-affected
situations are particularly at risk as conflicts rapidly undermine all aspects of life,
destroy livelihoods and institutions and restrict access to food. The world is currently
experiencing the highest levels of displacement on record, with 65.3 million people
forcibly displaced and the most vulnerable to food shortages.
We fully support the notion that violent conflicts cause food insecurity,
among other adverse consequences. At the same time, food insecurity, driven by
many factors, including climate shocks, trade distortions, volatility, food prices and
exclusion, has increased the risk of conflict.
The armed aggression of the Russian Federation caused a protracted
humanitarian crisis in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, thus affecting
millions of innocent citizens of Ukraine. In that regard, we express our profound
alarm that the Russian occupation forces have not taken sufficient measures to
facilitate the access of humanitarian organization to the temporarily occupied
territories. The situation is particularly disturbing in temporarily occupied Luhansk.
As a result, food security in these territories has deteriorated over the past year. In
that regard, we call upon the Russian Federation to comply with its humanitarian
obligations, including with regard to granting international organizations safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to the affected population.
We are convinced that the complexity and multidimensional causes of food
insecurity warrant the participation of all stakeholders in seeking ways to eradicate
it, as well as the need to focus on the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on
food security.
We also want to reiterate the importance of a comprehensive approach that
integrates the necessary responses to climate, biodiversity loss, conflict, epidemics,
economic crises, food insecurity, malnutrition and structural inequalities.
The problem of global food insecurity is of special concern to Ukraine. In
November, we marked the eighty-seventh anniversary of one of the deadliest crimes
21-03630139/147

S/2021/250

of the twentieth century — mass starvation in Holodomor, Ukraine, engineered by
the Soviet regime. It claimed the lives of millions of Ukrainians. It is telling that
this tragedy occurred in Ukraine, almost half of which has the most fertile soil in
the world.
Today, with so many people worldwide pushed towards acute hunger, my
country cannot remain idle, and is ready to help promote food security as a leader in
spearheading the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 2 and driving the
transformation of food systems internationally by combining the core competencies
of diverse organizations through multi-stakeholder partnerships.
In order to ensure respect for the most basic human right — the right to
food — Ukraine keeps the response to global food insecurity at the top of its agenda.
As a country with a traditionally strong agricultural sector and developed
food exports, Ukraine is already playing a role of food security guarantor in many
countries around the world. Despite the current challenges, Ukraine ranks among
the top 10 largest exporters of sunflower oil, barley, corn, wheat, butter, poultry
and milk powder, thus contributing to resolving the problem of global hunger, food
insecurity and malnutrition.
Ukraine’s key role has been on display since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic, when global supply chains were disrupted. Ukraine continues to fulfil its
obligations and has significantly contributed to the food security of its partners in
the Middle East, Europe, Southeast Asia and North Africa. We stand ready to do our
part in strengthening world food security in future.
Ukraine believes that an overhaul of the food system is long overdue. Food
system dynamics are likely to exacerbate inequality within and between nations, and
growing inequality will negatively affect society. New and bold smart policies are
needed to redesign food systems, with opportunities to adopt a whole-of-Government
approach to integrate the true costs of food systems; link food, agriculture and
environmental policies to healthy diets; and create an enabling environment for
inclusive technologies.
In that regard, we look forward to the holding of the 2021 United Nations
Food Systems Summit and hope that it will be instrumental in shaping a balanced
approach to addressing global hunger and malnutrition while respecting human
rights and supporting sustainable development for present and future generations.

140/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Annex 70
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
The United Arab Emirates would like to thank the United States for prioritizing
this important matter during its presidency of the Security Council.
The United Arab Emirates recognizes the role of food security in ensuring
human security. The United Arab Emirates has therefore actively supported the
United Nations in its global efforts to supply provisions, including food, to those
in need in conflict zones. In that connection, in May, the United Arab Emirates, in
partnership with the World Food Programme, established an air-bridge operation that
reconnected aid operations with a supply of medical equipment, goods and expertise
when food insecurity in conflict areas was exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. That operation delivers much-needed supplies from the
United Arab Emirates to key locations across Europe, Africa, Asia and the Middle
East. In addition, the United Arab Emirates recently announced $230 million in
funding for the Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan, in continuation of its efforts to
alleviate hunger and suffering in the region and around the world.
Conflict-driven food insecurity is causing millions to suffer in conflicts
around the world, particularly in the Middle East and Africa. Protracted conflicts,
in particular, pose a grave risk to the health and livelihoods of women, men, and
children. The situation was further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which
caused disruptions to humanitarian aid and further afflicted areas already devastated
by conflict. The United Arab Emirates therefore welcomes resolution 2565 (2021),
which calls for increased international cooperation to facilitate access to the
COVID-19 vaccine in conflict situations. Furthermore, the impact of climate change,
as a driver of both conflict and food insecurity, exacerbates the plight of civilians
in conflict areas. By unanimously adopting resolution 2417 (2018), the Security
Council showed its determination to address conflict-induced food insecurity.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the Council must continue its efforts
to ensure full implementation of this resolution. In that context, we would like to
make three recommendations for improving food security in conflict zones.
First, humanitarian aid cannot be used as a bargaining chip. What we have
seen in places like Yemen, where the Houthis repeatedly obstruct the delivery of aid,
is unacceptable. The Council must unequivocally condemn such actions and demand
full compliance with international humanitarian law.
Secondly, in his reports to the Security Council, the Secretary-General
could incorporate lessons from scientific models that forecast natural disasters.
Council members could take such risk factors into account when discussing issues
on its agenda. Predictive modelling for natural disasters and disease outbreaks is
sophisticated and could be an integral asset in the Council’s preventive action. While
this does not apply to human-made disasters, anticipatory action can help us all
prepare for the impact of natural phenomena on food insecurity.
Thirdly, women and youth need to be part of the equation when it comes to
reaching a sustainable solution for conflict-induced food insecurity. The specific
short- and long-term needs of women and youth, both in the short and long term,
have to be prioritized since food insecurity disproportionately affect their lives.
We are encouraged by the Security Council’s continued attention to this topic.
International collaboration is required if we are to mitigate and resolve this clear
threat to international peace and security. The United Arab Emirates will continue
to focus on addressing this scourge during our Council term in 2022-2023.
21-03630141/147

S/2021/250

Annex 71
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations, Samuel Moncada
[Original: English and Spanish]
As expressed on many occasions at the Security Council, the delegation of
Venezuela attaches great importance to comprehensively addressing the root causes
of armed conflicts in order to effectively and truly achieve sustainable and lasting
peace. Addressing poverty and the lack of access to basic services, housing, health
and food is key to ensuring stable and peaceful societies.
The United Nations is, par excellence, the most appropriate framework to
organically engage in multilateral discussions on this issue. For the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, the role of the General Assembly, as a broad organ for
discussion, is of crucial importance when it comes to defining the international
dialogue on food security strategies at both national and international levels.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly Sustainable
Development Goal 2, entitled “End hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture”, places the eradication of poverty
and hunger among its key priorities and identifies agriculture and sustainable food
systems as key drivers of sustainable development.
Similarly, our various development, production and capacity-building
initiatives and our experience-sharing projects, implemented by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), are aimed at eradicating hunger and malnutrition
in a multilateral cooperation framework.
Venezuela is committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
supports the work of FAO and UNDP, and reaffirms its commitment to those bodies.
It regrets, however, that for the conveners of this high-level meeting, the 2030 Agenda
and its goals, including the one referred to as “Zero Hunger”, are not as important as
they are to other responsible members of the international community.
In the context of armed conflicts, regardless of their intensity and generation,
the civilian population is the first victim of the shortages resulting from the lack
of food and the disruption of production and distribution mechanisms, which then
intensifies the suffering of those who are subjected to the onslaught of war.
Our delegation notes that the lack of means to implement food policies or
address trade barriers, economic slowdown, armed conflicts and the adverse effects
of climate change are the main factors contributing to reversing long-term progress
in the fight against global hunger.
Nowadays, food security challenges have been exacerbated by the devastating
impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the extraordinary
measures implemented to contain its spread and their resulting economic effects,
which have, in turn, exposed significant vulnerabilities in many national food
systems. As the Secretary-General stated in 2020, over 820 million people suffer
from food insecurity and another 130 million people could suffer from acute hunger
due to the effects of the pandemic. The human crisis resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic reminds us of the urgent need for sustainable food systems that reliably
provide safe, nourishing and affordable food.
Resolution 2417 (2018), on starvation as a means of warfare, reaffirms full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, in accordance with the
142/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

Charter of the United Nations. Hence, each country must work, without external
interference, to ensure food security, in accordance with its own national policies
and priorities.
In that context, our delegation notes with serious concern that, according to
official Syrian sources, in January, United States troops confiscated a convoy of 50
trucks loaded with wheat and barley from the Al-Tawiba silos. This is not an isolated
event, and it has been described as a systematic and organized theft of crops by the
United States military. Consequently, we categorically reject the use of hunger by
State and/or non-State actors as a tactic of war, or as a mechanism to destabilize
and overthrow legitimate and democratically elected Governments, or as a tool to
foment conflict and instability, which undoubtedly results, rather deliberately, in
social chaos and suffering.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will not cease to insist on the fact that,
in the context of a global pandemic, the negative impacts of the illegal imposition
of unilateral coercive measures violate a broad range of economic and social rights,
and specifically threaten the food security of one third of humankind, including 30
million Venezuelans, who are being subjected to that criminal policy.
We consider such hostile policies to be a double standard — showing
concern for food security while illegally imposing unilateral coercive measures that
affect the food supply chain at the national and international levels; and causing
sustained damage to economies and populations, particularly impacting the most
vulnerable segments of societies as part of a calculated policy of maximum pressure
to deliberately cause grief and pain to civilian populations, including that of our
country. In that regard, we echo the position of the General Assembly that essential
goods such as food and medicines should not be used as tools for political and
economic compulsion and that, under no circumstances, should people be deprived
of their own means of subsistence and development.
The pernicious effects of the so-called sanctions have been recognized
by independent United Nations experts, including the Special Rapporteur on the
negative impact of the unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human
rights, Alena Douhan, who recently concluded an official visit to Venezuela in order
to assess the negative impact of these criminal measures on the Venezuelan people’s
enjoyment of human rights. Like other States that are victims of illegal unilateral
coercive measures, we reiterate our international denunciation of the economic and
financial siege to which we are currently being subjected, demand its immediate
derogation and repeal, and call on all to reject its application.
In conclusion, we consider that efforts to eradicate the human tragedy of
hunger and to fully guarantee food security must be carried out in a concerted
and coordinated manner, broadening as much as possible the spaces for discussion
and ensuring the full participation of Member States as primarily responsible for
guaranteeing the implementation of national, regional and international strategies in
the global fight against hunger.

21-03630143/147

S/2021/250

Annex 72
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Al-Saadi
Allow me at the outset to congratulate the President, and through her, the
United States, for presiding over the Security Council for the month of March, and to
express our best wishes to her during this presidency. I would like also to extend our
gratitude to the United Kingdom for its delegation’s successful presidency during the
month of February.
The eradication of hunger sits at the top of the Sustainable Development
Goals, yet, despite the progress made in this context, in some countries and regions,
severe hunger and malnutrition remain major obstacles to development, especially
in countries enduring conflicts.
In Yemen, according to the latest analysis of the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, more than 24 million Yemenis are in need of humanitarian assistance, while
more than 20 million people are facing hunger. Malnutrition rates among women
and children in Yemen remain very high. Figures show that 1.2 million pregnant or
breastfeeding women and 2.3 million children under five need urgent treatment for
acute malnutrition. Of these children, about 400,000 remain without treatment and
are at a risk of dying.
Unfortunately, this dismal picture of the situation in Yemen is a human-made
crisis and results from the Houthi militia having waged war against the Yemeni
people since 2014. Understanding the causes of hunger and food insecurity in Yemen
is a key element to finding a solution. Allow me therefore to illustrate some of those
causes in the following few points,
First, the main driver of hunger in Yemen is not the lack of food, but rather
the people’s inability to afford it. When the Houthis took control over the Central
Bank headquarters in Sana’a before they were moved to Aden, they squandered over
$4 billion of the bank’s foreign reserves. As a consequence, the Government lost its
ability to provide letters of credit and foreign currency for traders who import the
majority of food consumed in the country. This led traders to secure their currency
from the market, thereby driving up food prices dramatically. Saudi deposits between
2018 and 2020 provided the Government with the resources to slow food price hikes.
Another deposit is therefore very much needed to avert a looming famine.
Secondly, even when the generous contribution of the international community
provided free food and aid to Yemenis, hunger persisted in Houthi-controlled
areas. United Nations agencies, in particular the World Food Programme (WFP),
have spoken loudly and clearly about the obstacles to aid delivery imposed by the
Houthis. We have seen enough evidence in United Nations reports and reports of
other international non-governmental organizations that show how the Houthis steal
aid from the mouths of the hungry and divert it to the fighting fronts to prolong the
war. The Security Council should act immediately to stop these Houthi practices and
ensure that aid reaches its intended beneficiaries.
Thirdly, even when the aid, which mostly arrives in Yemen through the AlHudaydah seaport, bypasses the Houthis’ obstacles and makes it to the internally
displaced persons camps, it often arrives too late, that is, after the conflict has driven
the internally displaced persons to flee to different camps. It takes a lot of effort and
time for the United Nations and international non-governmental organizations to
assess the new locations of displaced persons and to establish adequate supply chains
for aid delivery, causing the levels of food insecurity in those camps to soar. A living
144/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

example is the Houthi attack on Ma’rib, a city that is hosting 2 million internally
displaced persons, or 70 per cent of the internally-displaced-person population in
Yemen. For this reason, the Security Council should act immediately and apply
the utmost pressure on the Houthis and their regional sponsor, Iran, in order to
stop this heinous attack on civilians, which is clearly a violation of international
humanitarian law.
Fourthly, the most abhorrent reason for hunger in Yemen is the Houthis’ use
of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare. This disgraceful tactic has been
used against the people of the resilient city of Taiz, where Houthis have besieged
the city for over six years. They have blocked the roads into and out of the city,
forcing people to take long, unpaved and bumpy roads to reach their destinations.
Nowadays, a trip that used to take around four hours is taking almost a full day. The
effect that that has on the food accessibility, not to mention access to health care and
hospitals, is incalculable. The Security Council should therefore act immediately to
stop this war crime and hold the Houthis accountable.
Finally, although urgently addressing the aforementioned pressing issues
is crucial to save lives, it will not be enough to end hunger and food insecurity
in Yemen. The Government of Yemen therefore calls on the Security Council and
the international community to provide support to the new Yemeni Cabinet, which
was formed in accordance with the Riyadh Agreement. The Government, which
is working from the interim capital of Aden, is focused on paying salaries and
providing services to the Yemeni people across the country, including in Houthicontrolled areas. We would welcome a deposit to the Central Bank as a good start.
Next, the Council and the international community should use urgent
measures to deter and stop the Houthi from manipulating the FSO SAFER tanker
issue. The Houthis must immediately allow the United Nations technical team to
gain access to the tanker so it can make its assessment and undertake urgent repairs.
The spilling of over a million barrels of crude oil into the Red Sea would have
devastating environmental, economic and humanitarian consequences for decades.
It will affect fisheries activities and deprive Yemenis of an important food source.
The Security Council and the international community should apply the utmost
pressure on the Houthis to end their absurd war and engage in good faith with the
United Nations Special Envoy to reach a sustainable peaceful solution to the conflict,
based on agreed references, including the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference, and
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).

21-03630145/147

S/2021/250

Annex 73
Joint Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Dominican
Republic to the United Nations, José Blanco Conde, and the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations,
Günter Sautter
We would like to thank the United States for convening today’s meeting and
the briefers for their briefings.
As Security Council members in the 2019-2020 term, Germany and the
Dominican Republic consistently strived to put the issue of hunger and conflict high
on the Council’s agenda. We aim at further advancing this tremendously relevant topic.
Today’s open debate on conflict and food security is very timely, since hunger
crises and the risk of famine around the world — for example, in Yemen and South
Sudan — are increasing in number and severity. Already last year, the situation
was alarming, with the World Food Programme (WFP) warning that, owing to the
effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, 270 million people were
expected to be acutely food insecure by the end of the year. In 2021, the situation has
not improved: the WFP warns that over 34 million people are currently approaching
emergency or famine conditions.
While climate change, economic hardships and the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic play a devastating role, we want to emphasize that the most significant
driver for humanitarian needs — and thus for food insecurity — is conflict and
violence. Famine in a new dimension driven by conflict could soon become a reality
for millions of people. Without immediate action, innocent civilians will starve —
and die.
Hunger is a recurrent, persistent threat for conflict-affected countries. It
is shameful that humankind has not been able to draw the right lessons from this
situation. Instead, we are trying once again to solve a problem that could have been
prevented in the first place. Conflicts must be solved before they lead to famine.
Based on the growing evidence that conflict is the primary driver of hunger
that significantly increases the risk of famine, the interlinkages between hunger and
conflict were recognized in resolution 2417 (2018). Accordingly, we need to act more
decisively on this topic and on the interlinkages behind the problem. In accordance
with its mandate, the Security Council must become much better at conflict prevention,
first, by using the tools at its disposal to monitor conflict-affected countries when
the risk of food insecurity is still preventable; secondly, by ensuring safe, rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in need, with all actors taking
measures to allow and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance; thirdly, by
playing its decisive role in ensuring compliance with international humanitarian law
and respect for the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence by the parties involved in armed conflicts — which is the only way
that humanitarian organizations can reach affected people, wherever and whoever
they are.
Of course, the most effective way to address conflicts as drivers of hunger is
to end and prevent conflicts, which remains the key task of this Council. We also call
for a scaling-up of humanitarian operations. Joint efforts among the humanitarian,
development and peace pillars must be developed and implemented in a coordinated
manner so as to end conflict-driven food insecurity and hunger. Finally, the persisting
funding gap for the humanitarian response to this crisis remains alarming. All of
us must step up our commitment to ensuring that the most vulnerable continue to
receive the assistance they need.
146/147

21-03630

S/2021/250

We must do better. We can prevent hunger. We need to take concrete steps
together to collectively avert the risk of millions of people facing the tragedy of
hunger and famine — forever.

21-03630147/147
