A /76/PV.66

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

66th plenary meeting

Friday, 1 April 2022, 3:00 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Carazo (Costa
Rica), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Prevention of Armed Conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/690)
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico thanks Ms. Catherine MarchiUhel for presenting (see A/76/PV.65) the eighth
report of the report of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (see
A/76/690) and congratulates the entire team of the
Mechanism for the great work it has carried out so far.
First of all, we note the very significant progress
that has been made in terms of cooperation. It is
remarkable that some national jurisdictions have
reported to the Mechanism that they have opened
criminal proceedings on crimes committed in Syria.
We hope that, as in the cases of Germany, France and
Sweden, national jurisdictional authorities will use the
Mechanism as a repository of evidence to support their
investigations and the development of solid cases.
We also highlight cooperation with such other
mechanisms created to investigate and contribute

to accountability for crimes committed in Syria
as the Investigation and Identification Team of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic established by the
Human Rights Council. Coordination among all these
mechanisms is essential to avoid duplication and, of
course, to maximize available resources.
The Mechanism has also shown innovation in
investigation, such as the use of joint investigative teams,
the incorporation of technology and data analysis. All
of these tools have been important in identifying and
documenting such lines of investigation as chemical
weapons attacks and attacks on medical facilities.
These efforts are undoubtedly essential in
combating impunity. However, as we have stated on
previous occasions, Mexico believes that the situation
in Syria should have long ago been referred to the
International Criminal Court, a possibility that is
contemplated, as we all know, in article 13 (b) of the
Rome Statute. We regret that the use of the veto has
once again blocked this avenue.
Mexico’s position on the veto is well known.
We believe, as we have promoted through the
Franco-Mexican initiative, which already has 105
signatories, that the permanent members of the
Security Council should refrain from resorting to
the veto when the Council is faced with situations
involving the commission of mass atrocities. Likewise,
it is unacceptable that the veto be abused to prevent

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30838 (E)

*2230838*

A/76/PV.66

01/04/2022

accountability, including, of course, the failure to refer
situations to the International Criminal Court.

murdered, while many others are missing, disappeared,
detained or subjected to torture.

The 11 years of conflict in Syria have caused
incalculable and irreparable losses and suffering
for the population and has profoundly damaged the
social fabric. It is clear that there is not and never
will be a military solution. The only way forward is
political dialogue through the road map outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015). The fights against impunity
and for accountability are necessary pillars for the
success of this political process. That is why Mexico
strongly reaffirms its support for the Mechanism
and the fulfilment of its mandate and underlines the
importance of ensuring that it has the budget it needs to
carry out its work efficiently. Its work contributes in a
very important way to closing the justice gaps in favour
of victims.

A clear parallel can be drawn between the hostilities,
war crimes and human rights violations in Syria and
those in Ukraine, both with the direct engagement of
Russian military forces. As was correctly said in this
Hall during this morning’s meeting (see A/76/PV.65),
the current violations by Russian military forces in
Ukraine is a repetition of the Russian handbook written
in Syria.

Mr. Leschenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer (see A/76/
PV.65). We would like to make the following remarks in
our national capacity.
Ukraine is grateful to Ms. Catherine MarchiUhel, Head of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (IIIM), for
presenting the most recent report on the activities of the
Mechanism (see A/76/690).
We are pleased to note the progress achieved by
the IIIM throughout the reporting period. As one
of co-sponsors of the Mechanism back in 2016, our
delegation strongly supports the IIIM in implementing
its important mandate on collecting evidence of
atrocities committed in Syria, including murders,
torture and inhuman treatment of people. It is crucial
that victims and survivors of international crimes
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, and their
families, remain at the heart of the Mechanism’s work.
We recently observed the eleventh anniversary of
the Syrian conflict. The regime’s actions against the
Syrian people have led to one of the bloodiest armed
conflicts in the twenty-first century. Ukraine condemns
in the strongest terms the Syrian regime and its allies,
primarily Russia, of massive, systematic and grave
violations and abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Thousands of people have been
2/10

Let me stress that there is no place for impunity for
those who have committed such heinous crimes. They
must be brought to justice, wherever those crimes are
committed — in Syria, Ukraine or elsewhere. We will
continue to support the activities of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism, as well as the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the Investigation
and Identification Team of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Ukraine also
supports a sustainable political solution of the conflict
in Syria and recalls that the political transition should
be implemented in line with Security Council resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would also like to thank
Ms. Catherine Marchi-Uhel, Head of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 (IIIM), for her informative briefing.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (see A/76/PV.65).
We commend the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for its important work in
gathering extensive and detailed evidence of crimes
committed in Syria. We also commend its continued
engagement with civil society and other stakeholders,
including through its bulletins.
During more than a decade of conflict, the
international community has witnessed the commission
of the most heinous crimes in Syria, including the
re-emergence of the use of chemical weapons, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which have
shocked us all. As members of the international
community, it is our common responsibility to ensure
22-30838

01/04/2022

accountability for those crimes. That is not only key to
ensuring the right of the Syrian people to truth, justice
and effective remedies, but it is also essential for a just,
inclusive and sustainable political solution.
The Security Council must remain seized where
gross violations have taken place. Undoubtedly, the best
means of ensuring accountability is by way of a Council
referral of the situation to the International Criminal
Court. However, in circumstances where the Council
remains unable to progress accountability in Syria, we
rely on entities such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Investigation and Identification Team and factfinding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Those bodies allow us to bridge the impunity gap,
including by documenting those crimes and gathering
extensive and detailed evidence. That work is vital to
attributing responsibility and protecting the integrity
of the rules-based system, and it therefore demands the
support of the international community.
Along with those international mechanisms, the
role of civil society in documenting human rights
abuses, assisting victims and promoting accountability
for those responsible is crucial. Initiatives such as the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons keep accountability issues high
on the international agenda. We also commend those
States that have initiated proceedings to prosecute
war crimes and crimes against humanity in their
domestic courts.
The situation of detainees and missing persons
remains one of the greatest tragedies of this conflict.
The psychological impact on the victims and their
families is unconscionable. Ireland continues to
call on the Syrian authorities and on other parties to
release all those who have been arbitrarily detained
or abducted and to make the fate of missing persons
known. We welcome the emphasis on this important
issue in resolution 76/228, adopted by the Assembly on
24 December 2021.
The Secretary-General has been tasked with
investigating ways to bolster efforts. In that context,
Ireland notes the important work already conducted by
the Mechanism, welcomes the commitment to further
engagements and encourages the assessment of effective
coordination across the United Nations system.

A/76/PV.66

A generation of Syrian children has grown up
knowing nothing but conflict. They have been failed
time and time again. Grave violations of children’s rights
continue unabated, including recruitment, abductions,
killing and maiming. Girls are disproportionately
impacted by sexual and gender-based violence and the
targeting of educational and health facilities. We must
strive to protect children from harm, vindicate their
rights and hold those responsible to account.
Ireland remains a strong supporter of funding the
work of the IIIM through the regular budget of the United
Nations. That stability is essential for the Mechanism to
work efficiently and make justice a reality.
In conclusion, now more than ever, Ireland
believes that the Security Council and the international
community as a whole should recommit themselves to
the work for accountability for the crimes committed
in Syria. It is our fervent hope that that could achieve
the justice that the people of Syria yearn for and so
richly deserve.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (see A/76/PV.65). In addition, allow me
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
I would like to thank the Head of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 (IIIM), Ms. Catherine Marchi-Uhel, and her team
for their valuable work and for presenting the eighth
report of the Mechanism (see A/76/690). We reaffirm
our and unwavering support to the indispensable work
of the IIIM to assist in the investigation and prosecution
of persons responsible for the most serious crimes
under international law committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We also reaffirm our strong
support for the work of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
Georgia remains gravely concerned that, after
more than a decade since the beginning of the conflict,
people continue to suffer. Millions of Syrians have been
internally displaced or have sought refuge. Killings,
incommunicado detention and the disappearance of
tens of thousands of Syrians, torture and other cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment,
including sexual and gender-based violence, continue
to this day.

22-308383/10

A/76/PV.66

Throughout the country, people are prevented from
speaking freely and are at risk of being arbitrarily
detained. At the same time, an absolute majority of the
population lives below the poverty line.
The regime must cease attacks against civilians
and civilian facilities, allow safe, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian assistance to all in need,
especially in north-western Syria, and cooperate fully
with the IIIM, as well as the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Investigation and Identification Team and factfinding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
The voice of Syrian people, who continue to suffer,
must be heard. Impunity cannot prevail. It is therefore
imperative to ensure accountability for the perpetrators
of serious violations and halt abuses of human rights
and international law. We will continue to strongly
support the inclusion of the IIIM in the regular United
Nations budget, based on the decision that this organ
has taken.
Justice has to be served, and accountability for
violations of international law must be ensured wherever
they are committed. We join efforts with Ukraine and the
international community to ensure that justice be served
for the crimes that Russia is committing in the context
of its ongoing unprovoked, unjustified and premeditated
aggression against Ukraine. In that context, we call on
Russia to immediately cease the aggression, comply
with the ruling of the International Court of Justice and
uphold international humanitarian law.
Mr. Sylvester (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 (IIIM). Today’s update highlights the importance
of the IIIM’s mandate — not only in gathering evidence
of past crimes but in documenting ongoing human
rights violations against the Syrian people.
In Syria, as in Ukraine, there can be no impunity
for those who violate international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Russia’s actions
in Ukraine will be familiar to millions of Syrians who
have suffered at the hands of the Al-Assad regime, with
Moscow’s backing.
4/10

01/04/2022

The eighth report of the IIIM (see A/76/690)
demonstrates the Mechanism’s expertise, effectiveness
and contribution to international justice. The increasing
number of requests for assistance lend credence to
that assessment, as do significant steps forward in
delivering justice, most notably via the landmark
verdict in Koblenz, Germany.
The Koblenz verdict, which benefited from the
Mechanism’s support, determined that crimes against
humanity were committed in Syria as part of a
systematic attack against the civilian population by the
Al-Assad regime between April 2011 and September
2012. In doing so, the court sent a strong signal of
the international community’s commitment to hold
perpetrators in Syria to account.
We will not relent in that task. To accelerate the
United Kingdom’s contribution, I am pleased to note
that the United Kingdom signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Mechanism on 10 March. By
facilitating information-sharing with the IIIM, that
agreement supports our continuing efforts to hold the
Al-Assad regime to account.
We commend the Mechanism for its work on
holistic and inclusive justice and thematic strategies,
including on gender. Sexual and gender-based violence
against women, girls, men and boys has been pervasive
in Syria since the uprising in 2011.
We note the Mechanism’s update on its central
repository of information, welcome its continued
cooperation with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and call on all States and parties to
the conflict, including Syrian authorities, to cooperate
with the Mechanism.
The United Kingdom reiterates its concern about
the situation of tens of thousands of individuals forcibly
disappeared and those missing or detained in Syria. We
demand that all parties immediately cease involuntary
and enforced disappearances or kidnappings, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 2474
(2019) and applicable international law.
Finally, the United Kingdom fully associates itself
with the Mechanism’s conclusion that is has established
itself as a competent and trusted partner in justice
efforts concerning the crimes within its mandate. The
United Kingdom is proud to work with the IIIM and
its dedicated team members. We will remain at the
22-30838

01/04/2022

forefront of international efforts to hold the Syrian
regime and its backers to account.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation’s position on the
so-called “International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011” remains unchanged.
The Syrian Arab Republic did not consent to the
establishment of the Mechanism. And neither has there
been any Security Council resolution on this matter
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The creation of the Mechanism was a gross
violation of norms and principles of international
law, including the principles of the sovereign equality
of all States Members of the United Nations and
non-interference in their internal affairs. When making
that decision, the General Assembly clearly acted ultra
vires, going against the distribution of powers among
the main organs of the United Nations as established in
the Charter.
As a result, an illegitimate entity, which in
principle has no right to exist, has submitted its
unsolicited reports to the Assembly year after year.
We are convinced that the activities and conclusions
of the Mechanism, as well as the alleged evidence it
has collected, cannot be legally used in national or
international criminal proceedings.
At the same time, a group of Western countries
cynically pushed through the decision to fund the
Mechanism from the regular budget of the United
Nations, thereby shattering the tradition of consensus
in the Fifth Committee. What we are witnessing today
is now truly paradoxical — a toy created to serve the
geopolitical ambitions of the collective West, which
serves only its own interests, but with our money.
Moreover, the Mechanism is in no hurry to report
on how this money is being spent. Its latest so-called
report (see A/76/690) consists entirely of repetitions
and general phrases. The word “superficial” can hardly
do justice to the quality of the information contained
therein. Member States are left to guess what the
regular budget funds are being spent on.
The sources of the alleged “evidence” are not
disclosed in the report, and neither are the methods
of collecting and processing evidence. It is unclear

A/76/PV.66

with which specific entities the Mechanism is
interacting. The refusal to disclose information on the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) collaborating
with the Mechanism and their structure leads us to
believe that the General Assembly has participated in
the creation of yet another series of fakes and spoofs,
similar to what is being done by the London-based
Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.
That gives rise to the following question — what
evidence can be provided by bankrolled NGOs on
crimes in a country they have not been to? Apparently,
the same type of evidence as collected by the
Mechanism itself, which explicitly states in its report
that it collects information “mainly from open sources”.
Let me translate from bureaucratic language into plain
language. In other words, the Mechanism takes Western
propaganda and digests it to then produce it as “legally
significant evidence”. Apparently, the hope is that the
mechanism’s relationship with the United Nations will
legitimize such materials. But I seriously doubt that
it will.
In an attempt to somehow justify its existence, the
Mechanism took on high-profile cases. It announced
that it will soon complete work on the dossier of
evidence regarding the systematic attacks by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) against civilians and
its crimes against humanity in Syria. In that regard,
we should stress that Syrian law enforcement agencies
are doing an excellent job of investigating ISIS crimes.
Unsolicited assistance from an illegitimate Mechanism
only devalues the evidence regarding ISIS atrocities.
The Mechanism’s working methods do not make it
possible to meet the criteria for the relevance and
admissibility of the evidence, rendering it completely
useless in relation to national investigations.
We would like to make one further point. We do
not understand how such an illegitimate entity as the
Mechanism was granted access to the archives of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
as is evident from its report. The Security Council, for
whose benefit those archives exist, did not authorize
such access. We demand that the Secretariat cease such
practices. We respect the positions of delegations that are
sincere in their desire to stabilize the situation in Syria,
including achieving justice. However, it is important to
always act in accordance with international law, that is
to say, at the request of the Syrian authorities.

22-308385/10

A/76/PV.66

The Mechanism does not meet that criterion. Its
establishment is a political gamble of the collective
West to pursue its favourite policy of organizing regime
change in yet another unwanted country. It is important
to understand that any country seeking to preserve its
sovereignty and independent foreign policy is unwanted
by the United States of America and its satellites. It
is regrettable that the world Organization has become
embroiled in self-serving geopolitical games. The
Mechanism is not just an unfortunate mistake of the
General Assembly, misled by Western propaganda.
Its very existence today is a misunderstanding and an
obvious anachronism. It is time for the authors of the
idea to admit that the lies replicated by the Mechanism
will not lead to any regime change. We are convinced
that the funds of the United Nations regular budget
earmarked for the so-called investigations of the
Mechanism could be put to better use.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in exercise of the right of
reply, may I remind delegations that statements are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to exercise
its right of reply regarding statements of some Member
States delivered at this meeting.
The Head of the so called International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 (IIIM) briefed us today (see A/76/PV.65) on
the eighth report of the Mechanism (see A/76/690),
which she described as a valuable report, while other
colleagues described it as being in-depth, unique and
a leading report. The word “valuable” was used by the
Head of the IIIM because she said the report tackles
illegal, humanitarian challenges that are harmful to the
international community in the light of international
silence concerning what is happening in Syria. She
described what was taking place in Syria as atrocious.
I would like to remind Ms. Marchi-Uhel of just one
such atrocity that was committed by the United States
occupation forces in Baghouz, in eastern Syria, in 2019.
First, should she, as Head of the Mechanism, which
claims to be independent and impartial, not mention
such atrocities? In her briefing, she focused on women
6/10

01/04/2022

and children. However, more than 70 women and
children were killed in the United States attack I just
mentioned. Should she not have mentioned that in her
report? As I said, we reject the report, and we cannot in
any way accept the Mechanism’s mandate.
Secondly, the Head of the Mechanism said that she
cannot say for how long such heinous acts will continue
in Syria. Allow me to answer that question by saying
that we know when such atrocities will stop, that is,
once the United States withdraws its occupation forces
from Syrian territories; once it refrains from supporting
terrorism and terrorists in my country; once it gives
up its colonial ambitions and narrow political agendas
in Syria; once it lifts its illegitimate and inhumane
sanctions on the Syrian people; and once it respects our
national decisions.
Thirdly, the representative of Germany said that
accountability for those crimes is the least that can be
done for the Syrian people. However, I have another
idea. The least that they could do would be to lift the
sanctions that the European Union is still imposing on
the Syrian people, depriving them of their most basic
human rights. The representative of Germany also
called on countries to expand the jurisdiction of their
national courts and legislation. He even said that his
country was ready to provide support and the necessary
expertise in that regard. Bu, of course, he did not
mention a very important factor, which is the identity
of the accused. Even if countries were to decide to
implement the principle of national jurisdiction, which
my country and other countries do not approve of, they
would first have to get the blessing of a country, such
as Germany, in order to consider initiating a trial, or
perhaps not. It depends on the whims and political
interests of some influential countries. That also applies
to what my colleague the representative of Belgium said
in his statement when he, too, mentioned jurisdiction.
In that regard, I would like to recall what happened in
2001, when a group filed a case in Belgium. It was an
important, historic case and, due to significant pressure,
national legislations were amended in order to narrow
international jurisdiction.
Fourthly, I will not respond to what the representative
of Turkey said in his statement this morning, since
I could speak for a long time about the Turkish
involvement in the war against my country. However,
I would like to address my colleagues by recalling that
the so-called Abu Ibrahim Al-Hashimi Al-Quraishi,
former leader of the terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq
22-30838

01/04/2022

and the Levant (Da’esh), was killed in Atimah, a Syrian
village, that is a few kilometres from our border with
Turkey; that means, under the eyes of Turkey. I leave
the rest for colleagues to analyse.
(spoke in English)
As for the statement delivered by the representative
of Canada, let me quote what His Excellency said
earlier this morning:
“[T]here are steps we need to take to ensure that
impunity does not become a way of life.”
I could not agree more. But if that were to be truly
applied, it should be applied to all concerned, starting
from Governments that are directly involved in the
terrorist war against my country to those that funded,
armed, facilitated and transferred foreign terrorist
fighters to my country by opening their borders in plain
view of the world.
He also spoke about collecting evidence, and if we
were to assume that he is really concerned with justice,
then what happened to the plethora of evidence that the
Government of my country has provided to the United
Nations and all Member States throughout the past 11
years? Apparently, some evidence is valid, and some
is not. What are the criteria? It is the ones that those
countries that have caused destruction to my country
deem eligible. Talking about non-politicization is
therefore so out of context.
Finally, Syria provided information to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and, the last time I checked, the OPCW was
a technical organization, not a legal one. By what right
did the OPCW provide that information to the socalled IIIM?
The representative of the United States spoke
about violations of human rights and international
law, said that his country was proud of the support
that it provides to the so-called IIIM and concluded
his statement by quoting Her Excellency Ambassador
Thomas-Greenfield. In that same spirit, I should like to
do the same and conclude my intervention by quoting
the former Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright.
When asked if she thought that the United States war
in Iraq had been worth the deaths of half a million Iraqi
children, the answer was, “We think that the price was
worth it”. That is the legacy of the United States and its
policies around the world. I hope that my colleagues are
also proud of that legacy.

A/76/PV.66

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now give the floor to those representatives who have
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): This morning we heard some criticisms
regarding our comments on the working methods of the
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 (IIIM), which is based
on the protection of confidentiality. Additionally, we
heard that our legal justice system works on the basis
of confidentiality, especially in the prosecution phase.
I would like to remind the Assembly that the IIIM
is not a judicial body or a legal mechanism owing to
the fact that the General Assembly has no mandate to
create a judicial body. The IIIM is a political entity and,
as such, there are serious concerns regarding the legal
basis for its establishment as well as its encroachment on
not only judicial matters but also its serious violations of
the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic. Therefore
we cannot compare it with other justice systems,
whether national, regional or international.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today, as we were holding our discussions,
the situation in Ukraine was touched upon many times,
again not on topic. Some countries have made it a habit
to theatrically speak about violations of international
law there. Those are exactly the same countries that
in contemporary history alone have started many
aggressive wars.
It is at their hands that millions of ordinary
people died in Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria
and Libya, and I could continue with that list. Please
do not think that the peoples of those countries have
forgotten the violence committed against them. Today
the propaganda and the blatantly false information
being disseminated by the Western countries about
what is happening in Ukraine is no surprise. Baseless
allegations are being made and lies and disinformation
are propagated non-stop against my country. The real
crimes are the atrocities conducted by the Kyiv regime,
which are being passed over in silence.
When the various coalitions guided by the United
States and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant terrorists
killed civilians with impunity, at least they did not
think of those people as their own, whereas the current

22-308387/10

A/76/PV.66

nationalist regime in Kyiv stands ready to kill its own
nationals. The armed forces and Nazi battalions in
Ukraine at all combat sites are using civilians, including
the elderly, women and children, as human shields.
Humanitarian structures are being fired at,
including health-care facilities, schools and residential
buildings. A similar situation exists with respect to
the atrocities perpetrated against detainees, both
combatants and civilians, who the neo-Nazis consider
to be suspicious. Not a single sponsor of the so-called
European Ukraine is willing to pay attention to that,
and such selective blindness bears its deadly fruit.
Several days ago, they Ukrainian military posted
videos of the torture and execution of immobilized,
helpless people; I think that everyone present here
has seen those. Those who have not should go ahead
and take a look. Then perhaps they will experience a
necessary, albeit difficult, awakening in the wake of
the rosy picture painted by propaganda in talking about
democratic Ukraine and its heroic defendants — the very
same Ukraine that they are providing with mercenaries
and weapons today.
De-Nazification requires that all neo-Nazis, their
supporters and military criminals be brought to justice.
And that noble mission will be fulfilled.
Mr. Leschenko (Ukraine): I will be very brief. I
listened carefully to the words of the representative of
the Russian Federation and just wanted to ask him the
following in Russian:
(spoke in Russian)
Who is currently on the territory of Ukraine? Russia
and its armed forces are currently on the territory of
Ukraine, and the Russian representative is attempting
to paint us as criminals and accuse us of killing our
own people. That is absurd.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded the current stage
of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 35.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.47.
Mr. Younis (Pakistan): On behalf of the Group of
77 and China, Pakistan has the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.47, entitled “Doha Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries”.
8/10

01/04/2022

The first part of the fifth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) was held
on 17 March 2022 and adopted the Doha Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2022-2031 by consensus.
The conclusion of the Istanbul Programme
of Action came at a time when the fallout of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic reversed
years of hard-earned progress around the world, in
particular for the LDCs. A sustainable and inclusive
recovery from the pandemic will require immediate
and concerted action and a new generation of revived
global partnerships based on scaled-up and ambitious
means of implementation.
The Doha Programme of Action, with its six key focus
areas, is a step in that direction. Full implementation
of the Doha Programme of Action will help the LDCs
address the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the
resulting negative socioeconomic impacts, return to
a pathway to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, address climate-change challenges and make
strides towards sustainable and irreversible graduation.
The second part of the Conference, which is to be
held in Doha from 5 to 9 March 2023, will reinforce
its political momentum for this action through this
draft resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/76/L.47.
The Assembly will take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.47 entitled “Doha Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
pertains to paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/76/L.47
and is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. The present
statement will also be distributed to Member States.
The request contained in paragraphs 52 and
307 of the Doha Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries contained in annex to draft
resolution A/76/L.47 would constitute an addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management in 2023 and
entail additional resource requirements in the amount
22-30838

01/04/2022

A/76/PV.66

of $52,800 in 2023. In addition, the request contained
in paragraph 261 would constitute an addition to the
documentation workload for the Department in 2024
and entail additional resource requirements in the
amount of $26,400 in 2024. Detailed cost estimates and
their underlying assumptions for the requirements will
be provided in the annex to this statement.

Today’s adoption sets the beginning of a decade to
bring a transformative change in the lives of 1.4 billion
people in the world. It gives us hope that the most
marginalized segment of the global community is not
forgotten. The international community has pledged
in unequivocal terms to eliminate the suffering of the
poorest of the poor.

Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/76/L.47, additional resource
requirements estimated in the amount of $52,800, under
section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council Affairs and Conference Management, would
be included in the proposed programme budget for
2023 for consideration by the Assembly at its seventyseventh session. Furthermore, additional resource
requirements estimated in the amount of $26,400 under
the same section would be included in the proposed
programme budget for 2024 for consideration by the
General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session.

Today the General Assembly has adopted a global
compact that is highly ambitious, communicates the
aspirations of LDCs, is built on a shared responsibility
between LDCs and their development partners, has
charted out a comprehensive action agenda and aims
to steer a rapid recovery from the pandemic, build
resilience and foster the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in LDCs.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Delegations are informed that it is no longer
possible to sponsor the draft resolution through the
electronic platform.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.47, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Canada, Kazakhstan and Turkey.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.47?
Draft resolution A/76/L.47 was adopted (resolution
76/258).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now give the floor to members who wish to make
statements of position after the adoption of resolution
76/258.
Mrs. Chimbiri Molande (Malawi): We are
extremely delighted that the General Assembly has
adopted the Doha Programme of Action by consensus
(resolution 76/258).
Collectively, we mark a historical moment for
the 46 least developed countries (LDCs) of the world.

On behalf of LDCs, let me put on record my deepest
gratitude to the President of the General Assembly for
facilitating the adoption of the Doha Programme of
Action and supporting all related processes. I also thank
our development partners for being at this meeting today
and for demonstrating their extraordinary support,
flexibility and solidarity throughout the process.
The implementation of the Doha Programme
of Action is acutely needed, as we are living in an
extraordinary and uncharted situation. Our countries
are struggling to recover from the multifaceted impacts
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The reversals
of development gains, record inflation, rising interest
rates and unmanageable debt burdens have already
paralysed our economies.
The war in Ukraine has added fuel to the flames.
Commodity prices are spiking and are on track to hit a
record since 1970. Wheat prices are up by 60 per cent
since February. Oil prices have surged to their highest
price since 2008. Food prices are now higher than
during the global food crisis of 2008. Those factors are
all severely affecting the 46 LDCs.
Now is the time to adopt a strategy and systematic
approach by all actors to begin the implementation of
the Doha Programme of Action. We call upon the United
Nations development system to invest all available tools
and resources to implement the programme at all levels
and at the leadership of the United Nations Office of the
High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs) and Small
Island Developing States (SIDS).

22-308389/10

A/76/PV.66

Let me reiterate the call made by Mr. Lazarus
McCarthy Chakwera, President of the Republic of
Malawi, as Chair of LDCs in this Hall on 17 March.
“Crucially, I call upon our development partners to
go beyond fulfilling their commitments and also be
responsible to the pressing needs that are created
within LDCs by unforeseen events.”
I also echo my President and call upon the United
Nations leadership to strengthen the Office of the
High Representative for LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS. Not
only has that Office been instrumental in driving the
progress we have made so far but, as we move towards
implementation, its workload has also increased.
Finally, I urge all Member States to remain
fully engaged and extend their full support to the
implementation of the Doha Programme of Action.
We express our profound thanks and appreciation to
the Government of Qatar for its continued support to
the fifth United Nations Conference on the LDCs and
its preparatory process. We are also convinced that
Qatar will support the implementation of the Doha
Programme of Action.
Let me conclude by appealing to Member States
to secure the participation of their Heads of State and
Government at the second part of the conference, to be
held in Doha from 5 to 9 March 2023.
Mr. Shen Xiaokai (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China supports the adoption of resolution 76/258,
introduced by the representative of Pakistan on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, which provides
a procedural endorsement of the Doha Programme of
Action adopted by the fifth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries.
China hopes that the second part of the conference
will be held as a scheduled and achieve more outcomes
conducive to the sustainable development of the least
developed countries (LDCs). As China pointed out
during the first part of the conference, on 17 March,
debt relief is a very complex and sensitive issue. China
still has concerns and reservations about the paragraphs
concerning debt relief in the Doha Programme of Action.
China believes that the wording on debt relief used
in the Doha Programme of Action is too broad and
vague and fails to accurately reflects the commitments

10/10

01/04/2022

of the international community on the debt issue and
is not conducive to helping LDCs ease the debt burden
at the operational level. To ensure real benefits for
LDCs, China believes that formulations such as “debt
suspension” or “debt treatment”, as contained in the
Debt Service Suspension Initiative of the Group of
20 and the Common Framework for Debt Treatments
beyond the Debt Service Suspension Initiative, which
reflects international consensus, should be used.
While taking a conscientious and a responsible
approach, China has decided to disassociate itself from
formulations concerning debt relief in paragraphs 29,
206 and 264 of the Doha Programme of Action.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation did not object to the
consensus adoption of resolution 76/258, on the Doha
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
(LDCs). As a responsible member of the international
community, my country understands the importance of
the new Programme of Action for the interests of the
socioeconomic development of that group of countries.
At the same time, we would like to underscore that
a whole number of provisions in the Programme were
adopted without taking into account a several positions
of a number of countries. We would like to reiterate
our position that we voiced at the first stage of the fifth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, on 17 March.
The Russian delegation is of the view that the
Doha Programme of Action does not actually reflect
the consensus and ignores the agreed decisions and
agreements that were taken within the United Nations.
The document welcomes controversial concepts and
terms. Given that, the Russian delegation disassociates
itself from paragraphs 3, 98, 104, 105 and 116, the goals
of section III (b) on energy and paragraph 221.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after the
voting. We have also heard the last speaker for this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 23.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

22-30838
