United Nations

A/S-21/PV.7

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-first Special Session

7th plenary meeting
Friday, 2 July 1999, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Opertti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Uruguay)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mungra
(Suriname), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Overall review and appraisal of the implementation of
the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development

Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-first special
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S-21/4)
The Acting President: We shall first consider the
draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report.
The Assembly will now take action on the
recommendation of the Credentials Committee set forth in
paragraph 14 of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the first speaker, I should like to remind delegations that
the length of statements is limited to seven minutes only.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ida
Bagus Oka, Minister for Population and Chairman of the
National Family Planning Coordinating Board of
Indonesia.
Mr. Oka (Indonesia): Let me begin, on behalf of the
Indonesian delegation, by congratulating Mr. Didier
Opertti on his assumption of the presidency of this special
session of the General Assembly. I am confident that,
given his well-known diplomatic skills and expertise, this
meeting will be brought to a successful conclusion. Along
with other participating States, I would like to assure him
of my assistance in any way possible in the discharge of
his challenging tasks.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-21/1).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 3.

99-85552 (E)

Let me also state that my delegation is in agreement
with previous speakers as to the importance they attach to
this special session devoted to reviewing the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD). The meeting’s importance is further underscored
by the fact that the world is on the threshold of a new

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
millennium, with a broad spectrum of new challenges and
opportunities.
I would now like to highlight some of the issues and
concerns that Indonesia considers key to reorienting
population policies and strategies into the broader
framework of the ICPD. First is the full integration of
population concerns into development strategies, planning,
decision-making and resource allocation, at all levels and
across all regions of the world. In this regard, though
several developing countries have made progress, due to
adverse socio-political conditions in many of them they
have not yet been able to achieve this objective.
We in Indonesia consider ourselves fortunate, since
our country is in the midst of fundamental changes and
reforms that present us with opportunities to further
accelerate people-centred development. This situation has
helped us to better include the integration of population
concerns in development. In keeping with that spirit, we are
now seeking to accommodate the greater involvement of
women, non-governmental organizations, community groups
and private foundations, which should help to further
promote our objective of fully integrating population
concerns into our overall national development.
Secondly, having closely followed the debate on
reproductive health, we believe that, rather than
concentrating solely on demographic objectives, we should
emphasize the importance of human and family
development, the need to change attitudes towards
reproduction, and a client-centred provision of high-quality
family planning information and services. In this context,
Governments should pay more attention to the special needs
of adolescent reproductive health. My delegation would
thus like to re-emphasize the importance of the principles
enshrined in both chapter II and the chapeau of chapter VII
of the ICPD’s Programme of Action.
Thirdly, since Indonesia was severely hit by the recent
financial crisis, which resulted in a dramatic reduction in its
dynamic growth and development, it has become critically
important for us to seek international assistance. Our
success in implementing the ICPD commitments has been
drastically affected by the crisis. However, I am of the firm
belief that with our strong conviction and commitment,
coupled with the wide and constructive participation of all
relevant actors and with the support of the international
community, we will be able to achieve our common
objectives, as set out in the ICPD recommendations.

2

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
With this in mind, we truly appreciate the draft
presented by the President on key actions for further
implementing the ICPD’s Programme of Action. In the
draft it was unanimously acknowledged that the
developed countries should provide funds to offset the
problems of the developing countries arising from the
crisis, thereby enabling them to better implement the
Programme of Action. In this connection, we firmly
believe in the need for a comprehensive and enduring
solution to the foreign-debt problems of those countries
most affected by the economic crisis, including debt
swaps for population and development programmes.
For its part, Indonesia stands ready to fulfil its
commitments. By the same token, however, we expect the
international community to do the same by appropriating
the necessary funding. Without the mobilization of such
resources, it is unlikely that any meaningful progress can
be registered in the implementation of the Programme of
Action. I might add in this connection that poverty is a
major constraint on the path to implementing the
Programme. On the other hand, the alleviation of poverty
is directly correlated to success in population stabilization
and in improving the quality of life.
Fourthly, Indonesia would like to express its concern
over the tendency in some quarters to use this forum to
revisit the functions of the United Nations bodies dealing
with population matters, especially with respect to the
issue of reproductive health. Such an approach was
indeed required for the post-cold-war international scene,
which had ushered in a series of new challenges. The
situation has become even more tenuous with the
complexities of the new millennium on our doorstep. At
the same time, while we recognize the need to revisit this
issue for the purpose of strengthening the World Health
Organization (WHO), the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
and other related bodies and their leadership role, we
must also be aware that such a delicate question is
beyond the mandate of this session. Rather, we consider
it advisable that the question should be addressed in a
more comprehensive manner and in a broader context in
the framework of the United Nations reforms.
Fifthly, of no less importance are conditions
supportive of the implementation of the Conference’s
Programme of Action. My delegation strongly believes
that the programmes developed for this purpose should be
implemented to the best of our ability. Thus, it is
important that capacity-building, the transfer of
knowledge, know-how and technology, in particular

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
contraceptive production, as well as research and
information, among others, should be vigorously pursued.
In this way Member States, especially the developing
countries, will be enabled to fully implement their
population and development programmes as mandated by
the ICPD.
In this regard, I would like to reiterate Indonesia’s
offer to share its significant experience in this field with
other developing countries within the purview of SouthSouth cooperation through our International Training
Programme in Population and Reproductive Health.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the ICPD was
entrusted with a task of unprecedented importance. To
achieve the successful implementation of the ICPD and its
Programme of Action, however, will require partnership on
the part of all sides — Governments and the private sector,
developed and developing countries alike, and all relevant
international organizations. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to call on all participating countries to
ensure that they do not allow this unique opportunity to
evade them or to pass them by without achieving any
concrete results. For if we are unable to achieve positive
results, there is a real danger that the repercussions and
consequences for future generations of humankind will be
severe and devastating.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Peter Magvaši, Minister of Labour, Social
Affairs and Family of Slovakia.
Mr. Magvaši (Slovakia) (spoke in Russian): The
Government of the Slovak Republic adopted in June of this
year a national report on the review and appraisal of the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD+5).
The report states that the second half of the 1990s can
be described as a period of stabilization of demographic
trends. The most discussed issue is that of the birth rate. Its
largest decrease occurred in 1994; since then its decline has
slowed significantly. The decline in fertility is linked to a
woman’s age at the time she gives birth to her first child.
Compared with other countries of Western Europe, that age
is still relatively low, but it has been slowly increasing.
Of great importance to this demographic trend is the
fact that the number of abortions has dropped considerably.
This means that the number of abortions not performed in
conformity with standard medical practice has also fallen.
The overall abortion rate is 4.9, the lowest figure in recent

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
years. This decrease is linked to the increased availability
of contraception and compulsory sex education in schools,
as well as to a strongly anti-abortion social climate.
We note that, in 1998, the population structure in
our country was similar to that of the neighbouring
countries. Our population is gradually ageing, but it
should be added that Slovakia is also experiencing a
natural population increase.
The Government of the Slovak Republic recognizes
population policy to be a main component of family
policy. We believe that the fundamental nature of
demographic development calls for an integrated approach
to solving family problems. It requires the creation of
appropriate economic and social instruments to support
parental responsibility and the provision of legal
protection and moral support for marriage and family.
In 1996, the Government of the Slovak Republic
adopted a new model of family planning, known as the
Concept for State Family Policy. The Policy is crosssectoral and takes into account article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. The Policy formulates the
following principles as regards the demographic behaviour
of the population and support for its healthy development.
First, parents have the right to determine how many
children they wish to have and when to have them. This
right is linked to parents’ responsibility for the physical
and spiritual development of their children and their
upbringing. Secondly, the monitoring of the demographic
behaviour of the population of the Slovak Republic and
the adoption of relevant measures are also constituent
parts of state family policy. Thirdly, the objectives of the
State family policy in the field of population development
have a scientific basis. The basic objective is to preserve
balance in the age structure of the population and to
maintain a certain number of inhabitants. Fourthly, within
the framework of the educational process in schools, the
State is responsible for the content and implementation of
various educational programmes to help prepare children
and young people for marriage and parenthood. The
primary focus of this preparation in primary and
secondary schools is on the alternative compulsory and
voluntary subjects of ethics and religious education. The
approved draft educational policy on marriage and family
matters in primary and secondary schools allows the
accommodation of various groups in terms of the content
and implementation of sex education.

3

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
In the context of providing prophylaxis, health care
and protection to all family members, particularly mothers
and children, and of working to reduce the number of
abortions, the State disseminates information on natural
methods of birth control and contraception.
The Government of the Slovak Republic monitors the
social situation on a regular basis and analyses the
demographic behaviour of the population. It will continue
monitoring the implementation of the State family policy
and, in case of need, propose both direct and indirect
measures to support the family and its right to choose its
reproductive behaviour.
As an associated country of the European Union, the
Slovak Republic supports the work of the United Nations
in the field of population and development. As it develops
future population policy and adopts further measures, the
Government of the Slovak Republic will aim at the
comprehensive elaboration and implementation of the
conclusions of the Cairo Conference. That is why we have
associated ourselves with the statement of the European
Union and the European Free Trade Association countries,
as well as those of the countries of Central and Eastern
Europe.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency The Honourable Fred Fono, Minister for
National Development and Planning of the Solomon
Islands.
Mr. Fono (Solomon Islands): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Mr. Opertti on his appointment as President of
the General Assembly at its twenty-first special session and
to commend him for the fine job he has done thus far. On
behalf of the Government and people of the Solomon
Islands, may I take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), other United Nations
agencies and our development partners for their
contributions to the socio-economic development of our
small island nation.
The International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), held in Cairo in 1994 was an
important global landmark. The Conference stressed
recognition of the broader issues involved in the
interdependence of population, development and
environment. The Programme of Action adopted at that
time required specific commitment to its effective
implementation over the next 20 years. Global collective
action is crucial to further progress. In Cairo, the Solomon
Islands joined the international community in committing

4

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
itself to the implementation of the ICPD Programme of
Action. We promised to give high priority to issues
affecting our young and fast-growing population.
The ICPD Programme of Action has given us a new
paradigm of development: improving quality of life
through poverty alleviation; enhancing universal access to
education; ensuring the equity, equality and empowerment
of women; and advocating universal access to highquality reproductive health services. Additionally, we in
the Pacific islands firmly adhere to our core belief in
family values and the commitment we made to the
“healthy islands” concepts which are embraced in the
ICPD Programme of Action.
Recognizing the interdependence of population and
socio-economic development, the Solomon Islands
accords population issues a high national priority.
Population policy-related concerns have become an
integral part of the Department of National Planning and
Development. Accordingly, there has been an increase of
15 per cent and 12 per cent of the total annual budgetary
allocation to education and health, respectively. We have
been able to integrate reproductive health and familyplanning services into the primary health-care system and
to intensify interventions to prevent, control and eliminate
the leading causes of morbidity and mortality. In addition,
we have been able to strengthen partnerships and
collaboration between public and private sectors,
including non-governmental organizations, to improve the
provision of quality basic education for all children and
the development of school curriculum on priority health
issues.
Since Cairo, Solomon Islands has adopted national
policies on population, women and nutrition. The
Government is also engaged in the design of a national
youth policy. The National Population Policy of 1998
provides a major framework for population-based socioeconomic development, while the National Women’s
Policy sets the framework for women in development and
their empowerment as partners in nation-building.
Solomon Islands notes the key actions for further
implementation of the ICPD Programme of Action, as
reviewed by the preparatory committee. We welcome the
efforts and cooperative spirit demonstrated during the
preparatory process. Of particular importance to us, as a
least developed country with a young and fast-growing
population, high maternal and infant mortality rates and
a high illiteracy rate, especially among the female
population, are the adoption and implementation of this

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
Programme of Action, which is not only relevant, but has
become more urgent than ever before.
The future direction for population and development
issues must be set on the basis of past successes and
failures as we reaffirm our commitment to the Programme
of Action. In doing so, Solomon Islands firmly believes that
human rights must be respected and promoted with
responsibility. These responsibilities can be understood only
through proper information, education and communication
made available to the entire population. This must be our
commitment to and mandate for the next millennium.
With regard to internal population migration and
displacement, Solomon Islands has been able to provide
basic health services to its internally displaced population,
as experienced in the current ethnic unrest on Guadalcanal.
At this juncture, I wish to express my Government’s
appreciation for the prompt response to our request for
humanitarian assistance from the Commonwealth
Secretariat, the United Nations and other development
partners.
The reproductive health components of the ICPD
Programme of Action have been well integrated into the
main health-care system. We are able to broaden our
programme in maternal health, child-survival activities,
adolescent health and sexually transmitted diseases,
including HIV and AIDS awareness programmes. Solomon
Islands is yet to record a case of AIDS. However, the high
prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases among our
youth is a concern. Education is our main strategy. The
participation of civil society, including churches and nongovernmental organizations, has been a major thrust
towards achieving a reduction of maternal mortality and
childhood illnesses. Crucial to improved reproductive health
are the understanding and awareness of these amongst
leaders at all levels, including the rural population. Solomon
Islands is also mindful of its vulnerability to paedophile
activities in our region. Steps are being taken to legislate
against such activities.
Given the current economic difficulties, my
Government has embarked on a major policy and structural
reform programme. A Medium-Term Development Strategy
was developed and adopted, of which the underpinning
principle is that all development initiatives are populationor people-focused. The ultimate goal is to fully integrate
population issues into all sector development plans and
activities.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
Like other island States in the Pacific, Solomon
Islands has made progress in the last five years. The
magnitude and extent of the achievement are determined
by the structural, socio-economic and political
environment of the country. We have learned one most
important lesson in our experience in the process of
implementing the ICPD Programme of Action:
unequivocal national commitment, effective partnerships
and collaboration, and community support and
participation are essential elements that can be utilized to
address the more challenging issues. It is also crucial that
the donor community honour its commitment and
continue to assist small island nations to achieve a more
sustainable development.
In conclusion, I believe that, at the end of this
special session of the General Assembly, we should be
prepared to approach the next decade with vigour and to
reaffirm our commitment to achieving tangible goals of
the ICPD Programme of Action. Solomon Islands will
continue to reaffirm its commitment to the principles and
goals of the Programme of Action and will seek to ensure
that a concerted effort for a healthy, happy and a
productive population as we enter the new millennium.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Hong Sun Huot, State Minister and
Minister of Health of Cambodia.
Mr. Sun Huot (Cambodia): It is a great honour for
me to represent the delegation of the Kingdom of
Cambodia at such an important event as the twenty-first
special session of the General Assembly on the overall
review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD). Cambodia has
aligned itself with the statement presented by Germany on
behalf of the European Union.
The 1994 International Conference on Population
and Development (ICPD) was a watershed for and a
tribute to the relevance of population issues. In the
preamble of the Programme of Action, the Conference is
described as the defining moment in the history of
international cooperation, noting the growing recognition
of global population, development and environmental
interdependence. In 1994, the Royal Government of
Cambodia fully endorsed the Programme of Action. It did
so even as many Cambodians, possibly recalling the
immense loss of the recent past, may not have been
certain about all aspects of population issues.

5

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
The genius of the Programme of Action lies in its
emphasis on sovereign and individual action to achieve a
higher goal. It recognizes that each nation should decide its
own course of action within the boundaries of international
standards of cooperation and universal solidarity epitomized
by the United Nations Charter, and that any such course
must aim to make individual human beings the centre of
concerns for sustainable development. The Programme of
Action presents a vision and blueprint for global
development, while strongly reconfirming the principle that
nations are the engines for progress on a journey that
begins in the mind of every man and woman.
Cambodia has tried, I believe successfully, to do
justice to this wisdom. From a careful, modest beginning in
1994, Cambodia has since taken great strides towards
defining and implementing its vision. What began as a
modest capacity-building exercise in delivering birthspacing services in selected parts of the country has
expanded into a full nationwide reproductive health
programme which is a fully integrated part of the standard
minimum package of activities for primary health-care
services.
In 1999, we established the National AIDS Authority
to ensure a more effective multisectoral approach to this
disease, which, I am sad to say, has already assumed
epidemic proportions in my country.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
has exerted all efforts to eradicate poverty and to realize
a decent and prosperous living standard for its peoples.
The Government attaches great importance to issues
pertaining to the well-being of human beings and to
encompassing all national and international activities with
a view to achieving economic growth in the context of
sustainable development and social justice. As political
stability grows, the Government is able to further
strengthen its contribution to the social sector. The
contraceptive prevalence rate, although modest by
international standards, is increasing rapidly. Increased
awareness of HIV/AIDS is beginning to translate into
greater condom use among men visiting commercial sex
workers. Appreciation among Cambodian leaders for the
relationship between population and development has
grown significantly, particularly since the 1998 census.
We recognize, of course, that much remains to be
done. Maternal mortality rates are unacceptably high. As
I have already said, AIDS is an epidemic in Cambodia.
Domestic violence and trafficking in women and children
need to be addressed urgently and more effectively.
Despite some important efforts now under way, not
enough is being done to address the considerable
reproductive health needs of young people. School dropout rates for girls are far higher than those for boys. My
country’s performance on the Gender Development Index
leaves much to be desired.

The 1998 national census, the first since 1962, took
over four years to prepare. The population count was
nationally and internationally recognized as a model of
execution. A very high response rate and the high quality
of completed questionnaires assure policy makers and
development planners the use of a highly reliable
population database. The efforts of the Government,
particularly in the area of gender and women, are
represented by a strong Ministry devoted specifically to
promoting the status of women. The five-year plan of the
Ministry has as its main goals the empowerment of women
to influence national policies and the mobilization of the
nation to ensure gender equality and equity. The
Government is complemented by the strong work of
members of the community of non-governmental
organizations active in such areas as reproductive health
and women’s rights, many of which were inspired by the
ICPD Programme of Action and the Fourth World
Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995.

As I stated earlier, Cambodia has made impressive
progress since the ICPD. I must stress that this progress
can be safeguarded only if we honestly and sincerely face
the challenges that still lie before us. The Royal
Government of Cambodia did so when it endorsed the
ICPD Programme of Action. It accepts its responsibility
for improving the quality of life of all individuals and
recognizes that aiming to meet the goals of the ICPD
Programme of Action is pivotal to extending such quality
of life to all Cambodians.

Since the International Conference on Population and
Development, held in Cairo in 1994, Cambodia has made
significant progress. The Royal Government of Cambodia

The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sodovyin Sonin, Minister for Health and
Social Welfare of Mongolia.

6

In this context, I wish emphatically to call upon the
international community to further strengthen its efforts
by increasing its commitments to meet the goals of the
Programme of Action. The Royal Government of
Cambodia looks forward to the next five years of
cooperation leading up to the next global meeting on
population and development and wishes all representatives
success and prosperity along the way.

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
Mr. Sonin (Mongolia): It is with great pleasure that
I express, on behalf of the Government of Mongolia, my
appreciation for the fact that the United Nations General
Assembly has convened its special session to review and
appraise the five-year progress made towards implementing
the Cairo agenda on population and development.
Thanks to the intensive efforts and activities of the
organizations within the United Nations family, the strategy
of human-faced and sustainable development is becoming
the core of the developmental policies of countries and
nations around the world. The International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD), held in Cairo in 1994,
was a significant watershed in integrating human rights
issues into the overall development process. In Cairo we
learned that development is about empowering people,
including women, to benefit equally from growth and that
it is also about the urgency of concerted and mutually
reinforcing policies and actions to address peoples’ needs.
This underlines not only respect for human rights but also
the necessity of putting a human face on development.
Mongolia is a country that is pursuing simultaneous
transition to democracy and a market-oriented economy.
The structural reforms and budget constraints during the
transitional period have affected the delivery of essential
social services, particularly to the scattered rural population.
Mongolia has a youthful population, with almost 57 per
cent of the total population being under the age of 25. This
underlines the increased need for the Government to
implement appropriate policies for providing quality
education and health care, including reproductive health
services, and for increasing employment opportunities.
Although a number of difficulties are arising during
this transition period, the Government of Mongolia has
been keen to implement the ICPD goals. Thanks to our
efforts and to assistance from the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) and other United Nations
agencies, substantial improvements have been reflected in
decreasing maternal and child mortality, strengthening
reproductive health services to reach the remote and seminomadic population, increasing reproductive health
information to young people and promoting gender equality.
These efforts are part of our national reproductive health
programme.
However, there are a number of challenge that we face
in the field of population. Maternal and infant mortality
rates are still high. Domestic violence and alcohol abuse are
emerging social problems that demand immediate and
appropriate action. There is a need for further improvement

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
in the access to and quality of reproductive health
services for the poor and those living in remote areas.
Although the country has not experienced the HIV/AIDS
epidemic to any significant extent, incidences of sexually
transmitted diseases are on the rise.
In cooperation with United Nations agencies, the
Mongolian Government has designed multisectoral
strategies on preventing HIV/AIDS and sexually
transmitted diseases. We are very pleased to see that this
special session is focusing on strengthening actions to
improve reproductive health education and services for
adolescents and young people, to prevent and treat
HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases, reduce
maternal mortality and morbidity and further increase
male involvement in addressing women’s reproductive
health concerns and needs.
The concept of population and development
embraces a broad range of policy interventions. The
Mongolian Government firmly believes that ensuring that
there is a link between economic growth, social sector
development, environmental protection and sound
governance in developing and implementing policies and
strategies is vital for sustainable development. To exercise
a human-centred development approach is therefore
essential to building a just and democratic society where
all generations fully benefit. Therefore, besides pursuing
sustained economic growth, the Government attaches
great importance to poverty alleviation, unemployment
reduction and the protection of the poor and the
vulnerable. Although resources are limited, we are
determined to act in an appropriate and timely manner.
The Mongolian Government believes that active and
mutually supportive collaboration with a multitude of
social partners is an important and necessary component
of development. Civil participation is being increased,
including in the provision of reproductive health-care
services to women and adolescents. Thus active civil
participation was felt during the drafting of the new
Family Law.
I am pleased to note that the Mongolian Government
is strongly committed to achieving the ICPD goals and
that we are keen to continue to strengthen the actions
aimed at the further effective implementation of the Cairo
Programme of Action.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Tone Rop, Minister for Work, Family and
Social Affairs of Slovenia.

7

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
Mr. Rop (Slovenia): First allow me to express my
great satisfaction at this special session, which is enabling
us to discuss the results achieved and the obstacles
encountered in the implementation of the Programme of
Action adopted at the Cairo Conference in 1994, as well as
other issues related to population and development policy.
Slovenia has associated itself with the statement made
by the representative of Germany on behalf of the European
Union. We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
our support for the objectives and principles of the
Programme of Action. Slovenia has also been following
with great interest its implementation at the global level.
We believe the Programme of Action to be a wellstructured framework of objectives within which national
Governments can be encouraged to find the most
appropriate path to their fulfilment. However, we wish to
stress the importance of recognizing the diversity of
systems, cultural heritage and accepted norms and values in
different countries, which undoubtedly presents an obstacle
in reaching our objectives. We therefore feel it is pivotal to
encourage both cooperation and coordination among the
United Nations agencies and individual countries in their
quest for common solutions.
With regard to the future implementation of the
Programme of Action, we strongly believe that special
attention and greater commitment is required, particularly
in preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and protecting
mothers, since the mortality rate of mothers in certain
regions is increasing. In this context it is necessary to
ensure that countries are committed to providing education
and counselling to young people regarding reproductive
health. The demographic challenges we are facing at the
end of this millennium demand that we go beyond mere
discussions and call for concrete actions to mitigate
negative consequences. It is important to acknowledge that
the growth of individual problems of a demographic nature
takes time, and that it is therefore unrealistic to expect a
solution overnight. This should by no means discourage our
common efforts to seek answers and appropriate, effective
solutions.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
in its decision to increase the share of public expenditure
in the gross domestic product for human resource
development.
As regards its population and development policy,
Slovenia employs various measures in different areas of
social policy which also indirectly influence the
reproduction of the population. Notwithstanding the
diversity in the solutions applied, Slovenia acknowledges
that its population problems remain and might become
increasingly compelling. For this reason it will be
necessary to devote special attention to them, at the expert
as well as the political level.
Regarding the Programme of Action and its
implementation, it is essential to underline the importance
of certain issues that were to some extent neglected at the
1994 Conference. We are referring to the increasing
problem of the ageing of the population, an issue that is
already demanding our full attention. Certain actions to
deal with the problem and its numerous consequences
have already been taken, both within individual countries
and in the United Nations, not least by declaring this year
to be the International Year of Older Persons.
The ageing of the population is one of the major
demographic challenges at the end of the twentieth
century, and it will significantly influence the formulation
of social security systems. The changing demographic
conditions and their long-term consequences demand a
coordination between needs, available programmes and
capacities. The ageing of the population also demands an
entirely different social and personal approach to old age.
It involves adjusting and enhancing attitudes that value
elderly people as an important human resource, integrated
in society’s development.

Although the fields encompassed by a population
policy were already on Slovenia’s agenda, we have sought
further solutions to population issues since the International
Conference on Population and Development, held in Cairo
in 1994.

The Republic of Slovenia continues to hold the view,
at both the global and national levels, that major
importance should be attached to access by the population
to education and health services, to the prevention of
poverty and to a reduction in the level of mortality. As
already mentioned, we are devoting special attention to
the ageing of the population, with the primary goal of
maintaining the independence and dignity of the elderly.
Furthermore, it is essential to move further towards equal
treatment and access to all positions in society, regardless
of gender. The basic guideline in all these efforts must be
respect and protection of human rights.

Indeed, Slovenia’s eagerness to respond to the
objectives of the Programme of Action is further evidenced

Policy changes must prevent the danger of the rapid
spread of social problems, the decline in active work, and

8

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
the growth of unemployment, poverty and social exclusion.
Poverty remains a problem in all countries of the world. Its
existence is a vocal reminder of the urgent need for
different, integrated approaches.
Slovenia is devoting particular attention to the problem
of poverty and social exclusion. We have formulated a
National Programme to Combat Poverty and Social
Exclusion, which harnesses the measures of various policies
from the areas of employment, housing, health care, labour
relations, social security, the tax system and education. In
formulating the National Programme, we have
acknowledged the important role played by nongovernmental organizations and social partners.
The development of today’s society is closely linked
to the standard of living of those who compose it. Quality
of life is determined not simply by material goods, but is
made up of a whole set of simultaneously interwoven
factors: health, education, employment, elimination of
poverty, respect of human rights, the possibility of selffulfilment, social and cultural integration and living in an
ecologically enlightened environment. The goal of human
development must go beyond amassing material wealth, and
such wealth should be understood simply as a means to
create circumstances in which individuals will be able to
live a healthy and creative life. I hope that
recommendations adopted at this special session will further
contribute to the full implementation of the objectives we
have set together in the Programme of Action.
The role of the United Nations and its agencies is vital
in this, and let us therefore jointly support them, both in
principle through our discussions and in practice through
our actions.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abdul Rahim Al-Sbei’i, Minister of State
for Planning Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Al-Sbei’i (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to congratulate the
President on his election to lead this special session of the
General Assembly. We sincerely hope that the session will
reach a successful conclusion under his wise leadership.
I wish to express my sincere thanks and appreciation
to the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the Chairman
of the Committee on Population and Development, and to
their staffs for the great efforts they have made in the
preparation of this special session on the overall review and

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), which was held in Cairo in 1994.
The most important element of the ICPD is the
many dimensions that were added to the scope of
population policy concerns, so that they now encompass
almost all aspects of cultural, social and economic life,
which now are viewed from the perspective of human
development.
We would like to stress the interest of the Syrian
Arab Republic in population-related issues and in the
Programme of Action of the ICPD, which states:
“The implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Programme of Action is the
sovereign right of each country, consistent with
national laws and development priorities, with full
respect for the various religious and ethical values
and cultural backgrounds of its people, and in
conformity with universally recognized international
human rights.” (A/CONF.171/13, chap. II)
Since 1970, population issues have been given an
increasingly prominent status in development plans in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The letter of the President of the
Syrian Arab Republic to the International Conference on
Population held in Mexico in 1984 stressed the need to
address population issues by linking democratic changes
to social and economic developments.
Syria’s fifth five-year plan for social and economic
development, for the years 1981 to 1985, introduced a
new dimension; the population issue was taken into
account in assessing and satisfying the needs of rural and
urban areas. This has proved the interrelationship of
population factors and social and economic development,
as well as the considerable challenges involved in meeting
the increasing needs of the population for services and in
providing job opportunities to the increasing numbers of
people who make up the labour force.
The Syrian Arab Republic is pursuing a
comprehensive and balanced social and economic
development strategy. Within the framework of this
strategy the following population-related topics are being
accorded high priority. Education is accorded a special
priority in Syria. It is free at all levels and is provided to
all without distinction between males and females. It is
also mandatory at the elementary level. Particularly since
the ICPD, population has been introduced as a topic of

9

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
study in both formal and informal education programmes,
some of which are undertaken in collaboration with the
concerned United Nations agencies.
The State provides free of charge, in both rural and
urban areas, various health services, including reproductive
health care, family planning and education about sexually
transmitted diseases. This is in addition to the health
services provided by the private sector. In light of the
evolution of the child- and maternal-care concept into a
reproductive health concept, the strategies necessary for the
application of the concept and the services of reproductive
health have been developed, as well as cross-sector
cooperation, governmental and non-governmental alike.
All these efforts in the field of reproductive health and
related health advice, education, information and
communications have contributed to speedy and
considerable improvement in health indicators, specifically
those related to mother and child health care. The periodic
data collection system in Syria shows that the percentage of
women registered with and benefiting from family-planning
services has more than doubled over the last four years.
The issue of gender equity and the empowerment of
women enjoys great attention in Syria at the governmental
and non-governmental levels. The Central Bureau of
Statistics is currently collaborating with the governmental
bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as with
the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, in
implementing a wide-ranging project on establishing a
database of gender statistics.
Among the most prominent manifestations of gender
equity and the empowerment of women in Syria are the
important positions women enjoy in legislative bodies. The
percentage of women in the People’s Assembly — the
parliament — has reached 11 per cent. Moreover, Syrian
women enjoy senior posts in both executive and legislative
bodies, as well as in other activities and functions. Women
also assume distinguished positions in non-governmental
organizations.
There has been an increase in the percentage of female
students at all school levels. Compared to all graduates of
elementary schools, the percentage of females who have
completed elementary school is 47 per cent; it is 50 per
cent for preparatory and secondary schools and 40 per cent
for universities.
The President took the Chair.

10

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
As regards participation, the non-governmental
organizations play an important role in designing,
preparing, implementing and evaluating population
activities by coordinating their work among themselves
and with Government bodies at all levels.
Concerning the issue of refugees and evacuees, the
Programme of Action of the ICPD addressed resolving
refugee problems by stating that the problems of refugees
and displaced people arising from forced migration,
including their right to repatriation, should be settled in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and relevant United Nations resolutions. It is
incumbent on our conference to call once again for the
implementation of United Nations resolutions related to
ending the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab
territories and the application of the right of refugees and
emigrants to return to their homes, while emphasizing that
occupation is incompatible with development, stability
and security.
In the field of direct financing of the population
programmes in the Syrian Arab Republic, implemented in
cooperation with UNFPA, the national governmental and
non-governmental bodies contribute to these programmes
10 times more than UNFPA and the other donors.
Accordingly, we hope the donor countries will meet their
commitments concerning the provision of funds and of
the technical assistance necessary for the population
programmes.
Finally, we reiterate our thanks and appreciation to
the United Nations Secretariat and to UNFPA and express
our delegation’s readiness to cooperate with the President
to ensure the success of this session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
next speaker, His Excellency The Honourable Earl
Martin, Minister of Health and Women’s Affairs of Saint
Kitts and Nevis.
Mr. Martin (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Our attendance
here today represents our commitment to advance the
standard of living of our populations, a recognition of the
magnitude of the global task of human development and
the value of international collaboration, and the
commitment of the Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis
to the International Conference on Population and
Development Programme of Action.

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
The development model of trade liberalization, with its
requisite reforms of our fiscal, trade and administrative
policies, does not leave much hope for the growth and
development of our small island States — certainly not in
the near future.
The high level of vulnerability of small island States
to such external influences as international financial crises
and natural disasters, which periodically retard our
economic growth, suggests the need for an internationally
agreed vulnerability index for application to countries that
are seriously affected by external shocks such as these.
A key case in point can be found in our recently
completed berthing facility as part of our expansion project
in Basseterre of some 25 acres: Port Zante. With the advent
of a single hurricane, Hurricane Georges, within months of
its completion, a substantial part of this facility was
completely destroyed. When projects of this magnitude are
derailed through no fault of Government, the impact on our
fragile economy is enormous. This is just one example of
how small States are vulnerable to external factors.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
reproductive and sexual rights and the provision of
appropriate health services. We have also introduced
national programmes to strengthen the position of women
in our society. In our country, we stress that men, too,
have a responsibility to ensure that they overcome the
stereotyping that leads to gender inequality, and this can
be achieved only if there is a change in their mentality.
Developing countries have more than 80 per cent of
the world’s population. Population growth is occurring
rapidly in these countries, even though there is already
much strain on land use. However, as the Cairo
Conference of five years ago pointed out, the prospect of
continued growth rates causes much concern not only to
developing countries, but to countries overall.
Of serious concern is the availability not only of
food, but also of water suitable for consumption. Some
countries are already experiencing a serious decline in
their water reserves. The tragedy of people drinking water
contaminated by pesticides and other toxic chemicals
highlights and contributes to growing water insecurity.

Our Government would like to see a change in the
tendency of international financial institutions, including the
Bretton Wood institutions, to graduate countries from one
socio-economic classification to another based solely on
economic indicators. Macroeconomic data cannot be
considered in isolation, while the destructive impact of
external forces on the true socio-economic profile of small
island States, such as those comprising the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), is ignored.

My country enjoys the unusual situation of a
declining population, while most countries face constant
increases. This decline in population is caused not only by
the reduction of the birth rate, but by migration, as many
of our educated and trained nationals leave to go abroad.
Therefore, we lose many of our trained personnel to
developed countries, which, as a result, forces us on a
high-cost path of training and retraining nationals — the
transfer of skills and technology in reverse.

In regard to the critical issues identified in the ICPD
Programme of Action, women and health issues factor quite
heavily on our political agenda. We have a relatively young
population, 52 per cent of which is under the age of 25.
Moreover, 34.3 per cent are under the age of 15 and, like
countries large and small, industrialized and nonindustrialized, we are grappling with the challenge of
teenage pregnancy. My Government has developed a policy
that ensures the right of teen mothers to continue their
education.

The empowerment of people forms an intrinsic part
of our Government’s policy. We want our people to feel
that they are contributing and can contribute to society.
Since the Cairo Conference, our Government has
expanded the number of secondary schools in our nation
by 40 per cent and we also provide fully equipped
computer labs in secondary schools. We not only
guarantee primary and secondary education to all children,
but also provide scholarships for a large percentage of
high school graduates to advance their education.

Gender equity is a problem for many countries. In
implementation of a fundamental principle of the
Programme of Action emanating from the Cairo
Conference, the Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis is
committed to improving the situation of women, especially
those living in poverty. The Government has established a
Ministry of Women’s Affairs, which is responsible for
handling issues such as domestic violence, the exercise of

On assuming office in 1995, our Government made
a pledge to offer starter homes to lower-income families.
I am proud to report that, within four years, we have built
800 homes for lower-income families.
Our Government takes the empowerment of youth
very seriously. Our Government worked with the private
sector to arrange a work-training programme that

11

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
provided jobs for some 2,094 youths. Finding opportunities
for so many youths to participate in this programme was a
challenging task and the success achieved was outstanding,
as many of these youths were absorbed into the permanent
workforce of the Federation. This programme formed a
strong foundation on which to build future projects of this
kind.
I wish now to address the plight of the farmers in the
Windward Islands and the negative impact that it imposes
on their Government’s ability to fulfil the agreements made
in Cairo. We are currently witnessing the tremendous
weight placed on their shoulders by the recent ruling of the
World Trade Organization (WTO) on preferential access to
the European market for their bananas. No empowerment
can be sustained when people lack a stable income. All
talks of empowerment ring hollow when small States such
as Dominica, Grenada, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines are forced into a completely untenable
situation. The recent WTO decisions run contrary to
development and threaten the livelihood of, in some cases,
over 85 per cent of our populations. This is unbearable.
The struggle to maintain the Caribbean’s preferential
access to a minute segment of the European market
continues. The ongoing negotiations between the United
States and the European Union must not sacrifice or
destabilize the Caribbean region. We cannot talk about
development on the one hand and make decisions that
create economic insecurity on the other. My Government
urges a just, quick and mutually beneficial outcome of the
negotiations over bananas.
In conclusion, we have been able to achieve much
over the five years since Cairo, but our progress is limited
by economic constraints and natural disasters. However,
with fair trade practices and assistance from international
financial institutions, we could have achieved much more.
We cherish the principles of democracy, which are reflected
in our free and just society. We welcome continued
collaboration with international organizations and friendly
nations so that we may continue to promote economic and
social development for all of our people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Željko Reiner, Minister of
Health of Croatia.
Mr. Reiner (Croatia): My delegation would like to
extend its sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, and
to the other representatives elected to the Bureau.

12

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
The various recent meetings on population, such as
The Hague Forum and the thirty-second meeting of the
Commission on Population and Development, have paved
the way to this twenty-first special session of the General
Assembly. Back in 1994, the International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD) first redefined the
concept of population, putting it in direct relation to
development, especially sustainable development. The
Conference reaffirmed the importance of universally
recognized human rights and reproductive rights. Thus,
five years later, we are summoned here to reaffirm the
ICPD mandate and to examine the progress in its
implementation.
Much remains to be done, and progress has
sometimes been limited by new challenges, such as the
AIDS epidemic, the Asian economic crisis and its global
impact, political instability and wars. The imbalance
between demographic rates and social, economic and
environmental goals points to a very diversified
demographic picture of the countries around the world.
Nevertheless, we are living at a time of
unprecedented demographic developments, when
transition from high to low rates of fertility and mortality
is a reality, as developed countries as well as countries in
transition are dealing with the trend towards lower
fertility and mortality rates due to improved health care
and longer life expectancy. The influence these factors
have on development is immense, while the
interdependency between the economic and social spheres,
as well as between health and the environment, has
become crucial.
The partnership of Governments, non-governmental
organizations and other groups in civil society plays an
important role in the ICPD implementation process.
Furthermore, at a time when the economic and
demographic situation is a global issue, it is important to
strengthen international cooperation in this inevitable
process of globalization and to exchange ideas and knowhow, in the spirit of consensus-building, in order to reach
the ultimate goal of improving the quality of life of
present and future generations set by the ICPD.
As a country with an economy in transition, Croatia
confronts all of the issues I have mentioned, although
with its own specific mix. Croatia belongs to the group of
countries which are concerned about their low rate of
population growth and its consequences for long-term
human and socio-economic development. At the Cairo
Conference, Croatia reported negative population growth:

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
minus 0.2 per 1,000. Since then, the natural population
growth has been gradually stabilizing and becoming
positive, although it is very low: in 1997 it was 0.8 per
1,000.
The present demographic situation is the result of a
steady decline in fertility, a low natural increase and a
negative migration balance. It is also a consequence of two
world wars and, especially, of the recent war of aggression
imposed against my country in the 1990s.
In terms of spatial distribution, urban agglomeration
presents another significant problem in the country. Entire
regions have been affected by depopulation, a development
whereby population is concentrated in and around a small
number of urban centres. Also, Croatia’s islands are faced
with negative demographic indicators. In 1997, therefore,
the National Island Development Programme was
introduced as a means of abolishing distinctions in spatial
demographic development and achieving well-balanced
regional development.
It has to be noted that the aggression against Croatia
in the early 1990s caused a natural decrease in the
population and direct loss of human life and created a great
number of displaced persons and refugees. Precise
population figures will be available after the 2001 census.
In the meantime, international financial assistance has been
sporadic and at low levels. It is mainly through the efforts
and investments of the Croatian Government that these
problems have been addressed, while international
assistance has, so far, remained very limited.
In order to avert these and other negative trends, in
1996 the Government adopted the National Demographic
Development Programme, which envisages a series of
measures for fertility, rehabilitation and social assistance in
line with the Cairo document. I would like to inform the
Assembly that, just yesterday, the Croatian parliament
adopted a new law on State financial support for children.
Balanced population growth and an integrated social
approach is a priority for the overall development of the
country.
The reform of the health-care system in Croatia is
under way, with the goal being to decrease costs by
reorganizing the system, although not at the expense of
health-care users. Reproductive health care is accessible
through the primary health-care system in Croatia. Among
the priorities are reducing the prenatal mortality rate,
diagnosis of risky pregnancies and the promotion of
breastfeeding. Special attention is being given to women’s

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
health care related to pregnancy, delivery and post-natal
care. In 1996, Croatia recorded its lowest maternal
mortality rate: 1.86 per 100,000 live births. In 1997, the
prenatal mortality rate per 1,000 live births was 5.78. The
lowest infant mortality rate was recorded in 1996, at 8.0
per 1,000 live births, whereas in 1998 it was 8.23 per
1,000 live births.
In spite of all of the difficulties caused by war and
the process of transition in Croatia, statistical health
indicators remain favourable. Various activities are under
way, within the framework of the national plan of action,
with the goal of improving the overall health situation.
The plan is based upon the World Health Organization
strategy of health for all.
Given the complexity of the factors that affect trends
and patterns of fertility, mortality and migration, the
delegation of Croatia submitted a national report on these
issues at the regional population meeting organized in
December 1998 in Budapest. The report has been
published on the Internet and is included in the materials
which my delegation has distributed.
Croatia is one of the countries which has
experienced an increase in the number of aged persons in
its population. According to the 1991 census, the share of
the population over the age of 65 was 13.1 per cent. This
year, which was declared by the General Assembly as the
International Year of Older Persons, the Government has
established a national committee and adopted a
programme of activities to improve the social care of the
elderly so as to address the issues of their quality of life.
Great effort has also been invested recently to reform
pension funds and the health and social welfare system in
Croatia at the legislative and implementation level.
With regard to general equality issues, the Croatian
Government has established the National Commission for
Equality. The national policy on equality, adopted in
1997, provides for specific measures for achieving
particular goals in the areas of political decision-making,
the economic position of women, health care, education,
the human rights of women and violence against women
in times of war and peace.
Adequate financial resources are necessary to
achieve the goals and objectives of the Programme of
Action at the national as well as the international level.
Leadership and commitment with regard to programme
implementation are crucial to achieve this. We strongly
believe that the key actions for the future, which we are

13

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
going to adopt today at the end of the twenty-first special
session of the General Assembly, will give new impetus to
worldwide efforts to implement the goals and objectives of
the ICPD Programme of Action in the pursuit of balanced
population growth and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Minister of
Health of France.
Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): Allow me,
on behalf of the French Government, to thank the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), Mrs. Nafis Sadik, as well as the
Director of the Population Division of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Mr. Joseph Chamie, for their
excellent preparations for this twenty-first special session of
the General Assembly. Our thanks also go to Ambassador
Chowdhury, who presided over the work of the preparatory
committee, guiding it to a successful conclusion.
I should like to set my statement in the context of
hope, and also of clear-sightedness. Such hope is based on
the recent resumption of the flow of official development
assistance which, after some dark years, seems to be
making progress once again. France remains one of the
main contributors of official development assistance.
Such hope has also been reinforced by recent debtrelief measures. The Assembly knows that France actively
supports the appeals of the Secretary-General for debt relief
for the most heavily indebted poor countries. Furthermore,
we became involved in this area very early on, and we have
been responsible for more than half of the bilateral writeoffs effected by developed countries in recent years. France,
which was one of the countries that instigated this initiative,
will do its part in the new undertaking announced by the
heads of State or Government at the recent Group of 7
summit in Cologne.
That policy should enable developing countries to
finance programmes that will modernize their economies,
sustain their growth and preserve or restore a broad
equilibrium, mainly in the area of demographics.
There were 2 billion people in the 1930s; there are 6
billion now. How many will there be tomorrow? We must
think about not only how to control this growth but also
how to enable so many people to live well together. Let us
not forget that behind those numbers, whose tremendous

14

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
size can make them seem impersonal, are as many human
realities, as many individuals.
France is very optimistic about the dynamic
international process initiated by the Cairo Conference
five years ago. Here clear-sightedness will be key,
because for our hopes to be realized we will have to
collectively face those major challenges.
The first challenge is food. How can we meet this
basic need for billions of people whose number is
increasing every day while controlling the consequences
of scientific progress in the farm-produce area? We must
guarantee food security, that is, we must be able to ensure
that every individual has enough food while working to
reduce the risks linked to the food supply.
I should like to emphasize here that respect for the
rights of the human person and of fundamental freedoms
should be the guiding principle of any population policy.
With those rights in mind, let me state here that particular
importance must be accorded to gender equity.
We all know that controlling demographic growth is
a determining factor in sustainable development. But
controlling fertility and reproduction is impossible if equal
rights for men and women are not acknowledged or
respected.
Since the Cairo and Beijing Conferences, among
others, the international community has shared the belief
that freedom for women and the promotion of their civil,
social, economic and health status is a prerequisite for
sustainable development.
That imperative carries with it certain specific
requirements. As concerns education, France would like
a significant effort to be undertaken to give girls equal
access to schooling. As regards health, France is prepared
to participate in any programme aimed at helping
Governments to put an end to the intolerable sexual
mutilations inflicted on women and girls. France would
like also to see all women obtain full access to health
care.
But how can we talk of development and population
without mentioning AIDS, when we know that in certain
maternity wards almost 50 per cent of women are HIV
positive? In the countries most affected, life expectancy
has decreased to what it was in the 1960s. Thirty years of
work, 30 years of development wasted.

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
Have we truly understood what is at stake? If we do
nothing, the situation can only deteriorate. We, the
developing and developed countries, must work collectively
in this respect. We must redouble our efforts at prevention,
including through the use of health and sex education
programmes aimed at adolescent boys and girls. A study
done by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
indicated very clearly that sexual education does not lead to
early sexual activity but rather safeguards life.
But we cannot stop at prevention, though it is an
absolute priority. To be effective in the long term, we must
also take responsibility and provide care. This is both an
ethical necessity and a guarantee of efficiency. It is not
acceptable that the ill should fall into two categories: those
from rich countries and those from the poorer countries.
This is the idea underlying the France’s initiative for
a health solidarity programme that gives priority to
consistent programmes of prevention and responsibilitytaking for women and children, the first of which was
initiated in Côte d’Ivoire a few weeks ago, to be followed
this year by additional ones in Africa and Asia. As I said
earlier, we can no longer accept a situation in which sick
people are in the South and treatments are available only in
the North.
These are a few elements that France would like to
add to the statement made by the German presidency of the
European Union, a statement with which our country fully
associates ourselves.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Sarah Flood-Beaubrun, Minister of
Health, Family Affairs, Human Services and Gender Affairs
of Saint Lucia.
Mrs. Flood-Beaubrun (Saint Lucia): Saint Lucia
joined the rest of the international community in Cairo in
1994 to adopt the historic Programme of Action and also
participated in The Hague Forum and the preparatory
meetings to this special session.
We are a small island of approximately 238 square
miles with a population of approximately 145,000 persons.
Our Government is relatively young, but in many concrete
ways it has demonstrated and reaffirmed our commitment
to Cairo. The portfolios of my Ministry — Health, Human
Services, Family Affairs and Gender relations — were
created and combined not by accident but by design. That
is because we recognized then, as we do now, that a natural
nexus exists between issues of gender, health — including

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
reproductive health — family life and planning, older
persons, the poor, and human services in general.
Like other Caribbean countries, Saint Lucia is faced
with economic and social challenges which we must
surmount with the limited financial and technical
resources at our disposal if we are to improve the quality
of life of our people.
My colleagues from the region who spoke before me
alluded to the vulnerability of our islands to natural
disasters and unfriendly external economic environments.
In 1994, and prior to Cairo, like many other Caribbean
countries we were faced with a very high level of teenage pregnancy, poverty — especially among women —
under-representation of women in decision-making,
violence against women, and so on.
A high prevalence of teen-age pregnancy has long
been a feature of Saint Lucian society. In 1996, a
comparative review of adolescent fertility among the
islands of the region revealed that Saint Lucia’s rate was
50 per cent higher than that of our neighbouring island
Barbados, for example, and more than twice that of the
United States, whose rate was highest among that of
industrialized countries for that period.
Cairo gave us a new impetus, a firmer resolve to
seek and find solutions to the problem. The job ahead of
us was a tough one with no easy solutions, one which
required a multifaceted approach. Among our programmes
to tackle these problems are: incorporating topics on
reproductive health in the health and family life education
curriculum beginning at the primary-school level;
expanding sexual and reproductive health services to
include counselling on human sexuality, responsible
parenthood, effective prevention of sexually transmitted
diseases (STDs) and HIV/AIDS, and the promotion,
supply and distribution of high-quality condoms; a policy
on continuing education for all teen-age mothers;
increased opportunity for vocational skills training; and
programmes specifically designed for teen-age mothers
for the time being at least one of our general hospitals.
Attempts to deal with the problem have met with
some success. There has been a steady decline in the rate
of teen-age pregnancies from that period until now.
Today, five years after Cairo, and on the threshold of the
new millennium, teen-age pregnancy is still too high. It
was recently described as one of the leading social and
public health problems facing Saint Lucia. Approximately
25 per cent of our population lives below the poverty line,

15

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
and women are more affected than men. Overall
unemployment among the poor is also higher among
women.
At the primary- and secondary-school level, although
girls continue to outdo boys in performance standards, we
are faced with the problem of “drop-outs”, particularly by
girls who become pregnant while at school, or girls who do
not move on to tertiary education because of an unplanned
pregnancy. For the most part they remain unskilled and are
forced to take low-paid jobs or remain unemployed and
dependent on a male partner and are caught up in the
vicious circle of poverty.
A poverty reduction fund recently launched by the
Government has been quite successful in addressing
poverty, particularly in rural communities. Projects that
have been undertaken include the provision of water and
sanitation facilities and employment and income-generating
projects. A social investment fund has also been created to
tackle poverty, particularly among young persons in
deprived communities. It is expected that this will impact
directly on unemployment among women and youth.
In 1995, the Domestic Violence Summary Proceedings
Act was enacted, making not just physical but also
emotional and verbal abuse in the domestic setting a
criminal offence. Hitherto victims, most of whom are
women, relied on the general provisions of our criminal
law. Two crisis centres were formed — one in the north of
the island and the other in the south — to work hand in
hand with other women’s organizations, the police, the
courts and other Government agencies to fight domestic
violence. A temporary shelter for women escaping violence
is being purchased and will soon be opened.
Today, for the first time in our history, Saint Lucia
has a female head of State. Two young women have also
been elected to Parliament. They are both ministers of the
Government. Both prior to and after 1974, only one woman
had ever been elected to Parliament. Ours is a significant
achievement, as we believe that the most sincere
demonstration of our commitment to women’s rights in all
aspects and forms is to ensure women’s full representative
participation in decision-making at all levels, particularly
the highest.
Increasingly, pursuant to our efforts at gender
mainstreaming, women are more significantly represented
on statutory and other decision-making bodies. We have
been able to maintain universal access to primary education
and to reduce the unmet demand for secondary education

16

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
by increasing access from 54 to 60 per cent in the last
five years. Our goal is to guarantee secondary education
for all. Steps are being taken to address the unacceptable
rate of illiteracy among the adult population.
At the primary, secondary and tertiary levels girls
continue to outstrip boys both as regards numbers
enrolled and performance standards. Our task, while
addressing the issue of male marginalization — which is
increasingly becoming a feature of our Caribbean
societies — is to ensure that the progress of our women
in the educational sphere is reflected in the political and
socio-economic environment. For this reason, and in order
to achieve the correct balance, we have engaged in a
process of gender mainstreaming in all our sectors.
Among other things, the main constraint we face in
accelerating progress on all fronts is the lack of critical
financial and physical resources and institutional capacity.
At the same time certain trends and developments are
posing serious challenges to us. At the national level these
include increasing incidents of HIV/AIDS, family
disintegration, high teen-age fertility, disenchantment
among youth, a youthful population and an ageing
population.
The external circumstances that also impose
challenges include the prospect of low prices for bananas,
dwindling development assistance in the form of grants
from traditional donors, stringent conditions on
multilateral loan funding and increasing competition on
the international market as a result of the trends towards
globalization in all its aspects.
Saint Lucia is taking steps to address these
challenges. We will soon encourage the testing of all
pregnant mothers for HIV and will make azidotimidine
(AZT) available where needed.
While we continue to expand tourism — our main
income-generating sector — efforts are being made to
diversify our agriculture-based economy to take on board
financial and information services. A social reform
commission will advise on further reforms to improve the
status of women and children and to address growing
concerns regarding male youths, the family, older persons
and other socially marginalized groups in society.
Saint Lucia remains committed to pursuing and
achieving the goals of the International Conference on
Population and Development Programme of Action. We
are at a threshold in our development. Certain trends at

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
both the national and international levels are threatening to
wipe out the gains that we have made. Saint Lucia would
like to see, as an outcome of this special session, the
expeditious transfer of communication technologies, more
information-sharing, allocation of financial and other
resources to address high teenage fertility and greater
promotion of horizontal cooperation among developing
countries.
As we enter the new millennium, we hope that the
international community will confront development changes
in a pragmatic way. As a developing country, Saint Lucia
will continue to play its part in this global transformation,
which seeks to improve the lives of all of us and all our
peoples.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Junior Minister, Office of the Prime Minister,
responsible for the Advancement of Women, Family
Welfare and Social Affairs of Djibouti, Her Excellency
Mrs. Hawa Ahmed Youssouf.
Mrs. Youssouf (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At Cairo
we made the well-being of humanity the focal point of our
strategy rather than, as per usual, establishing purely
statistical objectives. A new strategy, which emphasizes the
tangible link between the population and development, was
adopted. Moreover, the financial requirements for attaining
these objectives were clearly pinpointed, as regards both
national contributions and those of the international
community, as well as, in particular, the contributions of
the wealthy countries. Last but not least, the Programme of
Action, which was adopted by consensus, in making the
well-being of humanity at the focal point of all activities,
stressed health, education, family and the integration of
women into the development process.
It is by keeping these commitments in mind that the
Government of Djibouti, on behalf of which I am
addressing this Assembly, has established national strategies
and programmes which, with the Assembly’s permission, I
would like to share with the representatives present here.
In the area of strategy and policy, in 1995 the
Government elaborated a national policy to support
families. The goal of this policy was to make available and
accessible quality services for the improvement of the
health and well-being of the Djibouti families. This
programme has only been partially implemented, but it has
allowed for the establishment of a considerable network of
health and family-planning centres. Moreover, numerous
vaccination campaigns focused on the disadvantaged groups

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
have been carried out simultaneously with a programme
to combat AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases. With
the assistance of the United Nations Population Fund, the
Government has also drawn up our country’s first
comprehensive population programme.
All these actions demand an awareness of the
population problems in our country. They have resulted
in a considerable drop in infant, juvenile and maternal
mortality rates, as well as greater knowledge of the extent
of the country’s AIDS problem. The result would
certainly have been better if — on account of the neverending conflicts in our subregion — more than 20 per
cent of our population did not consist of refugees, who
greatly burden our already fragile economic and health
situation.
As to the nature and development of women, the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, in organizing his administration
immediately after his recent election, created for the first
time a ministry responsible for the advancement of
women, family well-being and social affairs. This
ministry is responsible to the Prime Minister’s office.
This ministry, which I was responsible for organizing,
will draw up, in November 1999, a national strategy for
the integration of the women of Djibouti into the
development process, as well as a plan of action for the
implementation of this strategy. By September of this
year we will also finalize the draft Family Code, which is
intended to promote the family and the definition of the
rights and responsibilities of spouses and children.
The new Djibouti Criminal Code has integrated
provisions relating to domestic violence, genital and
sexual mutilation and rape, which are now treated as
crimes.
Finally, in order to improve the socio-economic
situation, the Government has launched microcredit
programmes, designed primarily for women.
With respect to the role of civil society, the
Government of the Republic of Djibouti accords particular
attention to and increasingly encourages community and
associative activity, and always involves national nongovernmental organizations in its meetings and projects.
Moreover, the national non-governmental organizations
are playing an increasingly important role in the
implementation of the Programme of Action.

17

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999

Nevertheless, any assessment of the Programme’s first
years must take note of certain obstacles. These are
basically attributable to a lack of basic demographic data,
making the preparation to and follow-up and appraisal of
the Programme difficult; a sociocultural environment that
does not encourage people to engage in new practices; and
insufficient resources.

women are guaranteed by the Constitution and are also
reflected in the gender-neutral wording of all legal acts.
In addition, the equal status and high economic activity of
women are attributable to equal education opportunities,
provided free of charge by all types of state schools,
including universities. As a result, the average level of
education of women is higher than that of men.

To obviate these problems, the Government intends to
establish an institutional mechanism adapted to the
population programme and to undertake a census. The
Government also intends to draft a national information,
education and communication programme on population.

Supporting families with children is a long-standing
tradition in the Czech Republic and is based on social
laws, family law and labour law, which take into account
the needs of mothers and fathers caring for small
children. Parents caring for children with disabilities have
additional support.

All of these programmes, however, require substantial
resources that are generally beyond our means and those of
the African countries, particularly in this era of crises and
structural adjustment programmes. In this regard, we call on
the United Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions
and our other development partners to help our efforts with
increased assistance targeted to the specific conditions and
needs of each country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Jiří Rusnok, Deputy Minister
of Labour and Social Affairs of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Rusnok (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
aligns itself with the statement made on Wednesday on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and we fully support
the main thrusts of the European position at this special
session. This allows me to confine my brief remarks now
to country-specific information. More can be found in the
Czech National Report on the implementation of the Cairo
Programme of Action, the English version of which has
been made available to delegates this morning.
Since 1990, the Czech Republic has undergone and is
still undergoing many structural changes. These changes are
connected to transforming the political system, as well as
to introducing a socially and environmentally sensitive
market economy. Despite the difficulties accompanying the
transition, the Czech Republic now ranks among countries
with deep respect for the basic human, social and cultural
rights of all citizens. This respect is reflected not only in
the rule of law, but above all in the real life of citizens.
Total expenditures on social protection, including health
care, and on education in the Czech Republic represent
nearly 30 per cent of its gross domestic product.
In the Czech Republic, gender equity is regarded as a
natural and basic principle. Equal rights for men and

18

In the 1990s, the demographic picture of the Czech
Republic has markedly changed. As a result of the longterm gradual ageing of the population and of changing
demographic behaviour, the country started to lose its
population by natural change from 1994 onwards. At the
same time, the average life expectancy has been
increasing significantly. Between 1990 and 1997, the
average life expectancy has increased by nearly 4 years
for men and by nearly 3 years for women.
The generally accepted explanation of the decrease
in the birth rate is, in particular, the postponement of first
marriages and childbearing to a later age and the
widespread use of contraception in recent years. However,
there are also the well-known social changes, such as the
higher level of education and employment of women, the
individualization of life and a broader range of
opportunities for young people. The current depopulation
trend is likely to continue in the future.
One of the top priorities of the National Health
Programme launched in 1992 is women’s health care.
Many of its projects focus on specific groups of women
and their occupational health. A great deal of attention is
paid to reproductive health, where projects seek to
promote medical education, various consulting services,
education in parenting and family planning, nutrition
during pregnancy and breastfeeding, the prevention of
breast tumours, contraceptive methods and the prevention
of sexually transmittable diseases. Other
medical/preventive programmes supported by the Ministry
of Health are devoted, for example, to healthy lifestyle or
the prevention of malignant tumours. The mass media and
professional non-governmental institutions have become
increasingly involved in these activities.

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
Prenatal and post-natal care focusing on babies and
infants has a long-standing tradition in my country and is
manifest in a continuously declining infant mortality rate,
from 20.2 per 1,000 live births in 1970 to 5.9 in 1997, as
well as in one of the lowest maternal mortality rates in the
world. The campaign to promote and knowledge of the
benefits of breastfeeding have been rapidly expanding and
improving.
For the time being, the HIV/AIDS morbidity rate trend
is not too alarming for the Czech Republic. National health
authorities have adopted a medium-term plan of prevention
of the disease. An inter-ministerial body, the National
Commission for HIV/AIDS-Related Issues, and a network
of counselling and testing points, working cost-free and
anonymously, have been established. There are many free
AIDS-counselling telephone numbers operated by nongovernmental organizations. The Czech Republic cooperates
with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and runs its own national programme.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
My colleague from Germany, speaking on behalf of
the European Union, has already expressed the main ideas
with regard to this important event, which we fully
endorse.
At this first review of progress made since the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD), let me add a few references to our major national
concerns in this field and to some of the measures that
have been adopted in my country since Cairo.
My country attached the utmost importance to the
Cairo Conference, both in its own right and as a part of
a global strategy for the promotion of sustainable
development, which takes into account the recognized
linkages between population, environmental protection
and economic and social development. We also deeply
appreciated the fact that the ICPD focused its attention on
a human rights-based approach to population issues.

In the 1990s, the Czech Republic has become a target
country for labour immigration and refugees. In response,
we are now developing capacities to guarantee immigrants
and refugees the rights embedded in the relevant
international agreements and standards. Generally, the
European social model applied by the EU member States,
among which the Czech Republic intends to rank in the
near future, inspires us in shaping our system of social
protection. The Czech Republic has already succeeded at
many levels in harmonizing the transition to democracy and
to the market economy with a sufficient level of social
solidarity. The basic principle of government policy in this
area is to ensure the equal opportunities of citizens.

Portugal, like other countries, is going through a
population ageing process resulting from growing life
expectancy and reduced fertility rates, which is bringing
about great challenges. My Government fully associates
itself with the world celebration of the International Year
of the Elderly, having established a national commission
aimed at putting into practice the principles and goals
defined by the General Assembly within this context. The
programme of that commission includes the promotion of
a redefinition of national objectives with regard to ageing,
the inclusion of ageing-related issues into national
development programmes and the reinforcement of the
institutional capacity to deal with the problems of the
elderly.

In conclusion, let me again turn to the international
arena and express my delegation’s satisfaction with the
results achieved in these most difficult negotiations. As this
review exercise over the Cairo Programme of Action has
shown, progress is rather slow, but it has no alternative. We
are moving in the right direction and my delegation thanks
all who have contributed in a constructive manner to the
successful conclusion and outcome of our meeting.

We believe the progress made in the field of health,
which has allowed for greater life expectancy in many
countries, should be complemented by social policies
aimed at improving the quality of life of older persons.
We will proceed with our efforts to increase the
recognition of the dignity of older persons and of their
role in society, promote generational solidarity and
support family care.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on His
Excellency Mr. Luís Filipe Marques Amado, Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs and Development Cooperation of
Portugal.

Portugal has both an import emigrant community
abroad and an increasing number of immigrants. This
circumstance not only provides us with a deep
understanding of migration issues but also gives us
greater responsibilities with regard to their treatment.
Portugal sustains a positive approach to the issue of
migration, taking into account the contribution of migrants
to their societies of both origin and destination.

Mr. Marques Amado (Portugal): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election, and wish
you every success.

19

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
We are committed to the full integration of migrants
into Portuguese society and have implemented two
legalization processes during recent years, under the control
of a designated High Commissioner for Immigration
Affairs. We are also committed to developing cooperation
with countries of origin, but we believe that a constructive
approach to international migration implies first and
foremost the protection of the human rights and dignity of
all migrants, irrespective of their legal status, including
through the adoption and enforcement of legal instruments,
both national and international.
Portugal attaches the utmost importance to the
protection of women’s rights and the empowerment of
women, which we consider a matter of vital interest not
only for women but for society as a whole. Following the
last constitutional revision, the Portuguese constitution not
only establishes that the direct participation of women and
men in political life is fundamental for the consolidation of
democracy but also that the law must promote equality in
the exercise of civic and political rights and nondiscrimination based on gender in access to political office.
We would also like to highlight the establishment of
specific bodies such as the Parliamentary Commission for
Parity, Equal Opportunities and the Family and the post of
High Commissioner for Equality and Family.
A global plan for equal opportunities was adopted last
year, focusing on areas such as violence, work and
employment, reconciliation of work and family
responsibilities, social protection of the family and
maternity, health, education, science and culture.
We believe it is essential to continue the worldwide
efforts to enable all persons to make free and informed
choices about their reproductive life by increasing access to
the information and support needed. The national health
strategy plan for 1998-2002 addresses in a comprehensive
way the issues at stake when dealing with reproductive
health.
A new document, reformulating the guidelines for
family planning, maternal health and information and
education on sexuality and reproduction for adolescents was
recently published. We believe it will have a positive effect
in the long term.
Responding to the needs of the population is primarily
a national responsibility. It is essential that countries
develop their own population programmes according to the
specific needs of their peoples as part of the global effort

20

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
to increase national investment in social development.
Respect for human rights, peace, democracy and the rule
of law, good and accountable governance and the
participation of civil society, are elements that must be
present and considered in promoting an enabling
environment in this context.
Having said that, we must also recognize that
developing countries, especially the least developed
among them, may require international cooperation to
complement their efforts to improve the quality of life of
their people.
We are fully aware of our responsibilities in this
domain and are committed to reforming our cooperation
policy, adjusting it to the framework of principles and
objectives as spelled out in the Development Assistance
Committee (DAC) strategy, entitled “Shaping the 21st
Century: The Contribution of Development Cooperation”.
In that way we will contribute to the better coordination
of donor States and organizations, which is necessary if
we are to achieve the proposed main goal of reducing
poverty by half by the year 2015. Without a better
coordination system involving United Nations institutions,
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
European Union and the major State donors, all the
efforts of the international community to develop
sustainable policies will be jeopardized.
The world population will soon reach the historic
figure of 6 billion. While paying a fair tribute to the
enormous amount of progress made in the field of health,
we believe that this fact will bring about great challenges
for the next century in the search for a better life for all
peoples in all countries. The greatest of those challenges
will be the eradication of poverty, which afflicts two
thirds of the world’s population, in spite of all efforts
undertaken by the international community.
The pace of growth of the world population in the
next century will depend greatly on our commitment to
many of the goals of the Cairo Programme of Action. It
is our responsibility to ensure that this growth is
commensurate with the earth’s resources, while at the
same time allowing for a healthy, productive and
dignified life for all.
This was the spirit which oriented our participation
in the process of review and appraisal of the
implementation of the ICPD Programme of Action that
culminates in this session. It is also the reason for our full

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999

commitment to the implementation of the key future actions
we have just approved.

and women’s empowerment activities into community
development programmes.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on His
Excellency Mr. Frank Loy, Under-Secretary of State for
Global Affairs of the United States of America.

The United States has also provided significant
support to international organizations to achieve these
aims. In addition, via the recent G-7 Cologne agreement,
the United States will provide debt relief to help free
funds for some developing nations that can use them to
deliver expanded social services to their citizens. The
United States private sector has increased its support as
well. Since Cairo, United States foundations have more
than tripled their assistance to population and related
programmes — an outstanding increase.

Mr. Loy (United States of America): Cairo was a
turning point. It changed both the way we think about
population programmes and the way we put them to work.
An unprecedented 179 nations joined the consensus. The
ground-breaking Programme of Action recognized that if
we are going to stabilize global population, reduce poverty
and promote sustainable development, we must address
children’s health, women’s health and women’s rights,
including their reproductive rights, and gender equity and
equality. Only then can we ensure a better quality of life
for all.
And just as Governments and non-governmental
organizations from around the world together forged the
Cairo consensus, so have they since then collaborated in
putting the recommendations into place.
Five years later, in short, as we review the progress
made, it is clear that Cairo is working. Here in the United
States, Cairo has helped the way we shape domestic and
foreign programmes and policies, and we are seeing a
difference.
Domestically, we have increased Government funding
for United States family planning and other reproductive
health services, and we have since witnessed a 12 per cent
decline in teen pregnancies and a similar reduction in
recourse to abortion. Other innovative programmes are
working to stop domestic violence and to build girls’ selfesteem.

As a result of all these efforts, millions of families
are able to achieve their reproductive goals and have
healthier children. More women are able to advance
economically, socially and politically. Reduced population
pressures permit countries to invest more resources in
education, health, the environment and other areas that
contribute to an improved quality of life.
Challenges remain, of course. The United States has
identified priorities to ensure that the Cairo goals become
a reality, both at home and abroad.
First, the United States is committed to ensuring
gender equity and equality. A priority is to close the
gender gap in education. Of the 960 million adults in the
world who cannot read or write, two thirds are female. In
addition, high priority will be given to initiatives that
advance women’s political participation, legal rights and
economic status, and prevent violence against women,
including female genital mutilation, domestic violence and
sex-trafficking.

Overseas, since Cairo, the United States, through the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), has spent more than $5.5 billion dollars on
bilateral health and population programmes and on
women’s empowerment programmes. This assistance
supports programmes and services in more than 100
countries throughout the developing world.

The United States will also continue to work to
expand access to, and quality of, family planning and
other reproductive health services. Vital to this objective
is ensuring that women and men have the widest possible
choice of modern contraceptive methods available to
them. We will also work to improve further the quality of
care in reproductive health services and to strengthen the
linkages between reproductive health and child survival
programmes.

Accomplishments include: increased access to and
improved quality of reproductive health services, including
family planning, maternal health and HIV/AIDS
programmes; new initiatives in girls’ and women’s
education; and strengthened partnerships with nongovernmental organizations to integrate reproductive health

Further, the United States will continue to support
safe motherhood initiatives and other community-based
efforts to address such needs as prenatal care, maternal
nutrition and training for midwives. At home, we will
work to close the gap in maternal mortality rates between
black and Caucasian women.

21

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
Internationally, complications from unsafe abortions
are one of the leading causes of maternal mortality,
resulting in 75,000 preventable deaths a year. The United
States will work to ensure that where abortions are legal,
they are safe and accessible, with an emphasis on scaling
up promising post-abortion-care initiatives.
The United States will continue to help reduce
HIV/AIDS rates by emphasizing preventive approaches that
are focused on young people and other high-risk groups.
Moreover, the United States will continue to support, design
and implement development and health programmes —
including sexual and reproductive health programmes —
with and for youth that involve the active support of parents
and other community members, including religious leaders,
health officials, teachers, policy makers and the media.
The United States remains the largest bilateral donor
of reproductive health assistance, but we are woefully
aware that we have not met our financial commitments. I
am happy to report that the Clinton Administration has
proposed a $25 million contribution to the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) and a very substantial increase
for USAID for fiscal year 2000, and we are optimistic that
our Congress will grant these requests. We are also pushing
hard for payment of United Nations arrears.
In our ongoing effort to mobilize resources, we will
continue to work to strengthen the involvement and
commitment of private businesses and foundations.
I truly believe that Cairo is doable. Essential to its
implementation are partnerships — between family
members, men and women, young people, the public and
private sectors, and at the community, national and
international levels. Indeed, our own successes would not
have been possible without the involvement of nongovernmental organizations, health professionals, policy
makers, religious leaders, the media, businesses,
foundations, other donors and other Governments.
An utmost priority for the United States is to continue
building and strengthening these partnerships. Only then
can we ensure that Cairo’s promise becomes a reality. And
let me take this opportunity to applaud the United Nations
for involving non-governmental organizations and youth in
these proceedings. The United States has a youth
representative on our delegation, as well as several nongovernmental organizations. And I understand that 10 other
delegations have included youth representatives as well.

22

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
Most of all, we thank the United Nations for this
historic opportunity for us all to reaffirm our nation’s
commitment to Cairo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to Her Excellency Mrs. Aksoltan Ataeva, Chairman of the
delegation of Turkmenistan.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
The 1994 Cairo Conference was held at a time when the
world was experiencing great changes, when newly
independent States were undertaking socio-economic
reforms. The decisions elaborated at the Conference have
formed the foundation of the national programme of
Turkmenistan which takes into consideration the
multifaceted problems of population development,
conditions of various branches of the economy and the
economy as a whole. The programme is based on
achieving sustainable growth and realizing the economic
potential of the country. It was aimed at improving
economic growth, environmental protection and the
health, education and cultural standards of the population.
The Statistical Bureau of Turkmenistan has been
monitoring and evaluating the main indicators of the
growth of the population. The Bureau has updated its
statistical reporting formats and indicators in order to take
into account international practice and national
characteristics. The 1995 census of the Turkmenistan
population has provided information on the demographic,
economic, educational, geographic and migrational
characteristics of the population of the country and its
regions. A special census of the unemployed population
and an examination of available jobs provided the basis
for the elaboration of a medium-term employment
programme for the Turkmenistan population for the years
1998 to 2002.
The Government of Turkmenistan, led by President
Saparmurat Niyazov, pays great attention to the issue of
gender equality. Women comprise 50.4 per cent of the
country’s population, and this level has remained stable
since 1995. In accordance with the constitution of
Turkmenistan, women enjoy equal rights in the areas of
education, professional training, career rewards and
advancement, and in social, political and cultural
activities. Transition to the market economy has had a
positive impact on employment opportunities, including
on women’s involvement in private business and in joint
ventures. In 1995 27.6 per cent of the people involved in
small businesses in Turkmenistan were women; in 1997
this percentage had already risen to 32.6 per cent. The

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
rates for female participation in medium-sized businesses
were 18.3 per cent and 21.6 per cent respectively.
In order to strengthen women’s roles at every level of
public life, the Government, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), opened the
Women’s Bureau of Turkmenistan. This organization serves
to improve the coordination and distribution of information
on gender issues among government departments and
institutions, international organizations and donors, and nongovernmental organizations and the public. It also ensures
women’s participation in the developmental process of the
country.
Turkmenistan education law guarantees education to
all citizens without prejudice in regards to sex, ethnicity,
social origin or economic status. Education is free of charge
at all levels within the State system. Women’s level of
literacy almost equals men’s.
Improving the health of the population is one of the
highest priorities of the State programme of socio-economic
development of independent Turkmenistan. According to a
decree of the President of Turkmenistan, the State health
programme was adopted in 1995. This programme aims at
the reconstruction of the public health system, including its
financing, preliminary medical service, hospital services,
pharmaceutical services, human resources and medical
research. These reforms will also address the reproductive
health-care system, family planning, hygiene, training and
proper nutrition.
During the last 10 years the birth rate has dropped
from 4.1 to 3.4, and there has been a steady decline in the
infant mortality rate. Maternal mortality rates have been
declining as well. One characteristic of the Turkmenistan
population is the brief interval between children — an
average of 1.4 years.
In order to improve families’ access to familyplanning services and information, the reproductive healthcare service was established. It aims at reducing maternal
morbidity and maternal and child mortality by providing
services to families to prevent unwanted pregnancies,
control birth spacing and optimize the timing of births in
relation to the age of the parents.
With the support of the United Nations Population
Fund, 12 reproductive health-care centres were opened in
different regions of the country, and 49 reproductive health
units were opened in various districts. In cooperation with
the United Nations Children’s Fund, significant work has

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
been done to immunize children, combat iron deficiency,
prevent infectious diseases and provide oral rehydration
therapy, as well as to return to exclusive breastfeeding as
a major instrument in the reduction of perinatal and infant
morbidity and mortality. The World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe and UNDP have assisted
Turkmenistan in carrying out an analysis of its health
sector. Turkmenistan greatly appreciates the help of these
organizations.
The Government of Turkmenistan has been
purposefully implementing its population and
development policy in accordance with the decisions of
the 1994 Cairo Conference. At the same time it faces
some difficulties. There is the need for the establishment
of a coordinating body for population issues. The country
needs to improve its demographic statistics, and it needs
adequate computer software for training specialists.
The Government of Turkmenistan has great
confidence in the work of the United Nations and is ready
to continue and strengthen its close cooperation with the
international community in pursuing the final goals of the
International Conference on Population and Development
— the peaceful and healthy development of the present
and of coming generations
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mr. Abdussalam Ibrahim.
Mr. Ibrahim (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to express our thanks and gratitude to all
those who contributed to the preparatory work for this
meeting so that we can meet and study this vital and
sensitive issue, and then together, in a spirit of partnership
based on mutual respect, face the challenges hindering a
balance between population and resources and find the
best methods for dealing positively with the links between
population and development. We do this with a sense of
collective responsibility and because of the importance of
improving the quality of life for our people and of
preserving the right of future generations to live and to
enjoy natural resources.
Population is one of the main components that shape
the objectives of human society and determine the various
levels of those objectives. While human life and welfare
constitute the primary objective of all development plans
and programmes, the human person is the most important
instrument for achieving the goals of such plans and
programmes. If the civilization experience of various

23

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
peoples has proven the ability of the human race to make
progress, this element, with its consumer power and its
aspiration for better living standards and for the social
services it needs — including health and education
services — remains one of the main challenges which have
faced human societies throughout the ages.
Some consider the population question and its
dimensions from a one-sided perspective which holds that
population, particularly its high growth rate, is the main
obstacle to development. We can say for certain and with
great confidence that this matter, necessary as it is to
consider, does not outweigh development — although we
recognize that a lower population growth rate in densely
populated developing countries with relatively scarce
resources may ameliorate the problems of
underdevelopment. Birth control is often a result more than
a reason, and we should not ignore the other aspects of the
population question and their integration into the aims and
objectives of development. These aspects include the
growth rate, age distribution, geographical distribution of
the population between rural and urban areas, educational
status and gender. This will enable us to determine the best
methods and policies that help achieve development.
In Libya, development is based on improving the
quality of life through democratic institutions built on
popular participation, the rule of law and full respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, by increasing
economic opportunities and aiming for equality and fairness
between the sexes. The family is the nucleus of society on
the basis of religion, ethics and nationalism. The State
ensures the sufficiency of production and equity of
distribution and the peaceful resolution of differences
among groups to attain a society of plenty, inspired by our
Muslim inheritance and its humanitarian values.
In order to attain these goals, we have opted for
comprehensive family planning in order to guide the Libyan
economy in the right direction. We accomplish this through
mobilization of the country’s resources and potentialities,
whether natural, material or human, within an integrated
programme guaranteeing the efficiency of our efforts to
attain our objectives. The objectives of this programme
have focused on bettering the standard of living,
diversifying the structure of the national economy and the
sources of revenue, on social equity, a balanced
development, and the development and evolution of human
resources.
To give an idea of our achievements in the field of
population and development, I can cite a number of

24

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
indicators that testify to the broad range of public services
available to the people of Libya especially in the health
and education areas. Life expectancy increased from 47
years in 1973 to 64 years in 1995. The infant mortality
rate continued to drop rapidly throughout that period,
from 65.4 per 1,000 in the 1970s to 24.4 per 1,000 in the
1990s. Infant mortality below the age of 5 also declined,
from 87 per 1,000 in the 1970s to 30.1 in the 1990s. The
number of cases of malnutrition and childhood anaemia
fell in 1995 to 2.7 per cent. Inoculation significantly
increased to 97 per cent in 1995. Surveys have shown
that breastfeeding has become widespread, being practised
by 91 per cent of mothers of newborns. The maternal
mortality rate has fallen, 77 deaths per 100,000 births
until 1995. The danger of maternal death is one in 172
cases. Births at hospital facilities rose in 1995 to 93 per
cent, and follow-up during pregnancy rose to 76 per cent.
Between 1970 and 1995, total infant mortality had
dropped from 7.8 to 3.1 per 1,000. We have also seen a
considerable decrease in the prevalence of contagious
diseases.
School enrolment increased among girls from 63.2
per cent in 1984 to 73.2 per cent in 1995. Illiteracy
among 10-year-olds has fallen from 50.9 per cent to 32.4
per cent in 1984, then to 19 per cent in 1995. As to
females, there was a big drop in illiteracy from 72.7 per
cent in 1973 to 27.2 per cent in 1995. The number of
citizens over the age of 15 who are enrolled in the
educational system has also risen significantly. The rate
of primary school graduation has risen from 9.8 per cent
to 22.2 per cent. The number of those earning associate
degrees has risen from 3.3 per cent to 21.3 per cent,
while those earning baccalaureate degrees or equivalent
rose from 2.5 per cent to 16.2 per cent. The number of
Libyan families living in stable housing has reached 99.9
per cent due to the availability of public water, electricity
and sanitation systems.
My country’s social development programme is
based primarily on human factors. We have been able to
rise above the difficulties encountered by our society
since the imposition of sanctions in 1992, which was a
heavy burden that hindered the development process,
through the development projects we undertook in the
1970s and 1980s. Demographic growth dropped to 3.4 per
cent between 1964 and 1973 and to 2.8 per cent between
1984 and 1995. We practice voluntary birth control,
which we feel should be left to the choice of parents. All
family planning methods are permitted except abortion,
which is allowed only in cases of danger to the mother’s
life. We support social planning to promote women’s

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
health. We try to alleviate the negative consequences of
migration from rural to urban areas. We have examined
every option with respect to rural population growth.
We wish to stress the recommendations of the Cairo
Programme of Action by insisting on the importance of
respect for the laws, ethics and religious values of all
societies in full compliance with international human rights
instruments.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdallah Baali, Chairman of
the delegation of Algeria.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to express my delegation’s pleasure at seeing you,
Sir, preside over this special session of the General
Assembly devoted to population and development, and to
reiterate our gratitude to Mrs. Nafis Sadik for her
extraordinary work at the head of the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA).
If, since the Bucharest Conference, any conference has
truly marked a turning point in our approach to population
problems, it was that held in Cairo five years ago. Indeed,
that Conference represented the final rejection of our
narrow-minded approach to demographic problems, which
had been based exclusively on quantitative factors. By
stressing for the first time the dialectic between population
and development, the Conference strove to take into
account a broad range of social and economic factors,
hitherto ignored, that exercise a converging and often
decisive influence on the dynamic of development. It
thereby allowed the elaboration of a coherent and ambitious
Programme of Action to enhance the integration of
population and development policies in full respect of the
rights of the individual, of social values and of national
cultures.
The meetings of this session offer us today the
opportunity to appraise together, without prejudice or
complacency, the progress we have made since Cairo and
to assess the challenges that remain. In this context, while
important advances have been made, especially on
demographic, health and educational issues — for which we
should be pleased — we must also note that, in many
sectors, we have been unable to attain the goals set, often
because of the paucity of financial resources allocated to
population programmes. A mere third of the funds promised
at Cairo have actually been made available.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
In Cairo, we made global commitments together.
These commitments were above all political and depended
on our common will to undertake collective measures to
improve the well-being of our peoples. Indeed, our efforts
should aim at reducing the disparities between the
developing and the developed countries in every sphere,
since everything in this world is interconnected. Poverty,
financial flows, the debt problem, trade and environmental
protection are, in effect, variations of the single and
unique issue of development.
This leads me to make the following comments.
First, underdevelopment, poverty and ignorance are the
toughest battles that humankind has ever had to fight. Do
not more people die today because of famine, epidemics
and malnutrition than because of armed conflicts? It is by
supporting the efforts of the developing countries to
achieve their economic and social development goals,
particularly in the key areas of education, health, food
security and housing, that will allow us to reduce the rates
of population growth, which remain very high in some
countries. The fundamental link between population,
sustained economic growth and sustainable development
must therefore be acknowledged.
Furthermore, economic, social and demographic
problems require concerted action between developing
and developed countries. Despite the fact that it has
slowed in many countries, the current rate of demographic
growth will, in the coming decades, have a considerable
impact on economic, social and even political stability in
numerous developing countries which are already
enduring serious difficulties. This will require a collective
response.
Likewise, the mass migratory movements resulting
from armed conflicts, social upheaval and environmental
constraints will require a global approach.
Finally, the international economic environment,
which is unfavourable for a great many countries and is
accentuated by the limitations of unbridled globalization,
makes the burdens still heavier for those countries, and
further reduces their room for manoeuvre with regard to
funding for social programmes.
Despite all of these constraints, it can be said that
the developing world has, to a large extent and to its
credit, shouldered its domestic responsibilities in the areas
with which we are concerned.

25

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
This brings me to the question of the mobilization, at
international level, of the financial resources necessary for
the full implementation of the recommendations of Cairo.
The donor community, like the multilateral mechanisms,
must not shirk its responsibilities but, on the contrary, must
acknowledge the crucial importance of direct financial
support for the efforts of developing countries, especially
the least developed among them.
Since Cairo, Algeria’s population policy has been part
of a renewed and strengthened process centred on the
improvement of access to health services and with priority
being given to education, communication, family protection
and the development of knowledge about population issues.
The strengthening of the institutional plan for programme
activities led to the setting up of mechanisms aimed in
particular at establishing dialogue and concerted action for
the development, follow-up and review of reproductive
health and population activities. The population policy is
being implemented within a multisectoral context, which
naturally includes the private sector and civil society.
The development of demographic indicators confirms
the trend, which started in the 1980s, towards a change in
the rate of natural growth and fertility. For example, the
population growth rate, which in 1994 was estimated at 2.2
per cent, is now 1.6 per cent, and the future fertility index
is estimated at three children per woman, as compared with
five at the end of the 1980s.
This rapid progress has been made possible thanks to
the efforts made by the State in the fields of health and
development. Health care for mothers and children is a
major priority, and it will be implemented through the
extension of prevention programmes, the promotion of safe
motherhood and the strengthening of family planning based
on voluntary participation and informed choice.
Decentralization is also the cornerstone of the
organization of the health system, which is intended to take
greater account of regional variations and reduce inequality
in access to such care through the creation of health-care
regions and the implementation of a relevant regulatory
framework.
In my country young people still make up almost half
of the population, and that considerable human potential
takes up a large part of our investments. Within this
context, school attendance has been improved, particularly
for young girls: the attendance rate of children of 6 to 15
years of age is 83 per cent. Our youth policy aims in
particular at strengthening the professional and social

26

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
involvement of that segment of the population to take
account of their health needs and to offer them a
framework within which they can express themselves that
is adapted to the requirements of rapid technological
development.
The advancement of the condition of women, which
occupies an important place among the social projects
carried out by my country, has been achieved during the
past five years by improving women’s access the job
market, as well as to decision-making positions and to
elected assemblies. Many women have entered civil life,
and today there are about 100 national and local
associations working for the rights of women and the
improvement of their standard of living.
Furthermore, the circumstances of the 1990s, which
were characterized by the growth of pockets of poverty,
have led to the consolidation of support mechanisms for
the most disadvantaged groups, in particular through a
social network and the reaffirmation of the principle of
free health care, which is necessary for the achievement
of the goal of health security.
Finally, a coherent and comprehensive population
policy must take into account migratory movements, both
domestic and international. In this context, we subscribe
fully to measures to strengthen the integration of migrants
and improve their access to basic social services, with full
respect for the dignity and inherent rights of the human
being.
What lessons should we draw from the past five
years? The lessons are self-explanatory. Clearly, the
developing countries need modern family planning
services and guaranteed access to such services, and to
the products that accompany them, at low cost. In this
respect, the poor countries, especially those in Africa,
clearly need to be given priority. Indeed, population
growth rates in our continent of Africa are the highest,
despite a downward trend observed in some countries,
and the resultant problems are especially acute. The
resurgence of old diseases that we believed had
disappeared forever and the rapid spread of AIDS during
the past ten years are, for our continent and for the entire
international community, a source of growing concern.
At the same time, how can we not stress how urgent
it is to take responsibility at a global level for the needs
of the developing countries? Indeed, the international
community is called upon effectively and resolutely to
support the national efforts of these countries with regard

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
to such issues, but it must also accompany those efforts
with measures aimed at ensuring a better balance between
their immediate needs, their aspirations for development
and the improvement of the standards of living of their
populations, which will require long-term global efforts that
are more ambitious and sustained.
Let us have as a common objective, therefore, the
essential goal of the well-being of women and men who, in
the majority of our countries, live in situations of social
destitution and distress from which they cannot escape, and
let us work together to make the coming millennium one in
which we restore the human being to full dignity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. David Rubadiri, Chairman of the
delegation of Malawi.
Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): My delegation associates
itself fully with the positions of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and Africa. As such, my
delegation’s remarks will focus mainly on addressing
population and development issues in Malawi, which are
typical not only of most other sub-Saharan African
countries but also of many other developing countries.
Malawi has accorded particular importance to
population issues over the past few years, particularly since
1994, when the first democratically elected Government
assumed office. We find it significant that coincidentally,
while the Cairo Conference took place some months after
Malawi’s first democratic elections, this special session
comes about within a month of our second democratic
election.
Just as we did in Cairo, with the stamp of legitimacy
that the second election has brought, my delegation is proud
to confidently reaffirm Malawi’s political commitment to
pursuing all the noble objectives aimed at addressing our
population and development concerns. The international
community made great strides in Cairo, and we must not
turn back.
Malawi adopted a comprehensive National Population
Policy in March 1994. Although the policy preceded the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD), it is consistent with the ICPD Programme of
Action. Appropriate modifications were subsequently
incorporated into an action plan for the implementation of
the policy. The policy and the action plan for its
implementation have formed the linchpin of Malawi’s
population programme.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
The establishment of a formal capacity for
population programme formulation, planning and
implementation continues to provide an enabling
environment for adhering to the ICPD Programme of
Action. We have made all efforts to introduce changes
recommended at the Cairo Conference. Our policies and
plans have been aimed at promoting an integrated
reproductive health culture, emphasizing gender concerns
in development and enhancing advocacy efforts to ensure
widespread support for the implementation of the National
Population Policy.
Population issues now receive considerable emphasis
in all major policy programme documents and have come
to figure prominently in the Poverty Alleviation
Programme, which started in 1994.
The implementation of the National Population
Programme has, however, been constrained by a lack of
trained personnel, a weak institutional framework and
inadequate financial resources for the implementing
institutions. To date, there are no adequate institutional
structures for coordinating the implementation of
population activities at the district and local levels.
Malawi will soon hold local elections for District
Assemblies, and we hope that this process will provide
political leadership at local levels for effective
multisectoral participation in the implementation of the
National Population Policy. We remain optimistic that
these constraints will be overcome. We are also hopeful
that inadequacies in relevant data will be remedied by the
census we conducted last year.
Many achievements have been made in the area of
reproductive health. Special emphasis has been given to
the health of mother and child and to the reproductive
health needs of adolescents. With regard to family
planning, Malawi adopted in 1996 Family Planning Policy
and Contraceptive Guidelines aimed at liberalizing family
planning services to accommodate all individuals within
the reproductive age groups needing such services. The
new contraceptive guidelines removed limitations on the
use of specific methods on the basis of criteria such as
parity and age. The new Family Planning Policy also
promotes new approaches for accessing and expanding
family planning services, such as the community-based
delivery of contraceptives and social marketing. A Safe
Motherhood Plan of Action is being implemented. In
addition, following the adoption of the National Youth
Policy in 1996, a Youth Adolescent Programme for
Reproductive Health has been put in place. During the

27

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
next five years Malawi intends to accord increasing
emphasis to adolescent reproductive health.
Advocacy activities and awareness campaigns already
seem to have the desired impact. The contraceptive
prevalence rate is currently estimated at almost 20 per cent.
At the beginning of the decade, it was less than 7 per cent.
It is an unfortunate reality that Malawi is one of the
countries affected seriously by the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
The fight against HIV/AIDS has been an uphill task, as,
indeed, it will continue to be. One can love passionately but
also carefully. The Government, however, remains
committed to bringing the situation under control, and
therefore youth programmes will be intensified.
At the same time, we are the first to acknowledge
certain limitations. The concept of reproductive health is
not well understood by most health workers. The
Government will have a reproductive health policy ready
before the end of the year. Financial and human resource
limitations have culminated in limited accessibility to and
availability of family planning services in the country.
Gender equality and equity have been recognized as
the sine qua non for healthy reproductive decision-making.
The Government is committed to the empowerment of
women and the elimination of gender discrimination. In this
regard, a number of actions have been undertaken to
address gender issues. Legal reforms have been introduced
to amend laws which allowed gender discriminatory
practices. These include reforms to the Affiliation Act, the
Marriage Act and the Wills and Inheritance Act. The
Constitution also offers sufficient and superior guarantees.
Under the Constitution, women have the right to full
and equal protection of the law and the right not to be
discriminated against on the basis of gender or marital
status. In an effort to institutionalize gender and
development, Malawi has put in place the National Gender
Machinery for the overall coordination of gender policy
formulation and implementation and the mainstreaming of
gender equality in all sectors and programmes. Malawi has
drafted a National Gender Policy that sets forth guidelines
for recognizing and addressing gender concerns and for
mainstreaming gender equality in all development
programmes.
With regard to education, a number of interventions
are being implemented to protect the girl child. With the
introduction of free primary education in 1994, girls’
enrolment has risen by 50 per cent. In this connection, a
policy change has been effected allowing girls who drop

28

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
out of school due to pregnancy to be readmitted into
school. A Girls’ Attainment in Basic Literacy and
Education (GABLE) social mobilization campaign on the
importance of girls’ education has been conducted
nationwide since 1998. Population education is being
incorporated in the formal school curriculum. In addition,
gender balancing is being done so that books and
materials portray balanced images of women and men,
girls and boys in all aspects of life. To address some of
the economic disparities between men and women, microfinance institutions have been established to promote
economic empowerment by providing credit facilities to
women.
Despite these achievements, the implementation of
gender and development programmes has been
constrained by various institutional and structural
problems, including a weak social-resource base and
limited personnel trained in gender issues.
Malawi recognizes the potential contribution of nongovernmental organizations and the private sector in the
formulation and implementation of population policies
and programmes. The non-governmental organizations
have participated in the formulation of the national
population policy. They are also involved in the
implementation of the policy and of programmes in areas
such as the provision of family planning and counselling,
youth and adolescent reproductive health services and
motivation training. The Government intends to come up
with a clear national strategy for harnessing the full
potential of the non-governmental organizations and the
private sector in this area.
As we conduct this ICPD review and appraisal,
Malawi has a clear idea of what it has to do in the next
five years. More importantly, there is a political will to
address all manifestations of our population and
development concerns. We sincerely appeal to all our
cooperating partners to continue assisting us in the
implementation of our programmes. To be meaningfully
implemented, most of the programmes require substantial
financial outlays. We are hopeful that today — after
dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s, after long hours of
arduous work — we will together send a strong political
and moral message that we are ready to address resolutely
all the population and development issues of our time,
that we have, five years after Cairo, made the ICPD
Programme of Action stronger.

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand, Mr. Voravee
Wirasamban.
Mr. Wirasamban (Thailand): I would like to take this
opportunity to express my sincere appreciation and
congratulations to the United Nations for arranging this
special session on Cairo+5, which affords us an opportunity
to renew our commitment to the issues of population and
development. For those of us from developing and
developed countries, and from non-governmental
organizations as well as donor agencies throughout the
world, this session provides a timely opportunity to follow
up and reflect on the excellent start made five years ago in
Cairo, and to do this with a forward-looking attitude. I do
believe that we have thus far made positive steps towards
the goal of global reproductive health.
Currently Thailand’s population constitutes
approximately 1 per cent of the world population. It is
estimated that our population will continue to increase
slightly at a rate of 1 per cent annually. The pattern of
changes in our population structure will be similar to that
of many other countries that have been successful in their
family planning. There is a trend towards an increase in the
proportion of the population that is elderly along with a
decrease in the younger population. This so-called
demographic bonus is not expected to last long, thanks to
various precautionary measures now in place.
Thailand’s current Constitution — passed by the
parliament last year after an amendment process that took
years — was drafted with the prime objective of promoting
and protecting people much more than ever before. For the
first time, the Constitution provides for greater educational
opportunities for the Thai people, greater access to
information and services and gender equality and equity.
Regardless of ethnic background, we in Thailand will enjoy
the fruit of this Constitution.
The current national five-year plan, for 1997 to 2001,
also emphasizes environmental, population and
developmental issues, with human beings at the centre of
all development activities. The national development plan
is consistent with the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD). It will also tremendously benefit the agencies
concerned with reaching the ICPD goal.
I take pride in saying that Thailand attaches high
priority to reproductive health, which has taken a prominent
place on our agenda. Many reproductive health programme

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
initiatives have been launched at the grass-roots level.
They cover as many components and as wide a scope as
possible. In this connection we would like to register our
deep appreciation for the support and contributions that
the United Nations Population Fund has provided to the
launching of such initiatives. Integral to these
programmes is the issue of reproductive rights. The whole
process has evolved gradually, from the advocacy work
of policy makers to the formulation of the national
reproductive health policy and to sensitizing government
health personnel and communities to the importance of
human beings as part and parcel of development
programmes. Thailand has tried applying a good practice
model to consolidate reproductive health services in
primary and secondary health care, taking into account
gender sensitivity. Sex education and adolescent health
are also among the top priority areas. They are seen as
key factors in solving the reproductive health problems of
the present and of future generations.
Despite these efforts, we still face challenges. One
of our major problems is the cross-border illegal
migratory inflow. Many diseases that were eradicated or
under control have reared their ugly heads once again
along the border. This heavily taxes our meagre resources
in terms of health facilities and expenses for the border
provinces. Nevertheless, for humanitarian reasons the Thai
Government cannot turn a blind eye on the plight of these
people. Thailand has provided appropriate, necessary
health services and relevant support to these illegal
migrant labourers, although we in Thailand have had to
tighten our belts because of the economic hardship and
the money for other national priorities has had to be
wisely spent. We are deeply concerned that the
reproductive health problem among illegal migrant
workers may soon reach an uncontainable level and
become an additional public health hazard. I would like
to urge the international community to lend a helping
hand in curbing this mounting problem.
Thailand attaches importance to the migration issue,
and in particular to the problem of undocumented
migrants. Thus we, together with the International
Organization for Migration, held an international
symposium on migration early this year in Bangkok. The
symposium received support and was attended by many
interested countries from various regions, as well as from
the United Nations bodies concerned. The meeting proved
to be very successful. The Bangkok declaration on
irregular migration was adopted, paving the way and
laying ground rules for further consultations aimed at a

29

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
comprehensive solution to the irregular migratory problem.
I would also like to take this opportunity to join my
fellow developing countries in renewing our efforts for
South-South cooperation through sharing practical
experience, skills and technical expertise in the field of
population development and reproductive health. Our
creation of the alliance of “Partners in Population and
Development: a South-South Initiative” some four years
ago offers us a means of leaping ahead by learning from
each other’s strengths and weaknesses and by working in
partnership to effectively and successfully reduce maternal
and infant mortality, improve adolescent reproductive health
and prevent and control devastating diseases, notably
HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases — as well as
dealing with many other issues of reproductive rights,
particularly for women and youth. We also wish to urge the
international community and donors to continue to provide
substantial support to South-South technical cooperation
aimed at the attainment of the ICPD Programme of Action
for these countries.
In closing, I am privileged to say that the various
actions in line with the ICPD Programme of Action in
Thailand have gradually been transformed from being
highly programme-based and agency-oriented into a more
participatory and decentralized approach. Technical
advancement, in tandem with management improvement,
has also significantly contributed to the progress of
reproductive health care, such as in quality of care and
HIV/AIDS prevention.
However, resource mobilization for population and
development still calls for greater attention. In the next five
years, more stakeholders or partners will have to march
with the people on the high road towards a healthy
reproductive life, which can be measured by the outcome
and impact indicators derived from standardized monitoring
and evaluation system. By the year 2014, we will attain the
goal of all Thais, both men and women, enjoying a good
and more equitable reproductive life. We also hope that this
ICPD+5 will add impetus to our forward move in
implementing the Programme of Action for our common
good.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Hasan Abu Libdeh, observer of Palestine.
Mr. Abu Libdeh (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure, on behalf of my delegation, to
address the General Assembly at this important twenty-first
special session devoted to the overall review and appraisal
of the implementation of the Programme of Action of the
30

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD) and to renew our commitment to exerting greater
efforts towards achieving the goals and objectives of the
ICPD. These objectives include economic development,
poverty eradication, sustainable population growth,
universal access to comprehensive reproductive health
services, reduction in infant and maternal mortality and
universal access to primary education, with special
attention to closing the gender gap. We strongly hope that
this session will adopt the necessary action-oriented
recommendations with additional resources in order to
speed the implementation of the ICPD Programme of
Action.
Five years after the Conference, the international
community has registered progress through the
achievement of various goals. Annual population growth
has declined, infant and child mortality has fallen and
people are living longer. However, the world still faces
many problems and challenges. Severe economic crises,
which eliminate jobs and increase poverty, as well as war,
ethnic cleansing, conflicts, foreign occupation and natural
disasters are obstacles that continue to slow the rate of
progress.
In this regard, we would like to draw the
Assembly’s attention to the grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. Israel,
the occupying Power, continues its illegal policies and
practice of colonial settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, in violation of
international law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
and United Nations resolutions. The illegal construction
of these settlements, including most recently those at
Jabal Abu Ghneim and Ras al-Amud, has created a
serious situation requiring the attention and concern of the
international community. The international community
must address this situation with the aim of bringing an
end to all illegal Israeli settlement activity, including all
of consequent illegal and harmful measures, such as the
transfer of Israeli citizens to the occupied territory, the
confiscation of land and the exploitation of natural
resources, including water. All of this clearly reflects a
policy of illegal expansion and annexation on the part of
the occupying Power.
The situation of the 3.5 million Palestine refugees
has deteriorated in recent years. More than 15 per cent of
the total Palestinian population in the occupied Palestinian
territory resides in refugee camps. The Palestine refugees
in the occupied territory and throughout the region
continue to face severe socio-economic hardships,
including very high unemployment, a decline in

General Assembly
Twenty-first Special Session
household income, an overburdened infrastructure and
deplorable living conditions.
At this important forum, we wish to reaffirm that, in
accordance with international law, the Palestinian refugees,
like any other refugees, have natural and inalienable rights
to return to their homes and properties or to compensation
for those who choose not to return. Therefore, the
international community should continue to assist them until
a definitive solution to their problem is reached through the
implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Another problem the Palestinian people continue to
face is displacement. The rights of Palestine refugees,
however, should not be confused with the right of displaced
persons to return to the territory occupied by Israel since
1967. The international community should strongly reaffirm
the appeal made in the Programme of Action that
population distribution policies be consistent with such
international instruments as the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, including article 49. Moreover, it should
reaffirm the call made in the Programme of Action for
countries to address the causes of migration and
displacement, including armed conflict and illegal colonial
settlements, and establish the necessary mechanisms to
protect and assist displaced persons, including compensation
for damages and the right to return to their homes and
property.

7th plenary meeting
2 July 1999
detection of breast and cervical cancer; and increase
awareness of the population on reproductive health issues
through mass media and other communication channels.
Gender concerns have also been integral to the
development of the Palestinian health plan. A separate
Gender Planning Unit was established in the Ministry of
Planning and International Cooperation. Moreover, the
data of the 1997 Palestinian census was analysed by
gender to provide the basis for accurate assessment of
gender issues and to incorporate gender concerns into
population and development plans.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
sincere gratitude and appreciation to the international
community for its support and assistance to the
Palestinian people and the Palestinian National Authority.
In particular, I would like to convey our appreciation to
the United Nations Population Fund for its role in
supporting the Palestinian National Authority and in
enabling it to implement the ICPD Programme of Action.
We are confident that the establishment of cooperative
relationships and partnerships, such as those between the
Palestinian Authority and relevant United Nations bodies
and non-governmental organizations, will bring concrete
results in the improvement of the situation of the
Palestinian people in the important fields of population
and development.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

Palestine has undertaken a variety of measures to
enhance activities in the field of population and
development. The Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics
was established specifically to monitor demographic
changes within the Palestinian population, to conduct
population and housing censuses and to identify indicators
for monitoring progress in implementation of the ICPD
Programme of Action.
With regard to international concerns regarding health
care, the Palestinian National Authority has given special
attention to the issue of health, in particular reproductive
health. Although our official population policy has not yet
been formulated, the Palestinian health plan is being
developed in accordance with the principles and objectives
of the ICPD Programme of Action. Promoting reproductive
health, including women’s health, is the central theme of
the Palestinian health plan, which seeks to reduce maternal
mortality and high-risk pregnancy by 50 per cent; integrate
reproductive health/family planning services and counselling
at the primary and secondary health-care level; increase
contraceptive prevalence by 25 per cent; increase the
proportion of women receiving post-natal care; introduce
screening in nearly 50 per cent of health facilities for early
31
