20

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

(d) To authorize the High Commissioner to make
appeals for funds to enable him to solve the refugee
problems referred to in sub-paragraph ( c) above;
(e) To approve projects for assistance to refugees
coming within the scope of sub-paragraph (c) above;
(f) To give directives to the High Commissioner
for the use of the emergency fund to be established
under the terms of paragraph 7 below;
6. Authorizes the High Commissioner, under conditions approved by the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme, to make appeals for the
funds needed to provide supplemental temporary care
and maintenance to, and participate in the financing
of permanent solutions for, refugees coming within
his mandate and otherwise not provided for ;
7. Further authorizes the High Commissioner to establish an emergency fund not to exceed $500,000, to
be utilized under general directives of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme,
and to maintain this fund from the repayments of the
principal and interest of loans made by the United
Nations Refugee Fund and from voluntary contributions made for this purpose;
8. Decides that appropriate financial rules for the
use of all funds received by the High Commissioner
under the terms of the present resolution shall be
established, in consultation with the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, and in
accordance with the Statute of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations;
9. Requests the UNREF Executive Committee to
exercise in 1958 such functions incumbent upon the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme in conformity with paragraph 5 above as it
deems necessary, with a view to assuring the continuity of international assistance to refugees falling
within the scope of paragraph 5 ( c) above;
10. Requests the High Commissioner to include in
his annual report a statement on the measures which
he has taken under the terms of the present resolution.
723rd plenary nieeting,
26 November 1957.

2. Authorizes the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to use his good offices to encourage
arrangements for contributions.

723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1188 (XII). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations is to develop friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of
equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Recalling further its resolution 545 (VI) of 5 February 1952 in which it decided to include in the International Covenants on Human Rights an article which
should provide : "All peoples shall have the right of
self-determination",
Reaffirming the principles embodied in the abovementioned resolution that all States, including those
having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories, should promote the realization of that right, in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations,
Considering that disregard for the right to self-determination not only undermines the basis of friendly
relations among nations as defined in the Charter of
the United Nations but also creates conditions which
may prevent further realization of the right itself,
Believing that such a situation is contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms that it is of international importance
that, in accordance with the purposes and principlts of
the Charter of the United Nations:
(a) Member States shall, in their relations with one
another, give due respect to the right of self-determination;
( b) Member States having responsibility for the
administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories shall
promote the realization and facilitate the exercise of
this right by the peoples of such Territories;

2. Decides to consider further at its thirteenth ses.. sion the item "Recommendations concerning internaThe General Assembly,
tional respect for the right of peoples and nations to
Having considered the problem of the Chinese refuself-determination", including the proposals contained
gees in Hong Kong, in accordance with the resolution
in Economic and Social Council resolution 586 D (XX)
adopted by the Executive Committee of the United
of 29 July 1955.
727th plenary meetinq,
Nations Refugee Fund at its fourth session, 6
11 December 1957.
Acknowledging the heavy burden placed upon the
Government of Hong Kong in dealing with this prob1189 (XII). Freedom of information
lem, and the efforts made to alleviate it,
A
Recognizing however that the problem is such as to
be of concern to the international community,
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the need for emergency and
Considering the need to bring the text of the draft
long-term assistance,
Convention on Freedom of Information 1 to the attention of the increased membership of the United Nations,
1. Appeals to States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies and to nonRequests the Secretary-General:
governmental organizations to give all possible assist(a) To circulate to Member States the text of the
ance with a view to alleviating the distress of the
preamble and nineteen articles of the draft Convention
Chinese refugees in Hong Kong;
1167 (XII). Chinese refugees in Hong Kong

• Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supp!ement No. 11 (A/3585/Rev.1),
annex I, para. 10,'.

• Ibid., Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, document
A/AC.42/7 and Corr.I, annex.

Resolntiona adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21

on Freedom of Information prepared in 1951 by the
General Assembly's Ad Hoe Committee on the Draft
Convention on Freedom of Information, together with
a brief history of the development of this project, and
to invite them to submit their views and suggestions on
the text and on the action which the General Assembly
should take thereon ;
(b) To invite Member States to provide a statement
of the legal provisions relating to freedom of information in their countries ;
( c) To report on this consultation to the General
Assembly at its thirteenth session to enable the Assembly to give such priority as it may determine to the
appropriate consideration of the draft Convention on
Freedom of Information.
727th plenary meeting,
11 December 1957.

such constant review may be ensured, inter alia, by
including problems of fr~edom of info~ation in the
agenda of its future sessions and exammmg means of
providing for the continuing study of such problems;
( b) Further to invite the Commission, when exa~ining the report of its commit~ee appointed to ~e".1ew
the work of the United Nations and the spec1ahzed
agencies on freedom of information, to. give SJ?ecial
consideration to the problem of developmg media of
information in under-developed countries ;
( c) To transmit to the General Assemb_ly . at its
thirteenth session the report of the Comm1ss1on on
these matters, together with the Council's recommendation thereon.
727th plenary meeting,
11 December 1957.

B

C

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the media of information have a
more important role than ever before in strengthening
friendly relations between peoples and that a free flow
of accurate and undistorted news and information is
a powerful factor in maintaining international peace
and understanding,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirteenth session, appointed a committee of five of
its members for the purpose of reviewing the work
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies on
freedom of information and reporting, with recommendations, to the Commission at its fourteenth session,
Believing that there is need to ensure that problems
of freedom of information shall remain under constant
review by the appropriate organs of the United Nations,
Requests the Economic and Social Council :
(a) To invite the Commission on Human Rights to
consider, at its fourteenth session, procedures by which

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the desirability of studying all possible
means of increasing the free flow of accurate and undistorted news and information within countries and
across national frontiers,
Noting the developing programme of advisory services in the field of human rights authorized by the
General Assembly in its resolution 926 (X) of 14 December 1955,
Considering that the holding of seminars on freedom of information could contribute to the solution of
problems in this field,
Urges Member States to consider the possibility of
organizing, in co-operation with the Secretary-General,
seminars on freedom of information under the programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights.
727th plenary meeting,
11 December 1957.

*

*

*

Other deciaions taken by the General AB6embly
on the recommendation of the Third Committee
Draft International Covenants on Human Rights (item 33)

The General Assembly, at its 727th plenary meeting on 11 December 1957,
decided to continue the consideration of agenda item 33 at its thirteenth session.
