Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the arrangements for the elections can be completed
under the supervision of the United K ations;
8. Decides to set up a United Nations Commission
for Ruanda-Urundi, composed of three members, who
will be assisted by observers and staff to be appointed
by the Secretary-General in consultation with the
Commission ;
9. Requests the Commission to proceed immediately
to Ruanda-Urumli to perfon°1 the following tasks on
behalf of the United Nations:
(a) To supervise the elections to be held in RuandaUrundi in 1961 on the basis of direct, universal adult
suffrage, and the preparatory measures preceding them,
such as the compilation of the electoral rolls, the conduct
of the election campaign and the organization of a system
of balloting which will ensure complete secrecy;
(b) To attend, as United Nations observers, the
political conference envisaged in paragraph 4 above and
the round-table conference to be convened after the
elections to determine the future evolution of the
Territory towards independence;
( c) To follow the progress of events in the Territory
before and after the elections, to lend its advice and
assistance, as appropriate, with a view to advancing
peace and harmony in Ruanda- Uruncli, ancl to report
to the Trusteeship Council or the General Assembly,
as necessary ;
10. Requests the Commission to submit an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its resumed fifteenth session:
11. Endorses the observation of the Trusteeship
Council that in view of the essential community of
interests and the facts of history and geography; the
best future for Ruanda-Unmdi lies in the evolution of
a single, united and composite State, with such arrangements for the internal autonomy of Ruanda and Unmdi
as may be agreed upon by their representatives.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

*

*

*

At its 960th plenar'J' meeting on 20 December 1960, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,!! appointed the members of the United Nations
Commission for Ruanda-Urundi.
The Commi.ssion is composed as follows: Mr. Max Dorsinville (Haiti), Chairman, Mr. Majid Rahnema (Iran) and
Mr. Ernest Gassou (Togo).

35

1580 (XV). Question of the Mwami
The General Assembly,
Considering that a division of op1111on has ansen m
Ruanda-Urundi with regard to the institution of monarchy and with regard to the person of the µresent
Mwami of Ruanda,
Considering further that such a situation poses a
constitutional question of far-reaching importance which
should be settled in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the people of the Territory,
Noting that, on several occasions, the M wami has
stated his desire to be a democratic and constitutional
sovereign,
Noting further that the M wami of Ruanda, in a
memorandum to the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in East Africa, 1960, has accepted
the idea of a referendum to decide this <ruestion,
Haviny perused the statement of the Mwami to the
Fourth Committee, 34
l. N ates with regret that the Administering Authority has arbitrarily suspended the powers of the
l\-1 wami of Ruanda and has not allowed him t() return
to Ruanda to resume his duties as Mwami;
2. Requests the Administering Authority to revoke
the measures adopted by it to suspend the powers of
the M wami, and to facilitate his return to Ruanda to
enable him to function as M wami pending the ascertainment of the wishes of the people on this question ;
3. Decides that a referendum should be held under
the supervision of the United Kations Commission for
Ruancla-Urundi established under General Assembly
resolution 1579 (XV) of 20 December 1960, in order
to ascertain the wishes of the people concerning the
institution of the M wami, and if necessary, the present
M wami of Ruanda;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi, after studying the situation on the spot,
to submit to the General Assembly, at its resumed
fifteenth session, recommendations concerning the
timing of the referendum and the questions to be put
therein.

960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.
aa Ibid., document A/4672, para. 25.
84 Ibid., document A/C.4/467.
