VI.

ResolutioW! adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reiterating its belief that further efforts are needed
to help ensure adequate protection for all against torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
1. Calls upon Governments, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned
with human rights, to give maximum publicity to the
Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to give
due priority to the examination of the draft code of
conduct for law enforcement officials proposed by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, 37 in order
that the Council at its sixty-second session and the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session may take
further steps with a view to the adoption of this instrument;
3. Also invites the Economic and Social Council
to consider with due priority the recommendation of
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control at its
fourth session, contained in new draft rule 95 of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,88 seeking to assure the applicability of the Standard Minimum Rules to all persons arrested or imprisoned with or without charge and conviction, as well
as the draft procedures for the effective implementation
of the Rules;89
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights,
through the Economic and Social Council, to submit
a comprehensive report on the elaboration of a body
of principles for the protection of all persons under any
form of detention or imprisonment to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
5. Invites the World Health Organization to prepare a draft code on medical ethics relevant to the protection of persons subjected to any form of detention
or imprisonment against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and to
bring it to the attention of the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/86.

Status of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 40
37 See E/CN.5/536,
38 /bid., para. 95.

39 Ibid.,

annex VI.

40 A/31 /202.

annex V.

103

Recalling its resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December 1966 and 3270 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
and in particular its belief that the entry into force of
the International Covenants on Human Rights will
undoubtedly enhance the ability of the United Nations
to promote and encourage respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, and thus contribute
greatly to the co-operation of States in the attainment
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in the implementation of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Convinced that the International Covenants on Human Rights constitute the first all-embracing and legally
binding international treaty in the field of human rights,
Expressing its appreciation to those States which have
become parties to the above instruments,
1. Welcomes with deep satisfaction the entry into
force of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
as a major step in the international efforts to promote
universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
2. Recognizes that such resources as may be necessary should be allocated to enable the Secretary-General
to provide the appropriate staff and facilities for the
effective performance of the functions of the Human
Rights Committee under the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
thereto;
3. Recognizes that appropriate arrangements should
be made to enable the Human Rights Committee to hold
sessions at such intervals and of such duration as may
be necessary for it to carry out in an efficient manner
the functions entrusted to it under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto;
4. Endorses the appeal to States made by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1988 (LX)
of 11 May 197 6 that they include in their delegations to
the sessions of the Council at which reports of States
parties to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights are examined experts competent in the subject-matter of the relevant reports;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
6. Invites once again all States to become parties
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and'
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto.

97th plenary meeting
/3 December 1976
