49

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories
to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence,
Aware of the increasingly important role being played in
the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a
number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization, and noting with satisfaction
the intensified efforts of the Special Committee in enlisting
the support of those organizations in that regard,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization;

2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest possible dissemination of information on the evils and dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts of the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination, freedom and
independence and on the assistance being provided by the
international community towards the elimination of the
remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to the
suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take
concrete measures through all the media at his disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization, and, inter alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic material,
studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Decolonization series, and
to select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering
Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to
above;

(~) To intensify the activities of all United Nations
information centres, particularly those located in Western
Europe and the Americas;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with the
Organization of African Unity by holding periodic consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization;
(e) To enlist, with the close co-operation of United
Nations information centres, the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in
decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(/) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities
and services in this regard;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Requests all States, in particular the administering
Powers, the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to
undertake or intensify, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and within their respective spheres of compe117See also sect. X.8.1, decision 39/420.
118 Oflicia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 2 3 (A/39/23), chap. II.

tence, the large-scale dissemination of the information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
100th plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/93.

Programme of Activities in Observance of the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples 117

The General Assembly,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 118
Bearing in mind that the year 1985 will mark the fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations, as well as the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, 119
Emphasizing the importance of the occasion to evaluate
the progress achieved during the period in the process of
decolonization, in particular in the implementation of the
Declaration during the past twenty-five years, as well as
the role played by the United Nations and its system of
organizations in that regard, and to formulate specific
measures for the elimination of the remaining vestiges of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations in various
areas of the world,

1. Approves the relevant chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
endorses the Programme of Activities in Observance of
the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples set out in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Commends the Programme, for appropriate action,
to all States, the United Nations bodies concerned, the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and the non-governmental organizations
active in the field of decolonization;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in connection with
the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, to co-operate and work closely with the Preparatory Committee for the Fortieth Anniversary of the United
Nations; 120
4. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution and, in particular, to make adequate resources available for undertaking
the measures envisaged in the Programme;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
I 4 December I 984
I I 9 Resolution I 5 14 (XV).

120 See resolution 39/ I 6 I B.

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

50
ANNEX

Pruan- of ActiYltles In Olllena11ce or tlle Twenty-ftfth Annlven■ry or
Ille Dedu■tlon on the Gr■ntiRa or Independence· to Colonial Co■ntrles
... Peoples

I. The commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
would be an appropriate occasion to evaluate the progress achieved during
the past twenty-five years in the implementation of the Declaration, as well
as the role played by the United Nations and its system oforganizations in
that regard, and to formulate specific measures for the elimination of the
remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations in
various areas of the world. To that end, the following special programme of
activities is envisaged.
A. ACTIVITIES AT THE INTERNATIONAL LEVEL
Commemorative meeting of the Genera/ Assembly

2. The General Assembly shall hold a special commemorative meeting
in observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, it being
understood that the specific modalities and procedures for the commemoration would be the subject of subsequent consultations between the President of the Assembly and the Chairman of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Grantina of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
3. The meeting shall be held on Friday, 13 December 1985, or alternatively, in October 198S in conjunction with ceremonies planned for the celebration of the fonieth anniversary of the United Nations and the proclamation of 1986 as International Year of Peace, in the lipt of the presence
at United Nations Headquaners ofa number of heads of State or Government.
Extraordinary session of the Special Commil/ee
4. The Special Committee shall organize an extraordinary session away
from Headquaners in 1985, as appropriate.
Special d«/arlllion/fma/ document to be adopted by the Genera/ Assembly

5. The Special Committee shall prepare in 1985 the draft text of a special declaration/linal document with a view to facilitating the full and
speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, for submission to the General
Assembly al its fortieth session.
Seminars to be held by the Special Commillee
6. The Special Committee shall hold in 198S two regional seminars on
the subject or decolonization.
7. The Special Committee shall organize, in close consultation with the
Department or Public Information of the Secretariat, a seminar on dissemination of information on decolonization and on the struale of the peoples
of southern Africa and their national liberation movements, to be held at
United Nations Headquarters in close co-operation with the Special Committee against Apartheid, the United Nations Council for Namibia, the
Organization of African Unity and the national liberation movements,
with the participation of press agencies, newspapers and other mass communication media.
Activities by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nalions system. other international organizations and the non-governme111a/ organizations concerned

8. The organizations concerned are requested to undenake various
activities in commemoration of the anniversary durina 1985. These activities may include the preparation or special publications and studies and the
holding of exhibits, seminars and symposia. An account or the activities
undenaken should be pven the widest possible publicity.
9. The orpnizations concerned are requested to draw up concrete
programmes of assistance to the peoples of colonial Territories and the
national liberation movements, as well as to the ref~ from Territories
under colonial domination. In particular, they are requested to launch new
projecu for anisting the Namibian people and seek additional funds in
support of such projects.
Dissemination of informalion on decolonization
I0. The Secretary-General is requested to take concrete measures
thfOUlh all the media at his disposal lo give widespread and intensified
publicity to the situation in the Territories concerned and to the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization. In particular, the Department of Public: Information, the Department of Political Affairs, Trusteeship and Decolonization and the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia are requested, in consultation with the Special
Committee:

(a) To prepare special publications devoted to the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, including special issues of Decolonization, Objective: Justice, the Namibia Bulletin and the United Nations and Decolonization;
(b) To produce a special film on the theme of decolonization and to
hold public screenings of the film, as well as other films concerning the process of decolonization;
(c) To prepare and distribute to national radio and television stations
audio-visual materials on decolonization;
(d) To hold exhibitions of photographs and publications related to
decolonization, both at United Nations Headquarters and at various
United Nations information centres;
(e) To organize special briefings of non-governmental organizations on
the subject of decolonization.
Other actMties
11. The motto "Decolonization, Freedom, Independence" shall mark
the anniversary.
12. The Secretary-General is requested:
(a) To arrange for a special postal cancellation and the issuance of a
special cachet, throup the United Nations Postal Administration;
(b) To issue a commemorative medal marking the anniversary, to be
conferred upon eminent personalities by the Special Committee;
(c) To publicize the foregoing through the appropriate media.

B. ACTIVITIES AT THE REGIONAL LEVEL
13. Intergovernmental regional organizations are requested, in co-operation with the United Nations, to intensify their activities designed to help
eliminate the last vestiges of colonialism and, to that end, to increue their
collaboration with one another. They may also hold commemorative
meetings and seminars, prepare special studies on various aspects of colonial questions and adopt measures to increase moral and material assistance to the peoples concerned.
C. ACTIVITIES AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
Special messages may be issued on the occasion of the anniversary
by heads of State or Government and other hip-ranking officials, as well
as by representatives of political movements, religious organizations, trade
unions and other national organizations.
15. Governments are requested to establish, in co-operation with
national United Nations associations, national committees for the commemoration of the anniversary to plan and co-ordinate various activities
to be undenaken in 198S within the context of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Declaration and the fonieth anniversary of the United Nations, such
as publicizing the work of the United Nations on decolonization throuah,
inter a/ia, publications, educational programmes in schools and universities, special studies, seminars and radio-television prop-ammes, includina
the widest possible dissemination in their national languqes of the Declaration and the various resolutions and decisions of the United Nations on
decolonization; the conferring of national awards or special scholanhips
for outstandin1 studies or essays on colonial questions; and the issuance of
a commemorative postage stamp and other activities. In particular, Governments are requested to prepare special educational materials on the subject of decolonization for dissemination throup schools, universities and
other educational institutions, including information on past achievements
and the roles played by the national liberation movements, the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations.
16. In undenaking the above activities, panicular attention shall be
devoted to the various manifestations of colonialism, including racial discrimination and apartheid, activities of foreign economic and other interests impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and military activities
and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their administration impeding the implementation of the Declaration.
14.

39/146. The situation in the Middle East

A
The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation in the
Middle East",
Reaffirming its resolutions 36/226 A and B of 17
December 1981, ES-9/1 of S February 1982, 37/123 F of
