V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1980s, together with measures that may be required
for the realization of those objectives;
5. Invites the regional commissions and other
bodies concerned within the United Nations system
to make a contribution on the basis of their experience
in order to assist the Secretary-General in his study
of the role of the public sector in promoting the economic and social development of developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the implementation of General Assembly resolution
32/179, taking especially into account the role of the
public sector in promoting the secure economic and
social development of developing countries and bearing
also in mind the evaluation of activities in public
administration and finance;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to take the present
resolution into account in preparing a comprehensive
and detailed report in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/179.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/145.

Sixth replenishment of the lnternational
Development Association and recapitalization of the World Bank

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 197 4 containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing the Charter of Econornic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 31/181 of 21 December 1976 on the recapitalization of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and replenishment of the International Development Association,
Taking into account the greatly enlarged external
financing requirements of the developing countries,
particularly for long-term capital,
Realizing that considerable lead time is required for
contributing Governments to take the necessary legislative action with respect to the replenishment of the
International Development Association and bearing in
mind that the commitment authority for the fifth replenishment of the International Development Association expires in June 1980,
l. Calls upan all contributing countries to take the
steps necessary for the urgent commencement and conclusion of negotiations for the sixth replenishment of
the International Development Association;
2. Calls upan all contributing countries to initiate
the necessary action for the sixth replenishment of the
International Development Association so as to ensure
an adequate increase in real terms in the resources of
the institution, taking into account to the fullest extent
possible the rapidly growing requirements of the developing countries for such resources and the effects of
world inflation;

111

3. Calls upan the members of the World Bank to
take early action to support an increase in the Bank's
capital of sufficient magnitude to ensure that its lending
to the developing countries increases adequately in real
terms.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/146.

Assistance for the reconstruction and
development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the tragic loss of life and
the immense damage to the economic structure and to
property, and about the disruption of society in
Lebanon resulting from the hostilities during the past
four years,
Aware of the magnitude of the unmet needs for the
relief of the Lebanese people and the reconstruction
and development of Lebanon,
Bearing in mind the concern expressed by Member
States about the grave situation in Lebanon and their
interest in its return to normal conditions of life and
its rcconstruction and development,
Affirming the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of Lebanon in its efforts for
relief, reconstruction and development,
Noting the appeals of the Secretary-General for
relief and other forms of assistance to Lebanon and
the creation of a special fund for this purpose,
Noting also resolution 65 (V) of 6 October 1978 118
of the Economic Commission for Western Asia in
which the Commission considered that the needs of
Lebanon exceeded the means within the capacity of
the Commission,
1. Endorses thc appeal of the Secretary-General
for international assistancc to Lebanon;
2. Urges all Governments to contribute to the reconstruction of Lebanon, either through existing bilateral and multilateral channels or, in addition,
through a special fund to be established by the Secretary-General for this purpose;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to establish at
Beirut a joint co-ordinating committee of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system to co-ordinate their assistance
and advice to the Government of Lebanon in all
matters relating to reconstruction and development;
4. Decides that the Committee on Assistance for
the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon,
headed by a co-ordinator appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, shall also assist the Government of Lebanon
in the assessment, formulation and phasing of aid and
ensure its implementation within the framework of the
needs of Lebanon;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
possible assistance to the Committee in discharging its
duties and to establish, in the manner he deems appropriate, a mode of consultation with representatives of
the countries providing assistance;
118 See Officia[ Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1979, Supp/ement ,Yo. 14 (E/1979/49), chap. III.

112

General Assembly-Thirty-third Se■11ion

6. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular
session of 1979 and to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/147.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1978 (LIX) of 31 July 1975, 2026 (LXI) of
4 August 1976 and 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Taking into consideration the reports of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people, 119
Taking note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
twenty-fifth session 12º and of the response of the Administrator of the Programme, 121
1. Endorses the resolutions of the Economic and
Social Council concerning assistance to the Palestinian
people;
2. Calls upan the United Nations Development
Programme, in consultation with the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, to intensify its efforts, in co-ordination with
the Economic Commission for Western Asia, to implement the relevant resolutions of the Economic and
Social Council in arder to improve the social and
economic conditions of the Palestinian people by identifying their social and economic needs and by establishing concrete projects to that end, without prejudice
to the sovereignty of the respective Arab host countries, and to provide adequate funds for that purpose.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/148.

United Nations Conferenee on New and
Renewable Sourees of Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
2119 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Having considered the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council, contained in its resolution
1978/61 of 3 August 1978, that the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session should give favourable consideration to and takc definitive action on convening
119 E/6005
120 Official

and Add.1, E/1978/55 and Add.1-3.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.1 ).
121 /bid., para. 55.

at the earliest possible time a United Nations conference on new and renewable sources of energy and
should, in that context, define the objectives, scope,
nature and timing of such a conference, as well as
the required preparatory arrangements, including intergovernmental machinery,
Cognizant of the importance of developing new and
renewable sources of energy in arder to meet requirements for continued economic and social development,
particularly in the developing countries,
A ware of the importance of increasing the industrial
capacity of thc developing countries,
Stressing the importance of intensive intemational
co-operation in the field of new and renewable sources
of cnergy,
A ware of the significant progress achieved in recent
years in the technology relating to the development
and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy,
Cognizant of the need to identify concrete measures
far the transfer of relevant technology to developing
countries and far financing arrangements, both bilateral
and multilateral, far the development of new and
renewable sources of energy in developing countries,
Convinced of the need to exchange information on
the latest developments and experience in the practical
application of ncw and renewable sources of energy,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General
on the feasibility of holding an international conference on new and renewable sources of energy, 122
I. Decides to convene an international conference
on new and renewable sources of energy in 1981 under
the auspices of the United Nations;
2. Decides further that the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy
should have the objective of elaborating measures for
concerted action designed to promote the development
and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy,
with a view to contributing to meeting future over-all
cnergy requirements, especially those of the developing
countries, in particular in the context of efforts aimed
at accelerating the development of the developing
countries;
3. Defines the scope of the Conference as confined
to the area of such new and renewable sources of
energy as solar, geothermal and wind power, tidal
power, wave power and thermal gradient of the sea,
biomass conversion, fuel-wood, charcoal, peat, energy
from draught animals, oil shale, tar sands and
hydropower;
4. Decides also that, in the light of the foregoing
and with a view to farmulating recommendations for
concrete action, the Conference should concentrate,
in ter afia, on the fallowing:
(a) Analysis of the state of technology related to
new and renewable sources of energy;
( b) Identification of the potential, particularly in
the developing countries, for utilization of new and
renewable sources of energy;
(e) Assessment of the economic viability of the
use of new and renewable sources of energy in the
light of the technologíes now available and those being
developed;
12 2 E/1978/68.
