United Nations

A/RES/59/267

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 115

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2004
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/646)]

59/267. Reports of the Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular
resolutions 31/192 of 22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of
29 October 1999, 55/230 of 23 December 2000, 56/245 of 24 December 2001,
57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002 and 58/286 of 8 April 2004,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2003, 1 the note
by the Secretary-General transmitting the programme of work of the Joint
Inspection Unit for 2004 2 and the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit, 3
Noting with appreciation the recent adoption by the Joint Inspection Unit of
internal working procedures and mechanisms to complement its standards and
guidelines, which are aimed at improving the quality and impact of the Unit’s
activities,
Recognizing that in order for the Unit to further improve its effectiveness, the
provisions of the statute of the Unit should be fully implemented,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
for 2003;1
2.
Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
programme of work of the Unit for 2004;2
3.
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Unit;3
4.
Decides to discontinue the requirement for the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the recommendations of the Unit;

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/59/34).
A/59/75.
3
A/59/349.
2

04-49228

A/RES/59/267

5.
Considers that the implementation in full of the provisions of the statute
of the Unit should contribute to the enhancement of its role and an increase in the
effectiveness of its activities;
Urges Member States requested to propose candidates for membership in
6.
the Unit to strictly adhere to the qualifications and experience outlined in article 2,
paragraph 1, of the statute;
Stresses the importance of ensuring that candidates have experience in at
7.
least one of the fields illustrated as follows: oversight, audit, inspection,
investigation, evaluation, finance, project evaluation, programme evaluation, human
resources management, management, public administration, monitoring and/or
programme performance, as well as knowledge of the United Nations system and its
role in international relations;
Invites the President of the General Assembly to ensure the full
8.
implementation of the procedures and mechanisms for reviewing the qualifications
of proposed candidates as outlined in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the
Unit, including through joint consultations with the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the Chairman of the United Nations System Chief Executives
Board for Coordination, 4 as well as drawing, as appropriate, on relevant expertise
from expert and intergovernmental bodies concerned with budgetary and human
resources matters, and with consultations with the States concerned, after which the
President of the Assembly submits the list of such candidates to the Assembly for
appointment;
Also invites the President of the General Assembly to review the
9.
procedures followed by the Assembly for the appointment of inspectors, with a view
to enhancing the efficiency of the application of article 3, paragraph 2, of the
statute, bearing in mind the procedures followed for the selection of members of
other expert bodies and to report to the Assembly at the first part of its resumed
sixtieth session for its decision, as appropriate;
10. Reaffirms article 11, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Unit, and requests
that the Unit, as a whole, also take responsibility in the exercise of its collective
wisdom with regard to all its reports, notes and recommendations, in order to
improve the effectiveness of the Unit;
11.

Re-emphasizes paragraph 9 of its resolution 56/245;

12. Decides that the Unit shall perform its functions and responsibilities
strictly in accordance with the provisions of its statute;
13. Also decides that the programme of work of the Unit shall be collectively
approved, providing the rationale for choice as well as the relevance of the
envisaged outcome to improving management and methods and promoting greater
coordination between organizations;
14. Affirms that, in the implementation of article 18 of the statute of the Unit,
the Chair shall be responsible for overseeing the Unit’s programme of work,
including, in the event of disagreement, the division of assignments, and for
enforcing the internal working procedures of the Unit to ensure, through collective
responsibility, the quality of its reports;

_______________
4

2

Formerly known as the Administrative Committee on Coordination.

A/RES/59/267

15. Welcomes the peer review system established by the Unit, and decides
that if, in the opinion of the majority of the inspectors, the report in question does
not meet the established quality standards, the Chair shall reflect such views and the
reasons therefor in the introduction to the report;
16. Emphasizes the desirability of continuity in the term of office of the
Chair and Vice-Chair, and calls upon the Unit to bear this in mind in implementing
article 18 of the statute, so as to re-elect the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman for
overlapping terms, thereby balancing the need for institutional memory and
reasonable rotation;
17. Also emphasizes the need to assess resource management from a systemwide perspective, including the contribution of, and coordination between,
organizations;
18. Decides that the Unit shall mainly focus on identifying means to improve
management and to ensure that optimum use is made of available resources, as
stipulated in article 5, paragraphs 1 to 3, of the statute, and to this end the Unit will
set out management criteria and methods for assessment of management
performance and effectiveness relevant to participating organizations;
19. Also decides that the Unit shall include, in its annual reports, information
on implementation and the results achieved by organizations in respect of their
follow-up to the recommendations of the Unit, as endorsed by their legislative
bodies, and the arrangements put in place by participating organizations for
reporting thereon;
20. Further decides that the Unit, as part of its focus on management issues,
should assess the development and application in participating organizations of the
principle of accountability in its relevant reports;
21. Decides that the Unit shall undertake inspections with a sharp focus on
the areas stipulated in article 5, paragraphs 1 to 3, of the statute, bearing in mind
paragraphs 18 and 20 above;
22. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in performing
its programmatic, coordination, monitoring and evaluation functions, as contained in
its mandate, to consider relevant reports of the Unit;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the staff recruited
according to article 19 of the statute fully meet the qualifications and have proven
experience in specific areas required to assist the Unit in the fulfilment of its
functions, namely, inspection, investigation and evaluation;
24. Reaffirms that the working languages of the General Assembly are those
of the Unit, in application of article 51 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
and also reaffirms that the working languages of the Secretariat of the United
Nations are those of the secretariat of the Unit, in application of Assembly
resolution 2 (I) of 1 February 1946;
25. Decides to continue providing translation in all official languages for the
reports of the Unit and also to provide interpretation, as necessary, within existing
resources;
26. Reaffirms its request to the Secretariat and all participating organizations
to facilitate the work of the Unit, including, in particular, through offering full
access to all relevant information, as required by the Unit;

3

A/RES/59/267

27. Also reaffirms its request to the executive heads of the participating
organizations that have not yet done so to take the steps necessary to facilitate the
consideration of and action on the system of follow-up to the reports of the Unit,
and invites the legislative organs concerned to consider the system and take action
in that regard;
28. Emphasizes the need to ensure respect for the separate and distinct roles
and functions of external and internal oversight mechanisms and also to strengthen
the external oversight mechanisms;
29. Decides to consider the implementation of the provisions of the present
resolution, which are aimed at increasing the effectiveness of the Unit, at its sixtyfirst session.
76th plenary meeting
23 December 2004

4
