S/2007/153

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 14 March 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union at its 40th meeting, held at Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005. I also refer to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005), of 21 October 2005,
by which the Council established an International Working Group to assist the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and
consolidate and strengthen the existing follow-up mechanisms.
In this regard, I am forwarding the text of the communiqué issued by the
International Working Group at the conclusion of its thirteenth ministerial meeting,
held in Abidjan on 2 March 2007 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-27206 (E) 160307 160307

*0727206*

S/2007/153

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Final communiqué of the thirteenth ministerial meeting of the
International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
Abidjan, 2 March 2007
1.
The thirteenth ministerial meeting of the International Working Group was
held in Abidjan on 2 March 2007 under the co-chairmanship of Mr. Nana AkufoAddo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, and Mr. Abou Moussa, Officer-inCharge of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). In attendance
were the Ministers of Benin, Burkina Faso, France and South Africa as well as the
High Representative for the elections in Côte d’Ivoire, and the representatives of
Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, ECOWAS, the African Union, the European Union,
the International Organization of the Francophonie, and the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund.
2.
The Group heard a briefing by the Prime Minister on the state of progress of
the peace process, especially with regard to the resumption of mobile court hearings,
the preparations for the launching of identification, and the gradual redeployment of
the State administration, in particular financial services in the north of the country.
3.
The Group also examined the extremely worrying situation of the Ivorian State
media. Since the decrees of 26 November 2006, the impartiality of RTI and
Fraternité Matin, and equitable access to these media for the various political
forces, as stipulated by the Pretoria Agreements, are no loner guaranteed. The Group
recalls that the independence and impartiality of the State media are indispensable to
the holding of free, transparent and fair elections. This is necessary for the electoral
campaign to be recognized as being in conformity with international norms.
4.
After hearing the report of the Minister of State, Mr. Youssouf Ouedraogo,
Representative of the current Chairman of ECOWAS, on the progress made in the
direct dialogue, the Group paid tribute to the President of Burkina Faso, Mr. Blaise
Compaoré, for his untiring facilitation efforts in a spirit of cooperation and
appeasement. It encouraged him to pursue these efforts in order to reach, as soon as
possible, an agreement that can re-launch the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire in
keeping with the expectations of the Ivorian populations. In this regard, the Group
welcomes the fact that the direct dialogue deals with fundamental issues mentioned
in resolution 1721 (2006) that are at the core of the Ivorian crisis, namely:
identification, the restructuring of the defence and security forces, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, disarmament and dismantling of militias, the
redeployment of the administration, and the preparation of elections. The Group
appeals to the Ivorian parties to take ownership of the peace process within the
framework of resolution 1721 (2006). The Group stresses that the agreement to be
concluded by the Ivorian parties must permit the normalization of the situation in
Côte d’Ivoire.
5.
The Group heard a briefing by the commanders of the impartial forces, who
mentioned the fragility of the situation in the country and recalled the security risk
that would result from a stagnation of the peace process.

2

07-27206

S/2007/153

6.
While expressing the readiness of the international community to support the
re-launching of the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire, the Group wishes to stress that
any global agreement reached at the direct dialogue will not be able to facilitate the
settlement of the Ivorian crisis unless the signatories translate into action their will
to achieve peace by fulfilling all their commitments in good faith.
7.

07-27206

The Group will hold its next meeting on 13 April 2007 in Côte d’Ivoire.

3
