S/2016/141

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 February 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2203
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 29 February
2016 and requested me to submit reports to it every six months on the
implementation of the resolution. The report also provides an update on key
political, security, human rights, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in
Guinea-Bissau since the issuance of my report of 13 August 2015 ( S/2015/626).

II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Political situation
2.
The political environment in Guinea-Bissau has continued to be marked by
tensions and divisions within the ruling African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC) and among the sovereign organs of the State. The
reporting period saw the parties engaged in political and legal battles over the
appointment of a new Prime Minister, the formation of a new Government and the
adoption of the Government’s programme.
3.
On 17 August, in response to a request by the President of Guinea -Bissau, José
Mário Vaz, to PAIGC to nominate a new Prime Minister to replace Domingos
Simões Pereira, who had been dismissed on 12 August, PAIGC renominated
Mr. Simões Pereira. On 20 August, the President issued a decree appointing the
Party’s third Vice-President, Baciro Djá, as Prime Minister instead. Mr. Djá was
sworn in on the same day. The appointment was met with widespread
condemnation, in particular by PAIGC, which had suspended Mr. Djá on 6 August
following his alleged refusal to respond to its requests to ac count for expenses
incurred during his management of the 2014 electoral campaign. On 24 August, the
National Assembly adopted a resolution requesting the annulment of the presidential
decree, calling for ongoing dialogue among State institutions and propos ing the
establishment of a stability pact to ensure political and social stability and the
country’s governability until the completion of the ninth legislature and presidential

16-01538 (E)

150216

*1601538*

S/2016/141

term. Furthermore, the National Assembly approved the creation of a parliament ary
commission to investigate the veracity of crimes, including corruption,
embezzlement, nepotism and other economic crimes, alleged by President Vaz, in
his 12 August address to the nation, to have been committed by members of the
Government of Prime Minister Simões Pereira. On 8 September, only one day after
the swearing-in of the Government of Prime Minister Djá, the Supreme Court of
Justice unanimously ruled that the presidential decree appointing Mr. Djá was
unconstitutional. In a decree issued on 9 September, the President dismissed the
Government of Prime Minister Djá following the latter’s resignation.
4.
At an Extraordinary Summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) held on 12 September, the Authority of Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS extended the mandate of its Mission in Guinea -Bissau
(ECOMIB) through June 2016. It also mandated the President of Senegal, Macky
Sall, and the President of Guinea, Alpha Condé, in their respective capacities as
ECOWAS Chair and ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, with the assistance of
the former President of Nigeria Olusegun Obasanjo, in his capacity as Special
Envoy of the President of Nigeria, Muhammadu Buhari, to facilitate dialogue with
all stakeholders to find a lasting solution to the crisis.
5.
In pursuance of that request, former President Obasanjo visited Guinea -Bissau
twice to help resolve the political crisis. During his visit from 15 to 17 September,
he held intensive consultations with President Vaz and the leadership of PAI GC, the
Party for Social Renewal (PRS), the Democratic Convergence Party and the Union
for Change, all represented in the National Assembly. He also met with the Speaker
of Parliament and the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. On 16 September,
President Vaz initiated consultations with the five political parties represented in the
National Assembly regarding the appointment of a new Prime Minister. In his
consultations with PAIGC, he requested that it propose three names for the position
of Prime Minister. In response, the Party submitted the name of its First Vice President, Carlos Correia, which was accepted by the President. On 17 September,
Mr. Correia was appointed and sworn into office by President Vaz. At a press
conference on the same day, former President Obasanjo proposed that President Vaz,
the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, political parties and civil society should
sign the proposed stability pact to promote cooperation and dialogue.
6.
On 2 October, following a series of consultations within PAIGC and with other
political parties, Prime Minister Correia submitted his list of Cabinet nominees to
President Vaz. In a letter dated 6 October, the President informed the Prime Minister
of his decision not to appoint the proposed Cabinet, citing, inter alia, ongoing
parliamentary investigations into mismanagement allegedly committed by some of
the nominees. In response to the President’s request for a new list, the Prime
Minister resubmitted the same list of names on 7 October and requeste d the
President to disclose the evidence that he had against those he was unwilling to
appoint.
7.
Former President Obasanjo returned to Bissau on 9 to 11 October to pursue
consultations with political stakeholders. On 12 October, my Special Representativ e
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS met several times separately with
President Vaz and Prime Minister Correia in an effort to assist the two leaders in
reconciling their views regarding the nominees to lead the Ministries of Natural
Resources and Internal Administration. Later the same day, President Vaz appointed

2/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

the new Cabinet members while assigning the two contested portfolios, ad interim,
to the Prime Minister.
8.
The new Government, which comprises 16 Ministers (including five women)
and 13 Secretaries of State (including three women), was sworn in on 13 October. In
addition to the PAIGC members, the Government includes the three minor political
parties represented in the National Assembly. Negotiations to bring PRS into the
Government were unsuccessful.
9.
On 20 November, the PAIGC National Council of Jurisdiction expelled Baciro
Djá from the Party for allegedly having breached its rules and regulations by
accepting the post of Prime Minister in August. Three other PAIGC officials who
were members of Mr. Djá’s Government were suspended for four years for the same
reason. Mr. Djá’s subsequent appeal was rejected by the Regional Court of Bissau
on 22 December. Also on 20 November, President Vaz dismissed the Prosecutor
General, Hermenegildo Pereira, and the President of the Court of Auditors, Vasco
Biaguê, replacing them with António Sedja Man and Dionisio Cabi, both PRS
members. The outgoing officials, who are PAIGC members, were widely recognized
as strong advocates of the independence of the jud iciary during their tenures.
10. The tense political climate adversely affected the first ordinary session of the
National Assembly, which began on 23 November. Following a week of heated
debate, the National Assembly approved its working agenda on 30 Nove mber, by
55 votes in favour, including 51 votes of PAIGC members.
11. On 16 and 17 December, President Vaz attended the forty-eighth ordinary
session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in
Abuja. In its final communiqué, the Authority underscored the need for dialogue to
consolidate peace and democracy in Guinea-Bissau and reiterated its appeal to
national authorities to expedite the review of the country’s Constitution. The
Authority also instructed the President of the Commission of ECOWAS to take the
measures necessary to organize a meeting of the International Contact Group on
Guinea-Bissau, in consultation with other stakeholders, and renewed its appeal to
ECOWAS bilateral and multilateral partners to provide financial sup port to
ECOMIB.
12. From 21 to 23 December, the National Assembly discussed the Government’s
programme. At the end of the discussions, a vote was taken. Out of the 101
parliamentarians present, 45 voted in favour, while 56, including all 41 PRS
members and 15 PAIGC members, abstained. The Bureau of the National Assembly
met on 29 December to discuss the outcome of the vote in response to a request by
PAIGC. The Bureau adopted a resolution in which it stated that it would abstain
from providing a technical and legal interpretation of the vote, noting that such an
interpretation would not be consensual. It added that it would favour political
negotiations, especially between PAIGC and PRS, to avoid a situation of political
and social chaos should the political and partisan dispute continue.
13. On 14 January, the PAIGC National Council of Jurisdiction expelled 14
Members of Parliament who had abstained from voting on the Government’s
programme and replaced them with new PAIGC Members. Former Prime Minister
Baciro Djá, who was also one of the PAIGC Members who had abstained from
voting, had been previously expelled from the Party, on 20 November. On
15 January, the Permanent Commission of the National Assembly removed the

16-01538

3/18

S/2016/141

parliamentary mandate of the 15 PAIGC Members of Parliament. On 18 January, the
15 Members of Parliament disrupted proceedings in the National Assembly, causing
the Speaker to suspend the session and postpone the vote until 19 January. However,
the expelled Members of Parliament remained in the National Assembly and,
joining the opposition PRS, elected a new Speaker in contravention of existing
Assembly statutes.
14. On 25 January, PAIGC, the National Unity Party, the Union for Change, the
Democratic Convergence Party and the Patriotic Movement held a press conference
during which they presented an open letter to the citizenry and international
partners. In the letter, they accused the 15 expelled Members of Parliament and
some members of PRS of several crimes, including impersonation, trespassin g,
attempting to carry out a coup d’état and breaches of constitutional order and the
rule of law. The five parties also filed criminal cases against the dissident
parliamentary group for those crimes. In apparent reference to the questioning
earlier that day of the Ministers of Finance and of Women, Family and Social
Cohesion by the Office of the Prosecutor General about the alleged misallocation of
subsidies for health treatment to public servants in 2015, they also cautioned against
the conduct of a judicial “witch hunt” by national authorities.
15. On the same day, President Vaz launched a series of consultations with
national stakeholders, including civil society organizations, political parties, the
Vice-President of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, traditional and
religious leaders and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. The President also
held a meeting with the international community on 29 January at which he
acknowledged the institutional impasse within the National Assembly and reit erated
that he had no intention of dissolving it.
16. On 27 January, the Regional Court of Bissau approved an injunction requested
by the Speaker of the National Assembly against the PRS parliamentary group and
the 15 expelled Members of Parliament. The Court also requested them to respect
the decision of the Permanent Commission of the National Assembly to remove the
parliamentary mandate of the 15 Members of Parliament and urged them to refrain
from any action that could endanger the physical integrity of the other Members of
Parliament and the citizenry in general.
17. On 28 January, a collective of 21 political parties “without representation in
Parliament” held a press conference in Bissau in support of the 15 expelled
Members of Parliament, during which they urged President Vaz to dismiss the
Government.
18. On the same day, the National Assembly approved the Government’s
programme with a majority of 59 out of 102 votes. PRS boycotted the session.
Shortly after the announcement of the approval of the programme, the Office of the
President issued a communiqué indicating the President’s surprise that the vote on
the programme had taken place while he was still consulting with national
stakeholders. The communiqué also indicated that the President would, ho wever,
continue his consultations.
19. President Vaz invited the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European Union to
participate in a meeting that he had convened on 1 and 2 February with key national
stakeholders involved in the political crisis.

4/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

20. In a letter to President Vaz issued on 2 February, the PAIGC leader,
Mr. Simões Pereira, requested that the format of the meetings convened by the
President be changed to include only the “competent and legitimate” institutions of
the Republic. Mr. Simões Pereira also expressed the Party’s availability to
contribute to a “frank and constructive” dialogue among political parties, civil
society organizations and sovereign institutions towards a stability pact to be
implemented through the current legislature. Finally, he welcomed the presence of
international partners in the dialogue process.

B.

Security situation
21. In spite of the political uncertainties, the overall security situation in the
country remained stable during the reporting period. In an effort to address
increased organized crime, drug trafficking and armed robbery during the peak of
the political crisis, the Ministry of the Interior activated an ad hoc security plan that
involved the conduct of regular joint police and military patrols. The plan was
deactivated in early January. Furthermore, ECOMIB, in accordance with its
mandate, reinforced the security arrangements for the protection of State institutions
in response to possible threats posed by the political crisis.
22. On 12 August, the Superior Military Tribunal opened a new case against Rear
Admiral José Zamora Induta in connection with his alleged participation in the
events of 21 October 2012 at the Bissalanca air force bas e, in which armed
assailants had reportedly launched an attack on the base. Mr. Induta was accused of
homicide, terrorism and the subversion of constitutional order and placed under
house arrest. On 22 September, he was transferred to a detention cell in t he military
camp at Mansôa, in the Oio region. On 11 November, the Supreme Court of Justice
approved a request for habeas corpus filed by his lawyers. The Rear Admiral was
released from detention but remained under house arrest. On 16 December, the
Superior Military Tribunal removed all coercive measures that it had imposed on
Mr. Induta and declined a new request by the military prosecution to make him a
suspect in the case surrounding the events of 21 October 2012.
23. Between 9 and 11 September, the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces
of Guinea-Bissau, Lieutenant-General Biaguê Na Ntan, attended the thirty-fifth
ordinary meeting of the ECOWAS Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff, held in
Dakar. During the meeting, ECOWAS reported that it was still working to secure the
resources needed for the envisaged demobilization of military and police officers.
Participants agreed to propose that the special pension fund for the retirement of
military and security officers be separated from the gratuity compon ent for former
freedom fighters, in order to facilitate a swifter launch of the demobilization
process. On 22 October, following subsequent consultations with UNIOGBIS and
other international partners, the Government announced that a separate bank
account would be created for the gratuity. It also announced that it intended to
renegotiate the memorandum of understanding signed with ECOWAS in November
2012 for the establishment of ECOMIB and for support in the area of security sector
reform.

16-01538

5/18

S/2016/141

C.

Human rights situation
24. During the reporting period, the human rights situation in Guinea -Bissau
remained largely unchanged. Little progress was made in the investigation of past
gross human rights violations or with respect to the creation of related
accountability mechanisms. No progress was recorded in improving conditions in
prisons and other detention facilities or in relation to protection from se xual and
gender-based violence.
25. On 17 August, the Regional Court of Bissau found three Public Order Police
officers and one National Guard agent guilty of beating a civilian to death. The
latter had reportedly resisted arbitrary arrest on 20 September 2014 in Bissau. The
Court sentenced all four suspects to 10 years in prison and a fine of CFAF 5 million
to be paid to the victim’s family. On 1 October, the defence appealed and the
suspects were conditionally released on condition that they report periodical ly to the
judicial authorities.
26. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS advocated against the use of the
media for political purposes, and for the public’s right to accurate, objective and
impartial information. Against the backdrop of growing political tensions, some
media organizations used politicized language, which could be construed as falling
under the definitions of “defamation” and “discrimination”, which are criminalized
under article 126 of the penal code of Guinea-Bissau. On 20 August, the National
Assembly issued a note to the media appealing to them to scrupulously respect work
ethics, avoid politicization, remain cognizant of the risk of being sued and report
any violations of the right to freedom of expression and opinion to the Office of the
Prosecutor General.
27. From 10 to 16 October, the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the independence of judges and lawyers visited Guinea -Bissau to assess the
independence and functioning of the justice system. In her preliminary observations,
she noted that the population had little confidence in the formal justice system and
that the working conditions and security measures in place for judges and
prosecutors were inadequate. She observed that those deficits prevented access to
adequate, timely and quality justice and undermined the independence of judges,
prosecutors and lawyers. She also noted that access to justice was jeopardized by
the absence of judges and prosecutors in many parts of the country and that that gap
was being filled by traditional leaders, whose methods were often inconsistent with
international human rights instruments ratified by Guinea-Bissau.
28. On 16 November, UNIOGBIS shared its regular report on the human rights
situation in prisons and detention centres with the Minister of Justice,
recommending that the Government take urgent measures to address overcrowding
and illegal detention and to provide legal counsel and basic social services to
inmates.
29. On 4 December, the newly appointed Prosecutor General ordered Guinea Bissau National Radio and Television to suspend a weekly radio debate programme
on political and social issues, citing the need to protect public order, peace, stability
and institutional security. The next day, following a meeting with the Director of the
broadcasting station, the Prosecutor General lifted the suspension of the programme.

6/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
30. Despite the political crisis, Guinea-Bissau is expected to have economic
growth of 4.8 per cent in 2016, owing largely to increased revenues from cashew
nut exports as a result of a favourable crop price (CFAF 4 00 per kilo in 2015,
compared with CFAF 259 per kilo in 2014) and the increased effectiveness of
Customs regulations to combat smuggling. Inflation remained low, with average
quarterly price increases of just 0.2 per cent.
31. Food production decreased by 8 per cent in comparison with the previous five
years. However, food availability remained adequate, owing mainly to the
successful cashew nut campaign and favourable international prices. To reverse the
trend of the poor harvest in the agricultural seaso n of the previous year, the Ministry
of Agriculture and Rural Development, with the support of international partners,
assisted farmers by providing agricultural inputs and pesticides and by promoting
food-for-work activities.
32. During the reporting period, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
and other international partners worked closely with the Ministry of Education to
ensure a timely start of the 2015-2016 school year. Schools opened on 12 October
despite the launch of a teachers’ strike that partially disrupted lessons for
approximately three weeks. In December, UNICEF completed the construction of 75
classrooms, bringing the total of improved classrooms in rural and remote
communities to 130 in the past 12 months. This improved access to education for
approximately 10,000 students.
33. As a result of emergency water chlorination support provided by UNICEF
following a depletion of chlorine stocks at Bissau’s public water system, the
residents of Bissau continued to benefit from adequately treated water between July
and September. The regular supply of chlorine by the authorities resumed in
September.
34. On 24 November, with the support of UNICEF, the World Health Organization
and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, the Minis try of Public
Health successfully introduced the rotavirus vaccine into the national routine
vaccination programme. More than 250 health workers received training at all levels
of the health pyramid for the administration of the new vaccine. Supplementary
vaccination campaigns against polio and measles, integrated with vitamin A
supplementation and deworming with mebendazole, were carried out from October
to December.
35. From August to December, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
continued to provide support to improve maternal and neonatal health, through the
donation of hospital equipment and medicine to the regions of Quinara, Tombali and
Bolama. On 26 November, UNFPA and the Ministry of Public Health signed an
agreement for the construction and rehabilitation of health facilities and maternity
waiting homes in the three regions.
36. In December, the Ministry of Education completed two key policy documents,
namely, the education sector analysis and the 10-year education strategic sector
plan, with the support of UNICEF, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the Global Partnership for Education.

16-01538

7/18

S/2016/141

37. No cases of Ebola virus disease were registered in the country during the
reporting period. In the meantime, the United Nations system continued to support
the Government in strengthening its health surveillance and response system.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
A.

Inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation process
38. On 29 October, UNIOGBIS and the Organizing Commission of the National
Conference organized a meeting with 29 media representatives based in Bissau and
the country’s regions aimed at involving the media in the national dialogue process
and providing them with basic information on the Commission’s mandate.
Following the meeting, at the request of the President of the Commission,
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) supported
the holding of three workshops on the prevention of the use of hate speech by media
professionals, in Bissau, São Domingos and Bafatá in November and December.
Approximately 100 participants from local news agencies, community and
commercial radio stations, State-owned media and the Offices of the President and
the Prime Minister were trained.
39. From 20 November to 19 December, in response to a request by the
Organizing Commission, a national consultant hired by UNIOGBIS consolidated all
the working documents and preparatory reports produced and used by the
Commission’s predecessors. The consolidated document was made available to the
Commission in late December. The document and the conclusions of the
Commission will form the basis for the recommendations of t he National
Conference.
40. Notwithstanding those efforts, and owing in part to the ongoing political
situation in Bissau, Government authorities have not convoked the Organizing
Commission or met with its President.

B.

Strategic and technical advice and support for national authorities
in implementing the national security sector reform and rule of
law strategies
41. As a result of the ongoing political stalemate in Bissau, demobilization efforts
have not gathered momentum. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS was not able
to undertake a demobilization sensitization campaign as requested by the
Government. In the interim, UNIOGBIS assisted the National Mixed Technical
Independent Commission, led by the Ministry of Internal Administration, in
reviewing the personnel selection criteria and police training strategy. UNIOGBIS
also resumed the co-location of its police advisers at the model police station in the
Bairro Militar area of Bissau.
42. During its consultations with the Minister of Defence and the military
leadership, UNIOGBIS was assured that mechanisms were in place to absorb the
$24 million required for pensioning off the first 500 military and police retirees.

8/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

However, they expressed concern at the delay in jump-starting the retirement of
military and police officers through the special pension fund and the gratuity
package. They requested the support of the international community in securing the
funds needed to expeditiously implement the retirement program me.
43. Between 3 and 9 October, the UNIOGBIS regional office in Bafatá conducted
capacity-building and mentoring workshops for Public Order Police and National
Guard officers in the regions of Bafatá, Gabú, Biombo, Cacheu and Oio. The
modules delivered to 17 officers, including three women, were focused on human
resources, administration, criminal data and basic systems processing. From 24 to
26 November, the UNIOGBIS regional office in Bafatá led a workshop on criminal
investigation, which targeted 14 police officers. The workshop was focused on the
analysis of crime statistics and the mechanisms needed to differentiate serious
crimes, as well as on community-oriented policing and its contribution to social
stability and peace.
44. In November, UNICEF facilitated and supported the participation of one judge
and three prosecutors in the first international course on juvenile justice for justice
officials in countries of the Community of Portuguese -speaking Countries, held in
Luanda. The course will contribute to national efforts to establish a juvenile justice
system that conforms to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other human
rights standards.
45. From 24 to 26 November, UNIOGBIS held a three-day workshop in Bissau
with national law enforcement and United Nations gender focal point counterparts
on the development of standard operating procedures for the investigation of crimes
against women, children and other vulnerable persons. On 4 December, UNIOGBIS
concluded a 10-day workshop in Bissau on basic police training curriculum modules
for both serving officers undergoing the certification process and future police
recruits. On 8 December, UNIOGBIS conducted a 10-day workshop in Bissau for
the development of standard operating procedures for regul ating the conduct of
police officers.

C.

United Nations good offices
46. During the reporting period, which was marked by growing tensions among
the sovereign organs of the State and within the main political party as a result of
the dismissal of Prime Minister Simões Pereira, my Special Representative made
full use of his good offices by undertaking, in close coordination with international
partners, an intense cycle of consultations with key political figures and other
national stakeholders. The consultations were aimed at creating an enabling
environment for finding a peaceful solution to the ongoing political crisis through
the promotion of confidence-building measures and meaningful dialogue. In
particular, my Special Representative convened formal and informal meetings with
international partners and key regional groupings (the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the European Union)
to forge a common understanding of the crisis and devise a coordinated strategy for
preventing an escalation of tensions. While making full use of his good offices in
engaging key national stakeholders — specifically, the President; the new Prime
Minister, Carlos Correia; Mr. Simões Pereira, in his capacity as leader of PAIGC;
and the Speaker of Parliament — my Special Representative stressed that political

16-01538

9/18

S/2016/141

differences should be resolved in an inclusive, collaborative and constructive way.
He also continued to advocate the resumption of dialogue to reconcile differences
and called on political actors to place the national interest above personal
differences.
47. From 1 to 3 September, my Special Representative held consultations in
Lisbon with the Portuguese authorities (the President, the Prime Minister, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Speaker of Parliament), as well as with the
Executive Secretary of the Community of Portuguese -speaking Countries. He also
met with the Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs on 12 January.
During those and other meetings, my Special Representative sought to keep GuineaBissau in the international spotlight with a view to encouraging material, technical
and financial support from partners to help consolidate efforts aimed at political
stabilization and sustainable socioeconomic development.

D.

Support for the Government of Guinea-Bissau in the mobilization,
harmonization and coordination of international assistance
48. My Special Representative continued to urge international partners to provide
material, technical and financial support to Guinea-Bissau. Moreover, he continued
to promote a coordinated international approach towards sustain able socioeconomic
development.
49. My Special Representative worked with international partners in Bissau to
forge a common understanding of the crisis and devise a coordinated strategy for
preventing an escalation of tensions. In that context, he chaired the monthly
meetings of international partners based in Bissau to facilitate information -sharing
and coordinate messaging. At the meetings, international partners stressed the need
for national stakeholders to uphold the Constitution and to engage in genuine
inclusive dialogue aimed at promoting lasting political stab ility and intra-party
cohesion.
50. From 1 to 3 September, my Special Representative held consultations in
Lisbon with the President, Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Speaker
of Parliament of Portugal, as well as with the Executive Secretary of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. All interlocutors reaffirmed their
readiness to assist Guinea-Bissau in resolving the political crisis. On 10 December,
he met with the President of Côte d’Ivoire, Alassane Ouattara, in advance of the
twenty-eighth high-level meeting of the heads of the United Nations peace missions
in West Africa, held in Abidjan on 11 December. President Ouattara reiterated the
calls of ECOWAS for international support for ECOMIB.
51. The United Nations system, through UNDP, is working with the Government
and the European Union to establish effective mechanisms for aid coordination and
follow-up on the pledges made at the March 2015 international partners’ round
table, which totalled approximately $1.3 billion. Since the pledges were made by
international stakeholders, up to $150 million has been re ceived from the World
Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the Peacebuilding Fund,
the African Development Bank, the West African Development Bank and Portugal.

10/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

E.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs to function effectively and constitutionally
52. From 30 October to 1 November, with the support of UNIOGBIS, the National
Assembly ad hoc commission on constitutional reform held a retreat in Canchungo,
in the Cacheu region, to officially launch its activities. Participants discussed the
draft chronogram of the commission’s activities through the end of 2016, as well as
its terms of reference, internal regulations, communication strategy and draft
budget. The commission was reconvened on 5 November to approve the documents.
53. On 4 November, UNIOGBIS hosted a meeting of the National Civil Society
Movement for Peace, Democracy and Development and the platform of
non-governmental organizations and local associations of Bafatá, to promote
interaction between civil society and Members of Parliament. The meeting’s
participants, who included more than 35 representatives of civil society
organizations, discussed issues related to justice, human rights and socioeconomic
development, in particular infrastructure and transportation challenges in the region.
A similar meeting was held in São Domingos on 10 November. Its 27 participants
discussed the major socioeconomic issues affecting their region, including Customs
tariffs on domestic products, land conflict, cattle-rustling, lack of access to basic
services, and justice. Participants in both meetings selected five representatives who
met with the National Assembly’s specialized commission on social affairs on 11 and
18 December, respectively, to deliver their report. The report contained
recommendations on how to address the challenges identified at the meetings and
how to foster parliamentary interaction with constituents. The commission praised
the initiative and pledged to reach out to Guinea-Bissau’s constituents.
54. From 27 to 29 December, UNIOGBIS provided support for the holding of a
training workshop on communications, advocacy and lobbying, simultaneously in
the towns of Bafatá, Buba and São Domingos. The training was aimed at enhancing
the capacity of civil society organizations to play a constructive role in Guinea Bissau’s democratic process and governance. Some 25 participants attended each of
the workshops.
55. During the reporting period, UNDP worked with the National Assembly and
the Court of Auditors to strengthen their capacity to provide oversight in the area of
economic governance. It also supported the Ministry of the Economy and Finance in
releasing the quarterly report on public finances in three regions (Quinara, Gabú and
Cacheu), which were disseminated to local traditional authorities, religious and
women’s organizations, local elected officials and youth associations. UNDP also
assisted the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Modernization in creating and
operationalizing a unit to monitor decentralization mechanisms and programmes so
as to improve efficiency and transparency in public service.
56. On 18 December, with the support of UNIOGBIS, the National Institute of
Studies and Research concluded a series of seven conferences initiated on 30 June
in commemoration of its thirtieth anniversary. Some 500 participants from
academia, the civil service, political parties, the diplomatic corps and the United
Nations attended the conferences. Discussions were focused on, inter alia , structural
challenges in the justice sector, border management, political stability and
constitutional reform. The conferences were aimed at assisting the Institute with the
resumption of initiatives to promote scientific debates and studies on the count ry’s
sociopolitical realities and to stimulate open dialogue.

16-01538

11/18

S/2016/141

F.

Strategic and technical advice and support for the establishment of
effective and efficient law enforcement and criminal justice and
penitentiary systems
57. During the reporting period, the UNIOGBIS regional office in São Domingos
continued to engage with local law enforcement agencies, regional authorities and
civil society representatives in order to assess and make recommendations on ways
to address increasing crime.
58. From 10 to 18 August, UNIOGBIS and UNDP facilitated meetings between a
visiting expert mission of the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections
and Guinea-Bissau security sector reform and rule of law officers in Bissau and the
regions. The main goal of the visit was to explore ways to improve overall
coordination in relation to security sector reform and the rule of law, including
United Nations joint programming. At the request of the Prosecutor General,
UNIOGBIS undertook five working visits to his Office between September and
November to provide technical assistance and advice in connection with pending
investigations involving political and military actors.
59. UNIOGBIS supported the organization of the fifth annual National Forum on
Criminal Justice, held from 2 to 4 December in Bissau. Approximately 70 senior
officials discussed issues related to environmental crime, a national policy on
criminal justice and the review of the draft military justice code. The main
recommendations made by participants were: (a) protect the environment through
the criminalization of such acts as illegal fishing, illegal trade in timber and the
exploitation of protected areas; (b) establish a data-gathering system to measure
criminality and to provide crime statistics; and (c) ensure the compliance of the
military justice code with national and international standards.
60. On 10 and 11 November, UNIOGBIS conducted two sensitization sessions
with senior officers of the military judiciary police, military magistrates and
representatives of the Ministry of Defence at the National Defence Institute, in
Bissau. Nineteen military magistrates, including two women, and 22 senior officers
of the military judiciary police, one of whom one is a woman, participated in the
event, which was focused on raising awareness of the principles governing the
administration of justice by military tribunals.
61. On 26 November, the UNIOGBIS regional office in Buba supported local
governance authorities in the region of Quinara in creating a regional co nsultative
council. Fifty participants, including five women, comprising representatives of
local administration and civil society organizations, community and religious
leaders and security system representatives, discussed peace, security and
development concerns of the region. The creation of the Council is expected to
assist in curbing criminality and human rights violations and in fostering peace
consolidation, public security and development.
62. UNDP continued to support the provision of free legal a id and conflict
mediation services to the most vulnerable population, including women, through the
Centres for Access to Justice in Bissau and the regions of Cacheu, Oio and Bafatá.
The Judicial Training Centre, supported by UNDP, continued to provide trai ning to
196 magistrates and justice officers.

12/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

G.

Promotion and protection of human rights and human rights
monitoring and reporting activities
63. Despite intense lobbying by UNIOGBIS, efforts to review the status of the
country’s National Human Rights Commission to make it compliant with the Paris
Principles have been delayed. This, in turn, has affected the activities of the
interministerial committee to implement the recommendations of the universal
periodic review of the Human Rights Council and those of other human rights
bodies. In addition, as a result of the political instability in Bissau, UNIOGBIS has
not succeeded in supporting the Government in moving forward with its national
human rights action plan.
64. UNIOGBIS supported national authorities in facilitating a workshop held from
27 to 28 October on impunity. The workshop was a follow-up to the first National
Conference on Impunity, Justice and Human Rights, held in 2013 within the
framework of the 2011 Bamako Declaration and Strategic Fram ework on Impunity,
Justice and Human Rights. Fifty participants from the justice, defence and security
sectors, the civil service, the National Assembly, political parties and civil society
organizations developed a national action plan consisting of strat egies and
mechanisms for addressing impunity, ensuring effective and accessible justice and
promoting and protecting human rights.
65. At the request of the Ministry of Education, UNIOGBIS delivered human
rights training for 50 secondary school teachers, including 10 women, in the regions
of Bafatá and Gabú in November and December, respectively. On 4 December,
UNIOGBIS supported the Faculty of Law of Amilcar Cabral University in
delivering a conference on the fiftieth anniversary of the International Coven ant on
Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, to ensure that law students become familiar with those international
instruments and support their implementation.
66. From 30 November to 5 December, UNIOGBIS disseminated laws against
female genital mutilation, human trafficking and domestic violence during a training
course conducted in Farim, in the Oio region, for 60 members of local civil society,
including 41 women. During the reporting period, UNICEF and UNFPA continued
to work in a concerted manner with the National Committee for the Abandonment of
Harmful Practices to support national strategies aimed at the cessation of female
genital mutilation/cutting.
67. In the context of the International Human Rights Day celebrations on
10 December, UNIOGBIS facilitated, alongside the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, a programme of activities in the
regions of Gabú, Bafatá, Oio, Quinara and Bissau in support of the “ 16 Days of
Activism against Gender-Based Violence” campaign. The programme, led by the
Ministry of Women, Family and Social Cohesion, consisted of training for
schoolchildren, lectures at the Faculty of Law and secondary schools, marches, and
human rights concerts for prisoners and detainees in all penitentiary facilities. The
international community also supported a group of civil society organizations in
holding a “Human Rights Fortnight” at Casa dos Direitos (House of Rights), a
locally run human rights resource centre in Bissau, which included a series of
cultural events.

16-01538

13/18

S/2016/141

68. UNIOGBIS, UNDP and UNICEF also continued to strengthen the capacity of
the judiciary and law enforcement officials, as well as the military, in the area of
human rights. UNICEF technical and material support for the National Guard,
non-governmental organizations and the National Committee against Trafficking in
Persons resulted in the interception of 31 separated children at various border points
in the Gabú and Tombali regions during the reporting period. In addition, the
ongoing joint operations between the National Guard and child protection civil
society organizations resulted in the repatriation and reintegration into Guinea Bissau of 39 children, commonly referred to as talibés, from the Gambia and
Senegal.
69. UNIOGBIS delivered human rights training to 60 members of the judiciary
and 30 military trainers of trainers, focusing on the integration of human rights into
the administration of justice, as well as on the training curriculum of the armed
forces.

H.

Strategic and technical advice and support for the Government
of Guinea-Bissau to combat drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime
70. From 10 to 21 August, UNIOGBIS, in coordination with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), assisted the Public Order Police, the National Guard,
the military judiciary police and local prosecutors in implementing “Operation
Padlock II”. The operation was aimed at monitoring incoming and outgoing persons
and goods through the border-crossing points in the eastern and southern regions of
Guinea-Bissau, using the Mobile INTERPOL Network Database (MIND).
71. On 21 August, the transnational organized crime units of Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone participated in a UNODC -coordinated regional workshop
in Dakar to share their respective countries’ organizational structure, operational
challenges and lessons learned. The second inter-agency protocol for collaboration
and joint intelligence, investigation and interdiction operations relating to drug and
psychotropic substances was signed during the workshop.
72. The West Africa Coast Initiative Policy Committee met in Bissau on
24 November under the co-chairmanship of my Special Representative for Guinea Bissau and my Special Representative for West Africa and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), with the participation of 40 high -level
international representatives and United Nations officials, including the Ministers of
the Interior of Guinea and Sierra Leone as well as the Attorney General of Liberia.
Participants acknowledged and expressed support for the Guinea -Bissau authorities
for their efforts to fight transnational organized crime since the return to
constitutional order in 2014. The Policy Committee took stock of the progress made
in the implementation of the Initiative, discussed solutions for countries where
implementation levels remained low and agreed on new strategic orie ntations for the
extension of the Initiative programme until 2017. The Committee reasserted its
support for the implementation of the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan to Address
the Growing Problem of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime and Drug Abuse
in West Africa (2008-2015). At the conclusion of the meeting, members of the
Committee also reaffirmed their continuous commitment to implementing the

14/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

Initiative programme, including through strategic coordination at the national,
regional and international levels.
73. On 30 November and 1 December, with the support of UNIOGBIS, the
Ministers of Defence and Justice co-chaired a seminar organized by the National
Defence Institute aimed at discussing transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, and its negative impact on stability and governance in Guinea -Bissau
and the subregion.
74. On the same day, UNODC, in cooperation with UNIOGBIS, initiated a
training-of-trainers course on trafficking in persons in Bissau. The course, which
concluded on 4 December, was a joint initiative between UNODC and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, with the participation of the
Portuguese Observatory on Trafficking in Human Beings.
75. On 11 December, UNIOGBIS reopened its regional office on Bubaque Islan d,
in the Bijagós archipelago, which will, inter alia, support efforts to assist national
authorities in monitoring drug activities and transnational organized crime. Two
officers have been deployed to the office.

I.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding, in line with
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
76. In collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the Women’s Political Platform, UNIOGBIS organized two training
workshops on land law and conflict resolution, in Bolama, in the Quinará region, on
15 and 16 August and in Quinhamel, in the Biombo region, on 21 and 22 August.
The workshops were aimed at strengthening the capacity of women leaders and civil
society with respect to land law, gender equality, community dialogue, gender -based
violence and conflict resolution.
77. From 23 to 24 October, UNIOGBIS held a training workshop on gender
equality and security sector reform in Canchungo, in the Cacheu region, in
collaboration with two women’s committees established within the defence and
security institutions. Thirty-five women from the navy, the army, the air force, the
National Guard and the Public Order Police took part in the training, aimed at
strengthening participants’ capacity to promote and protect women’s rights under
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Participants expressed their concern
regarding gender inequality within the armed forces and security institutions.
78. On 23 and 24 November, the National Assembly specialized commission on
women and children and the National Network of Women in Parliament organized a
workshop in Bissau to validate a bill of law on quotas for women to promote
women’s participation in decision-making processes. Participants agreed on the
need to further improve the bill, which, once fully validated, will be submitted to
the National Assembly for approval.
79. From 16 to 19 December, UNIOGBIS supported the organization of a training
workshop for women’s civil society organizations and women leaders on
communication, advocacy and lobbying, in response to a request by the women’s
parliamentary caucus.

16-01538

15/18

S/2016/141

J.

Work with the Peacebuilding Commission in support of GuineaBissau’s peacebuilding priorities
80. On 21 October, the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific configuration
for Guinea-Bissau held an informal meeting to review the political and economic
situation in the aftermath of the political crisis in the country. The newly appointed
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Artur Silva, participated in the meeting from Bissau.
The Minister briefed the configuration on the Government’s priorities and provided
assurances with respect to the authorities’ political will and commitment to restore
stability in Guinea-Bissau.
81. In a statement issued on 26 October, the configuration encouraged national
stakeholders to address the country’s governance difficulties through political
inclusivity and commitment to rebuild the momentum for progress in key areas such
as the security sector and the “Terra Ranka” development programme presented to
the donor community at the round table in March 2015. On 16 December, the
configuration issued another statement, urging the political leadership to rise to the
country’s historic opportunity to break the cycle of instability and poverty.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
82. The Guinea-Bissau-United Nations Partnership Framework for the period
2016-2020, in support of the implementation of the national stra tegic and
operational plan for the period 2015-2020 (“Terra Ranka”), has been finalized and is
awaiting signature by the Government. The estimated budget for the Partnership
Framework amounts to approximately $381 million, including $10 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund. A coordination mechanism for its implementation has been
discussed and agreed upon with national authorities. A joint action plan for its
implementation is expected to be finalized and adopted in the first quarter of 2016.
83. On 16 November, my Special Representative convened the third meeting of
the United Nations Strategic Policy Group to jointly review contributions from the
United Nations system towards the implementation of the mandate of UNIOGBIS.
Members of the Group also examined the mechanisms for coordination, monitoring
and evaluation between the Government of Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations,
as part of the United Nations Partnership Framework.
84. In accordance with the findings of a working-level visit to Bissau led by the
Department of Political Affairs from 15 to 17 December, I have requested
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team to support the development of a
national strategy and joint rule of law programme within the framework of the
Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections and to foster greater
integration by realizing opportunities for synergy and collaboration in the areas of
reconciliation and constitutional reform.

16/18

16-01538

S/2016/141

B.

Public information
85. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS produced 25 radio programmes in the
Creole and Portuguese languages, which were broadcast on two national radio
stations. The programmes were focused on human rights and gender issues,
sustainable development, peace and security, justice and humanitarian affairs, the
rule of law and the national reconciliation process. UNIOGBIS assisted the
Organizing Commission of the National Conference and the ad hoc commission on
constitutional reform in developing their respective communication strategies and
preparing their first communication activities.
86. As Chair of the United Nations Communications Group, UNIOGBIS led the
organization of a wide range of activities to mark the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, such as lectures on the United Nations at Amilcar Cabral
University, Lusophone University and secondary schools, a special parliamentary
session on United Nations Day on 24 October, a concert and a photo exhibition on
the Sustainable Development Goals and the work of the Organization in Guinea Bissau.
87. Notwithstanding planned activities in the field of public information, owing to
the current political situation UNIOGBIS delayed joint work with the Ministry of
Social Communication on the media forum and adjustments to the national policy
for the media sector. In addition, the non-signature of the United Nations
Partnership Framework has negatively affected the UNIOGBIS communication
strategy and associated coordination mechanisms.

C.

Staff safety and security
88. The overall security situation remained relatively calm throughout the country
during the reporting period. Four incidents of petty crime and three minor non -fatal
traffic accidents involving United Nations staff members were reported. In response
to continued reports regarding terrorist threats in the subregion, preventive measures
were put in place at UNIOGBIS and United Nations House, and staff members were
reminded to be vigilant.

V. Observations
89. The political crisis within the main political party, PAIGC, and among the
political leadership in Guinea-Bissau, which has prevented the country from moving
forward with its national reform agenda for more than six months, is concerning.
The current stagnation undermines the bright outlook for the country following the
successful partners’ round table in March, during which international partners
expressed unprecedented support for the country’s strategic and operational plan for
the period 2015-2020. The crisis has the potential to further damage the already
fragile State institutions and the overall peacebuilding process.
90. In such a context, it is the people of Guinea-Bissau who are failing to reap the
dividends promised to them by their democratically elected Government. They have
yet to see tangible improvements in their socioeco nomic situations. I appeal to the
leaders of Guinea-Bissau, including the President, the Prime Minister, the Speaker

16-01538

17/18

S/2016/141

of Parliament and heads of political parties, to follow through on their commitment
to bring political stability to Guinea-Bissau in the interests of their nation.
91. I commend Guinea-Bissau’s regional and international partners, in particular
ECOWAS, the African Union, the Community of Portuguese -speaking Countries,
the European Union and bilateral partners, which, along with the United Na tions,
have remained steadfast in investing time and resources in supporting the people of
Guinea-Bissau in their quest to attain sustainable peace and stability. I also wish to
recognize the important and salutary role played by ECOMIB and urge Member
States to consider providing financial assistance to support ECOWAS in sustaining
the deployment of the Mission.
92. I note with satisfaction that the armed forces have remained in their barracks
and have not interfered in the political affairs of the countr y. I encourage national
authorities with responsibility and command over that sector to intensify efforts,
within their capacities, to advance the implementation of security sector reform,
including its retirement and reintegration aspects. I hope that bil ateral, regional and
international partners will provide the financial and technical support needed to
move this process forward. I also call on the Government to operationalize as soon
as possible the coordination mechanisms for pledge disbursement and mo nitoring,
in cooperation with partners. The United Nations remains available to provide
technical assistance in that regard.
93. I equally appeal to the National Assembly, the ad hoc Commission on
Constitutional Reform and the Organizing Commission of the National Conference
to accelerate their work while making the best use of the technical expertise
provided by the United Nations. Likewise, United Nations support will continue to
be available, upon request and where appropriate, for other initiatives aime d at
enhancing stability in Guinea-Bissau, including the formulation of a stability pact.
94. I remain concerned about the continued fragility of Guinea -Bissau’s criminal
justice system and the lack of progress in the investigation of, and in establishing
accountability mechanisms for, gross human rights violations. I reiterate my calls to
national authorities to implement the justice reform plans, the national plan to
address transnational organized crime, and the recommendations made in the
Human Rights Council’s universal periodic review of Guinea-Bissau in January
2015. I also encourage national authorities to finalize the ratification of all pending
human rights instruments.
95. The mandate of UNIOGBIS expires on 28 February, but much work remains to
be done, including in support of efforts to find a sustainable solution to the ongoing
political crisis. I therefore recommend that the current mandate of UNIOGBIS be
extended for another year, until 28 February 201 7.
96. To conclude, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Miguel Trovoada, and to the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country
team under his leadership, as well as to bilateral, regional and international partners,
for their continuing contributions to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

18/18

16-01538
