United Nations

A/RES/68/196

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 109

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/458)]

68/196. United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative
Development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that the world drug problem must be addressed in accordance with
the provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by
the 1972 Protocol, 1 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 2 and the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances of 1988, 3 which constitute the framework of the
international drug control system,
Bearing in mind the content of article 14 of the 1988 Convention, regarding
measures to eradicate illicit cultivation of narcotic plants and cooperation to
increase the effectiveness of those efforts,
Fully aware that the world drug problem remains a common and shared
responsibility that requires effective and increased international cooperation and
demands an integrated, multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing and balanced
approach to supply and demand reduction strategies,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its
twentieth special session 4 and the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the
Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, 5 and stressing the
commitment contained in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter
the World Drug Problem, 6 adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at the

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
3
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
4
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
5
Resolution S-20/4 E.
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I,
sect. C.
2

13-45121

*1345121*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/196

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

high-level segment of its fifty-second session and by the Assembly in its resolution
64/182 of 18 December 2009,
Recalling Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 52/6 of 20 March 2009,6
53/6 of 12 March 2010, 7 54/4 of 25 March 2011 8 and 55/4 of 16 March 2012, 9 which
resulted in the International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable Alternative
Development, held in the provinces of Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, Thailand, from
6 to 11 November 2011, and the high-level International Conference on Alternative
Development, held in Lima from 14 to 16 November 2012, hosted by the
Governments of Thailand and Peru, respectively, in close collaboration with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, at which Member States considered and
adopted the International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development, 10
Recalling also its resolution 67/193 of 20 December 2012, in which it noted
the need for Member States to undertake to increase long-term investment in
sustainable crop control strategies targeting the illicit cultivation of crops, in
coordination with other development measures, in order to contribute to the
sustainability of social and economic development and poverty eradication, and
recognized the significant role played by developing countries with extensive
expertise in alternative development, including preventive alternative development,
in promoting best practices and lessons learned from such programmes and invited
them to continue sharing those best practices with States affected by illicit crop
cultivation,
Acknowledging that alternative development 11 is an important, lawful, viable
and sustainable alternative to illicit cultivation of drug crops and an effective
measure to counter the world drug problem and other drug-related crime challenges,
as well as a choice in favour of societies free of drug abuse, that it is one of the key
components of policies and programmes for reducing illicit drug production and that
it is an integral part of efforts made by Governments to achieve sustainable
development within their societies,
Reaffirming that development-oriented drug policies and programmes should
be undertaken in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and, in particular, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, human rights and fundamental freedoms and the
principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 12 and the principle of
common and shared responsibility, as well as the Millennium Development Goals,
and also taking into account the specific situation of countries and regions and,
where appropriate, security concerns,
1.
Welcomes the outcome of the high-level International Conference on
Alternative Development, held in Lima from 14 to 16 November 2012, including the
adoption of the Lima Declaration on Alternative Development and the International
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development; 10

_______________
7

Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 8 (E/2010/28), chap. I, sect. C.
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 8 (E/2011/28), chap. I, sect. C.
9
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 8 (E/2012/28), chap. I, sect. C.
10
See E/CN.7/2013/8.
11
In accordance with Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/33, 2007/12 and 2008/26, the concept
of alternative development includes preventive alternative development in a manner focusing on the
sustainability and integrality of uplifting people’s livelihood.
12
Resolution 217 A (III).
8

2/10

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/68/196

2.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on the outcome of that Conference; 10
3.
Adopts the aforementioned Lima Declaration on Alternative
Development and the International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
as the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development, annexed to
the present resolution;
4.
Encourages Member States, international organizations, international
financial institutions, entities and other relevant stakeholders to take into account
the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development when designing
and implementing alternative development programmes;
5.
Expresses its appreciation and gratitude to the Governments of Thailand
and Peru for the convening of the International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable
Alternative Development and the high-level International Conference on Alternative
Development, respectively.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

Annex
United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
Lima Declaration on Alternative Development
We, the representatives convened in Lima for the high-level International
Conference on Alternative Development on 16 November 2012,
Underscoring that the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as
amended by the 1972 Protocol, 13 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971 14 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, 15 in particular its article 14, paragraphs 2 and
3, constitute the framework of the international drug control system, and urging
their full and effective implementation,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its
twentieth special session in 1998 16 and the Political Declaration and Plan of Action
on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to
Counter the World Drug Problem, adopted by the General Assembly in 2009, 17
Noting that, as was stated at the International Seminar Workshop on
Sustainable Alternative Development, held in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai,
Thailand, from 6 to 11 November 2011, the Political Declaration and Plan of Action
mentioned above, together with the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the
Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, 18 represent a
_______________
13

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
15
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
16
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
17
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I,
sect. C.
18
Resolution S-20/4 E.
14

3/10

A/RES/68/196

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

significant advance, as they promote alternative development within the framework
of broad national rural development, emphasize the need to address poverty, inter
alia, as a driver of illicit crop cultivation and suggest the coupling of both human
development and crop reduction indicators to measure the success of alternative
development efforts,
Reaffirming that development-oriented drug policies and programmes should
be undertaken in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and, in particular, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 19 and the principle
of common and shared responsibility, as well as the Millennium Development
Goals, also taking into account the rule of law, the specific situations of countries
and regions and, where appropriate, security concerns,
Recalling Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 53/6 of 12 March 2010, 20
54/4 of 25 March 2011, 21 and 55/4 and 55/8 of 16 March 2012, 22
Recognizing that alternative development, which, in accordance with
Economic and Social Council resolutions, includes, as appropriate, preventive
alternative development, is part of sustainable and effective crop control strategies,
which may also include eradication and law enforcement measures,
Recognizing also that alternative development is a process to prevent and
eliminate the illicit cultivation of plants containing narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances through specifically designed rural development measures in the context
of sustained national economic growth and sustainable development efforts in
countries taking action against drugs, and recognizing the particular sociocultural
characteristics of the target communities and groups, within the framework of a
comprehensive and permanent solution to the problem of illicit drugs,
Recognizing further that the problem of the illicit production and manufacture
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances is often related to development
problems and that those links require, within the context of common and shared
responsibility, close cooperation among States, the competent organs of the United
Nations system, in particular, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
regional bodies and international financial institutions,
Acknowledging the principal role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as a
governing body of the United Nations Office on Drug and Crime, along with its
subsidiary bodies, together with the International Narcotics Control Board, as the
United Nations organs with prime responsibility for drug control matters,
Reaffirming that alternative development is one of the tools to fight against the
world drug problem,
Recalling and noting with appreciation the inputs for the draft international
guiding principles on alternative development agreed by participants at the
International Seminar Workshop on Sustainable Alternative Development, held in

_______________
19

Resolution 217 A (III).
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2010, Supplement No. 8 (E/2010/28), chap. I,
sect. C.
21
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 8 (E/2011/28), chap. I, sect. C.
22
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 8 (E/2012/28), chap. I, sect. C.
20

4/10

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/68/196

the provinces of Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, Thailand, from 6 to 11 November
2011, 23
1.
Welcome the outcome of the high-level International Conference on
Alternative Development, held in Lima from 14 to 16 November 2012, which
includes the present Declaration and the International Guiding Principles on
Alternative Development, as contained in the appendix hereto;
2.
Encourage States, competent international organizations, entities and
other relevant stakeholders to take into account the present Declaration and the
International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development when designing and
implementing alternative development strategies and programmes;
3.
Submit the present Declaration, including its appendix, to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for inclusion in his
report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-sixth session;
4.
Express our appreciation and gratitude to the Government of Peru for
the convening of the high-level International Conference on Alternative
Development.

Appendix
International Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
A.

General provisions

1.
Alternative development policies are an important component of enhancing
development in States affected by, or in some cases at risk of, the illicit cultivation
of crops used for illicit drug production and manufacture, and play an important role
in national, regional and international development policies and in comprehensive
policies of poverty reduction and cooperation.
2.
Alternative development, as an integral component of policies and
programmes for reducing drug production, is an important, viable and sustainable
option for preventing, eliminating or significantly and measurably reducing the
illicit cultivation of crops used for the production and manufacture of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances through tackling poverty and providing livelihood
opportunities.
3.
Alternative development, including in some cases preventive alternative
development, constitutes an international policy founded on the principle of shared
and common responsibility that seeks to discourage the cultivation of illicit crops in
countries affected by that problem and in those countries which are vulnerable to
illicit activities.
4.
Alternative development, which includes, as appropriate, preventive
alternative development strategies and programmes, should be formulated and
implemented by taking into account the vulnerability and specific needs of the
communities and groups affected by illicit cultivation of crops used for drug
production and manufacture, within the broader framework of national policies.
5.
Effective alternative development strategies and programmes require, as
appropriate, the strengthening of relevant governmental institutions at the national,
_______________
23

See E/CN.7/2012/8.

5/10

A/RES/68/196

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

regional and local levels. Public policies should be supported to the extent possible
by, inter alia, strengthening legal frameworks, involving local communities and
relevant organizations, identifying and providing adequate financial support,
technical assistance and increased investment, and recognizing and enforcing
property rights, including access to land.
6.
Local communities and relevant organizations should be involved in the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all alternative development
programmes in order to truly reflect the needs of targeted communities.
7.
Civil society can contribute significantly to the formulation of effective and
sustainable alternative development programmes, and its active participation should
therefore be encouraged in all phases of alternative development programmes.
8.
An integrated and complementary approach to alternative development
programmes and strategies is crucial and should be implemented in concert with
broader drug control policies, including demand reduction, law enforcement, illicit
crop elimination and awareness-raising, taking into account demographic, cultural,
social and geographic considerations, as appropriate, and in line with the three drug
control conventions.
9.
States should ensure the proper and coordinated sequencing of development
interventions when designing alternative development programmes, and in that
regard should take into account issues related to the establishment of agreements
and viable partnerships with small producers, favourable climatic conditions, strong
political support and adequate market access.
10. Alternative development programmes in the areas where crops are cultivated
for illicit drug production and manufacture should be undertaken with a clear
understanding of the overall objectives, as appropriate, of eliminating or
significantly and measurably reducing the supply of drugs while promoting
comprehensive development and social inclusion, alleviating poverty and
strengthening social development, the rule of law, security and stability at the
country and regional levels, taking into account the promotion and protection of
human rights.
11. Alternative development programmes should include measures to protect the
environment at the local level, according to national and international law and
policies, through the provision of incentives for conservation, proper education and
awareness programmes so that the local communities can improve and preserve
their livelihoods and mitigate negative environmental impacts.
12. Alternative development programmes, including, as appropriate, preventive
alternative development programmes, should be designed to address subregional and
regional needs and should be integrated, when circumstances require, into broader
regional, subregional and bilateral treaties and arrangements.
13. International cooperation, coordination and stakeholder ownership are
essential for the successful implementation and sustainability of alternative
development programmes. Alternative development should be considered by all
parties involved as a long-term commitment whose results may require time to
attain.
14. International cooperation programmes aimed at alternative development
should take into account the experiences of different countries, including with
regard to South-South cooperation, should draw on best practices and lessons

6/10

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/68/196

learned in alternative development programmes and projects and should take into
account the available financial and technical support provided by donors.
15. Alternative development policies, as one of the tools available in the fight
against the world drug problem, should be implemented alongside efforts made by
States to strengthen the rule of law and promote health, safety and security so as to
ensure a comprehensive approach to tackling the challenges that may be posed by
the possible links between drug trafficking, corruption and different forms of
organized crime and, in some cases, terrorism.
16. Alternative development can be an integral element of an overall development
strategy and should complement economic efforts in the fight against poverty.
17. The impact of alternative development programmes should be assessed by
taking into account their contribution to the control of illicit crop cultivation,
including the eradication of such crops, and through estimates based on human
development indices, socioeconomic and environmental indicators and impartial and
accurate evaluations.
B.

Actions and implementation measures

18. States Members of the United Nations, international organizations, regional
organizations, development agencies, donors and international financial institutions,
as well as civil society, should apply their utmost efforts, as appropriate:
(a) To target illicit cultivation and production of crops used for the
production and manufacture of illicit drugs, and address related factors, by
alleviating poverty, by strengthening the rule of law and institutional frameworks, as
appropriate, and by promoting sustainable development aimed at enhancing the
welfare of the population;
(b) To build and maintain confidence, dialogue and cooperation with and
between stakeholders, from people at the community level and local authorities to
leaders at the national and regional levels, so as to ensure participation and
ownership for long-term sustainability;
(c) To implement long-term projects and programmes to provide
opportunities to fight poverty, diversify livelihoods and strengthen development,
institutional frameworks and the rule of law;
(d) To develop policies and programmes that take into account an evidenceand science-based assessment of the potential impact of alternative development on
the illicit cultivation of crops used for the illicit production and manufacture of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, and on rural and socioeconomic
development, including the gender dimension related thereto, and the environment;
(e) To take into account the need to promote the diversification of licit crops
cultivated and licit economic activities undertaken when implementing alternative
development programmes;
(f) Owing to the transnational nature of drug-related crimes, to encourage
and support coordinated cross-border collaboration and alternative development
activities, where appropriate and feasible, with the support of international
cooperation;
(g) To address with specific measures the situation of women, children,
youth and other high-risk populations, including, in some cases, dependent drug
users, owing to their vulnerability and exploitation in the illicit drug economy;
7/10

A/RES/68/196

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

(h) To provide, within a holistic and integrated development approach,
essential basic services and legal livelihood opportunities to the communities
affected by, or in some cases vulnerable to, illicit crop cultivation;
(i) To recognize that alternative development, including, as appropriate,
preventive alternative development, requires the implementation of articulated
short-, medium- and long-term plans and actions from all relevant stakeholders to
promote positive and sustainable socioeconomic changes in the affected and, in
some cases, vulnerable areas;
(j) To promote coordination and encourage alternative development
programmes which contain complementary measures at the local, regional and
national levels;
(k) To ensure, when considering crop control measures, that small-farmer
households have opportunities for viable and sustainable licit livelihoods so that the
measures may be properly sequenced in a sustainable fashion and appropriately
coordinated, taking into account the circumstances of the region, country or area
concerned;
(l) To ensure that programmes or projects related to alternative development
effectively discourage the illicit cultivation of crops used for the illicit production
and manufacture of drugs;
(m) To also ensure that drug control programmes are implemented in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, so as to avoid the shifting of illicit crop
cultivation domestically, as well as from one country or region to another;
(n) To respect the legitimate interests and specific needs of the local affected
and, in some cases, vulnerable population when designing and implementing
alternative development programmes;
(o) To address basic human needs, in full conformity with the three drug
conventions and relevant human rights instruments, in order to promote the welfare
of targeted communities;
(p) To integrate those communities which are in marginalized regions into
the economic and political mainstream; as appropriate, such integration should
involve supporting access to roads, schools, primary health-care services, electricity
and other services and infrastructure;
(q) To promote increased coordination and cooperation between relevant
governmental agencies, when appropriate, and adopt an integrated approach to drug
control that involves all relevant stakeholders;
(r) To ensure that the implementation of alternative development
programmes is conducted in a manner that helps to enhance synergy and confidence
among national Governments, regional authorities and local administrations and
communities with regard to building local ownership and coordination and
cooperation;
(s) To promote the strengthening of the justice and security sectors and
social development, as well as institutional legal frameworks and anti-corruption
measures, in a manner conducive to enhancing alternative development efforts;
(t) To promote governance capabilities, when appropriate, in order to
strengthen the rule of law, including at the local level;

8/10

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/68/196

(u) To ensure that measures aimed at strengthening the rule of law are
included in development-oriented drug control policies in order to, inter alia,
support farmers in their efforts to stop, and in some cases prevent, the cultivation of
illicit crops;
(v) To apply, in addition to estimates of illicit cultivation and other illicit
activities related to the world drug problem, indicators related to human
development, socioeconomic conditions, rural development and the alleviation of
poverty, as well as institutional and environmental indicators, when assessing
alternative development programmes in order to ensure that the outcomes are in line
with national and international development objectives, including the Millennium
Development Goals, and that they reflect accountable use of donor funds and truly
benefit the affected communities;
(w) To utilize objective impact evaluations that examine a broad range of
social, economic and environmental factors and incorporate the lessons learned
from these evaluations in future projects to ensure that the design and
implementation of alternative development programmes are based on a reliable and
evidence-based evaluation and thorough analysis of local socioeconomic,
geographical and cultural realities, as well as the assessment of benefits and risks;
(x) To undertake further research and strengthen data collection with a view
to providing a basis for more effective and evidence-based alternative development
programmes, as well as conduct research to assess the factors leading to the illicit
cultivation of drug crops used for the production and manufacture of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances;
(y) To utilize data and conduct analysis to identify areas, communities and
affected populations that are vulnerable to illicit cultivation and its related illicit
activities, and tailor the implementation of programmes and projects to address
identified needs;
(z) To encourage partners in cross-border alternative development activities
to consider measures to support the implementation of alternative development
strategies and programmes, which may include special preferential policies,
protection of property rights and facilitation of the import and export of products, in
accordance with relevant international law, including trade agreements;
(aa) To enhance technical support, including exchange of expertise, best
practices and resources, while seeking to secure long-term flexible funding for
alternative development programmes in order to ensure their sustainability;
(bb) To consider the possibility of creating an international fund for
alternative development programmes that could be used to face major emergency
situations, in order to ensure continuity;
(cc) To recognize that international cooperation resources for the
implementation of alternative development programmes should be used in
consultation and in coordination with partner countries to support joint efforts to
eliminate, reduce and, in some cases, prevent the cultivation of illicit crops through
reducing poverty and enhancing rural development in areas affected by, or in some
cases vulnerable to, illicit cultivation and engaging in effective law enforcement
measures;
(dd) To recognize that long-term cooperation, coordination and the
commitment of multilevel and multisectoral stakeholders are essential to a holistic

9/10

A/RES/68/196

United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

and integrated approach to the effectiveness and sustainability of alternative
development programmes;
(ee) To consider voluntary and pragmatic measures in appropriate forums,
with a view to enabling alternative development products to gain easier access to
international markets, in accordance with applicable multilateral trade rules and
treaties and taking into consideration the ongoing negotiation processes in the
framework of the World Trade Organization; these might include promoting costeffective marketing regimes in the field of alternative development, including, as
appropriate, preventive alternative development, such as a global stamp for products
stemming from alternative development programmes and voluntary certification to
support the sustainability of alternative development products;
(ff) To promote, where appropriate, a favourable socioeconomic
infrastructure, including the development of roads and transportation networks, the
promotion and enhancement of farmer associations, microfinance schemes and
schemes aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the management of available
financing resources;
(gg) To combine local wisdom, indigenous knowledge, public-private
partnerships and available resources to promote, inter alia, a legal market-driven
product development approach when applicable, capacity-building, skills training of
the involved population, effective management and the entrepreneurial spirit, in
order to support the creation of internal and sustainable commercial systems and a
viable value chain at the local level, when applicable;
(hh) To support policies conducive to cooperation with the international
financial institutions and, where appropriate, private sector involvement and
investment to help to ensure long-term sustainability, including through the use of
public-private partnerships, and to encourage alternative development in rural
associations or cooperatives and support their management capacity, in order to
maximize value from primary production and to ensure the integration of areas
affected by, or in some cases vulnerable to, illicit cultivation into national, regional
and, as appropriate, international markets;
(ii) To promote local ownership and participation of the involved parties in
the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of alternative development
programmes and projects;
(jj) To foster empowerment, including articulation, communication and
participation, of the community and local authorities and other stakeholders, to
sustain the achievements of the projects and programmes;
(kk) To take into account land rights and other related land management
resources when designing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating alternative
development programmes, including those of indigenous peoples and local
communities, in accordance with national legal frameworks;
(ll) To raise awareness among rural communities of the negative impacts that
illicit drug crop cultivation, related deforestation and the illicit use of natural
resources, in disregard of national or international laws, may have on long-term
development and the environment.

10/10
