CONTENTS

Provisional

Adoption

. . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I ,. . . I . . . . . . .

1

of the agenda . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

agenda (S/Agenda/l942)

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current Chairman of the Organizalion of African Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against the
Republic of Uganda:
(CI) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(/>) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/12128);
(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(cl) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Chargi d’affaires n.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12124) . , . . . . . , . , . . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

SIPV. 1942

-

-.

-_

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, , .) are normally published in
quarterly Sllpple~~~zt.r of the Qj’jkiul Records qf’ the Security Cm~~c~il. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcso/r/tions
tr~rl
Dccixions o/’ the) Sccl/rity CouI~cil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1942nd MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 13 July 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
Psesitlcnt:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1942)

1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

Complaint
by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against
the Republic of Uganda:
(0) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant
Executive Secretary of the. Organization of
African Unity to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/12126);
(k) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mauritania to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12128);
(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(cl) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Chargi
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Uganda to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12124)

Adoption of the agenda

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current
chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of
the “act of aggression” by Israel against the Republic of Uganda:
(a) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the Organization of African Unity
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12126);
(6) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania to the United Nations

addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);
(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent representative of Israel to the United Nations addressedto the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(d) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the ChargC d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12124)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at previous meetings
[/9.?9th to 194l.u nwctings],
I invite the representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea,
Israel, Kenya, Mauritania, Mauritius, Qatar, Somalia,
Uganda, United Republic of Cameroon and Yugoslavia to participate in the Council’s discussion, without the right to vote.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that, in addition, I have received a letter from the representative
of India requesting an invitation to participate in the Council’s
discussion. In accordance with the provisions
of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representative of India to parlicipate in the discussion without the right to vote.
3. I invite the representative of India to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to take
a place at the Council table when it is his turn to speak.

4. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the first
speaker, I should like to remind the members of the
Council that, besides the documents listed in the

I I, &It there are also other causes which result
from the world situation and which require that all
States Members of the United Nations, and in particular the most developed countries,
co-operate
tangibly for their solution. These are problems which,
as they become more acute, will bring about majot
social turmoil, and unless they are given priority will
cause the destabilization of mankind. One of the most
urgent problems was highlighted in the report of the
World Food Council, which recently met in Rome.
The report states that unless the nations make greatel
joint efforts, the world is headed for a disastrous global
famine by 1985. On the other hand, the recent Habilat
Conference held in Vancouver has shown that the
world population, which is now 4,000 million, will
double within the next 30 years. Therefore, public
services will also have to double. Health problems
will assume tragic dimensions.
Accordingly
to the
same sources, although 60 per cent of the world’s
population lives in rural areas, there is a steady outflow
of migrants to the urban areas, so that within the next
25 years most of the inhabitants will be massed in the
cities, thereby naturally aggravating urban problems.
United Nations experts estimate that in order to meet
the population growth, developing countries will, in
the next 20 years, have to create as many jobs as the
developed countries have created over the last 200
years. Three quarters of the world’s popukilion live
from hand to mouth in developing countries while
80 per cent of the world’s wealth is concentrated in
the hands of 20 per cent or less of the population.
The housing problem is taking on the proportions of
Dante’s inferno. In 1974, the developing world had
to import 27 million tons of cereals and this ix expected
to rise to 80 million tons in the next decade. About
half the cities of Latin America lack piped water and
sewerage. In some parts of Africa and Asia, only one
house out of five has piped drinking water. Unilecl
Nations specialists estimate that 500 million children
-that is to say, one eighth of the world’s populntionsuffer from malnutrition.

agenda,

the documents relevant to the item under
are the following: S/12131, S/12132,
S/12134, S/12135, S/12136 and S/12140.

discus~i~t~

5. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (iMrrp,cftrtioll
,fiO/Jl
Sptrlrislr): Mr, President, the delegation of the Republic of Panama wishes to associate itself with previous speakers and to congratulate you most warmly
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of July. We are certain that YOU Wit]
do an outstanding job in carrying out your delicate
responsibilities.
6. My delegation also wishes to express its appreciation to Ambassador Jackson of Guyana for his
extraordinary performance as President of the Council
for the month of June, which was a credit to him, to
his country and to Latin America.
7. It was with genuine regret that the delegation of
Panama learnt of the death of Mr. Chou-teh on 6 July
in Peking. This illustrious Chinese slatesman was
Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National
People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China,
and we join in the tributes to the memory of this
legendary hero of the great Chinese nation. May I
reiterate to Ambassador Lai Ya-li, our colleague,
Mr. Chou Nan, and the members of the Permanent
Mission of China our most sincere condolences.
8. The death of Mr. Gustav Heinemann, an eminent
international
personality who was President of the
Federal Republic of, Germany from 1969 to 1974,
prompts my delegation to express its condolences to
the people and Government of the Federal Republic
of Germany on this irreparable loss.
9. Furthermore,
the delegation of Panama wishes
to express its solidarity with Indonesia in connexion
with the earthquakes which have caused thousands
of deaths in that country, and we hope that dynamic
and generous international assistance will be forthcoming so as not only to alleviate suffering but also
to meet the needs of the population groups that were
affected by the earthquake.

12. In contrast with this ominous social picture.
the Secretariat’s latest figures for military
expenditures for 1973 was between $ZOS,OOO million uuct
$235,000 million at constant 1970 prices, and $240,0110
million to $275,000 million at 1973 prices, This figure
is higher than the estimated combined gross national
product of the developing countries of southern Ask
the Far East and Africa, and far higher than that 01
Latin America.

10. The breach of the peace which occurred in
Uganda has deeper causes than those which appeal
on the surface and which deserve the conscientious
and sustained attention of the international community. The reasons for the tragedy which started with
the hijacking of the French aircraft may be identified
through the report of the At/ Hoc Committee on International Terrorism,’
which, when referring to political terrorism directed against States and to its
underlying causes, recognizes that a social group 01
a population resorts to terrorism and to violence when
its rights are trampled underfoot, when it is the victim
of political, SOCki] or economic injustice, and when a]]
recourse to legal procedures to obtain justice is
fruitless.

13. In the opinion of experts, all this will bring abour
tremendous complications
in human settlements in
future years. It is also considered that all the factor:,
to which we have referred,
which together promote
urban concentrations of population and poverty, are
aIS0
an inVit~ltiOll
to terrorism, which may be individual terrorism, political
terrorism
or State tcrrorism.
14. Panama attaches the utmost importance to the
complaint made by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
2

the current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, of “the act of aggression” by Israel against the
Republic of Uganda, the impact af which has been
clear from the significant number of States not members of the Council who have attended these meetings
to put their views on.
15. The delegation of Panama would like to avail
itself of this opportunity to reiterare to the Orgnnization of African Unity its unalterable anti-colonialist
stance and its opposition to any kind of discrimination, For years in the United Nations, we have been
on the side of the African peoples, which have been
steadily struggling to eradicate from their continent
the inhuman practices of racial discrimination. Apt/~/r&/, which is the most shamefuul manner of oppressing
peoples, has been energetically rejected by the Government and people of Panama. Everywhere, Panama
has raised its voice, loud and strong, against the
&imes of white supremacy which, running counter
to the advance of history, persist in keeping.large
groups of African peoples under the most humiliating
and absurd exploitation.
16. Because of the deep and unstaunched wounds
to its sovereignty and territorial integrity in its geographical heartland, Panama cannot be indifferent to
the violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of any country in Africa or in the world.
17, Panama knows fuII well how painful colonial
situations are because it is itself divided by the colonial
enclave of the Canal Zone, which has deprived the
Panamanians of their two main ports on the Atlantic
and on the Pacific. This untenable situation is a permanent source of tension and exposes the inhabitants
of my country to unforeseeable consequences and
risks. The inalienable rights of the Panamanian people
have been trampled underfoot for 73 years by a treaty
giving the other party the lion’s share treaty which is
absolutely without justification nowadays. It is therefore perfectly natural for Panama to be a firm supporter
of the United Nations policy of decolonization.
18. In this .year of the bicentennial of the independence of the United States, and as we celebrate the
Amphictyonic
Congress convened by the Liberatbr
Simcin Bolivar, which is linked to the best values of
democracy, human rights, fundamental
freedoms,
national sovereignty and anti-colonialism,
we hope
that a final agreement will be reached for a just and
equitable treaty which will meet Panama’s claims.
The protracted negotiations with the United States,
which have been going on for 12 years, will be delayed
somewhat further because of the North American
elections. But our Head of Government, General Oman
Torrijos, has set the target of 1977 for the decolonization of Pariama. Torrijos has declared that by 1977
the patience of the Panamanians and the excuses of
the United States would be exhausted. Panama cannot
be out of touch with history or contemporary thinking.
All the major international canals with the sole excep-

tion of the Panama Canal are under the control of the
territorial sovereign. Just as the Suez Canal is Egyptian and the Kiel Canal is German, the Panama Canal
must be Panamanian. That is our absolute right.
19. In this debate there has been no lack of countries reproaching the United Nations for its apparent
ineffectiveness in maintaining
international
peace
and security: Those who speak thus overlook the
constructive
achievements
of the Organization,
which, like the wolf of Roman mythology, has suckled
and sustained the political existence of many States.
But this has not made the Organization immune from
attack because of its creative activities for the benefit
of mankind. Like Prometheus,
it is, exposed to the
vulture of ingratitude which devours its entrails.
20. Those who criticize the United Nations are not
censuring the Organization but the Governments
of
its Member States. The effort to reorganize the international community
within the system of collective
security which the San Francisco Charter attempted
to shape is the responsibility of all States, which have
not only committed themselves to act in such a way
as to maintain international
peace and security but
have agreed to accept and carry out the decisions of
the Security Council in accordance with Article 25 of
the Charter.
21. In debating the item on its agenda regarding the
complaint made by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
the Council must necessarily confront two acts of
violence: one perpetrated by an extremist group of
Palestinian Arabs and Europeans, calling itself the
“Gaza Brigade of the Guevara Group of the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine”, which hijacked
the Air France airbus over Greece, taking 256 hostages, who were flown to Entebbe Airport at Kampala;
and the other perpetrated by forces of the Israeli
army, which violated the air space as well as the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of
Uganda with an operation to rescue the Israeli hostages.
22. The International
Court of Justice has established its own definition
of an international
illegal
act. It defines such an act as one which violates a
rule of international law and therefore gives rise to
responsibility.
23. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, which
was the butcome of a trend in public opinion produced
by the tragic results of the Second World War, provides that:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.”
24. It was precisely my country, Panama, which
submitted the proposal which gave rise to resolution

178 (11) of 21 November 1947 whereby the General
Assembly decided to instruct the International Law
Commission
to prepare a draft declaration on the
rights and duties of States, taking as a basis for discussion the draft declaration on the rights and duties
of States presented by Panama. The Draft Declaration on the Rights and Duties of States [GPWIY~~
ASSPI~I~/.Y~,solr~tion 375 (IV), (IWW.Y] prepared by the
International
Law Commission at its first session,
which in general follows the text submitted by the
Panamanian jurist Mr. Ricardo J. Alfaro, establishes
irllo- rrlirr that: every State has the duty to refrain from
intervening in the internal or external affairs of any
other State; every State has the duty to refrain from
fomenting civil strife in the territory of another State,
and to prevent the organization on its territory of
activities calculated to foment such civil strife; every
State has the duty to refrain from resorting to war as
an instrument of national policy, and to refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of another State, or in
any other way inconsistent with international law and
order; every State has the right of indiyidual or collective self-defence against armed attack.
25. My country has a well-established tradition of
protecting human rights and the principles of international law regarding friendship and co-operation
among States, which is proved by the historical evidence that the first draft of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the Declaration on the Rights
and Duties of States were submitted by Panama as
one of the priority tasks of the Organization which
came into being as a result of the San Francisco
Charter.

existing situation

is an act of legitimate self-defence.
Nevertheless, those who study and interpret contemporary
insurrections consider that terrorism has failed
as a system of revolutionary struggle and that organized political
terrorism is a perVerSiOn
Of pOlitiCal
struggle. But, even so, terrorism continues to be an
instrument of political combat nevertheless.
The
extremists have not abandoned it in their efforts ta
agitate public opinion and mobilize the masses.
28. Concerned at the frequency of such acts, the
Genera1 Assembly adopted its resolution 3034 (XXVII)
entitled “Measures to prevent international
terrorism
which endangers or takes innocent human lives or
jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the
underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and
acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration, grievance and despair and which cause some people to
sacrifice human lives, including their own, in an
attempt to affect radical changes”. Under that resolution, the Ad HW Committee
on International
Terrorism was established. It consisted of 35 members
and met under the chairmanship of the present Foreign
Minister of Panama, Mr. Aquilino Boyd, at United
Nations Headquarters, from 16 July to 11 August
1973. At the conclusion of its labours the Committee
submitted its report on international
terrorism to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session.’
Action on this is still pending, but it is to be on the
agenda of the thirty-first
session. The SecretaryGeneral has been referring to it in his annual reporls
on the work of the Organization in the last few years.
29. In the course of the Committee’s work Venezuela
submitted a draft proposal which constitutes a good
summary of the concerns of the Committee
regarding
the definition of international terrorism and its underlying causes. According to the Venezuelan proposal.
international terrorism is

26.

There can be no doubt, then, that in the case we
there are two acts of force without legal
basis-one
committed
by a State against another
Member State and the other carried out by civilians
moved by political passion.
are discussing

“Any threat or act of violence which endangers
or takes innocent human lives, or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, committed by an individual or
group of individuals on foreign territory, on the
high seas or on board an aircraft in flight in the ait
space superjacent to the open or free seas for the
purpose of instilling terror and designed to achieve
a political goal.

27. If aggression, as defined in Genera1 Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX), is “the use of armed force
by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
or political independence of another State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations”, it is obvious that the violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda by
the military operation carried out at Entebbe Airport
by the Israeli army constituted a use of force not
authorized by the Charter, which only permits enforcement actions by the United Nations or legitimate
individual
or collective self-defence against armed
aggression. Israel was not the victim of an armed
attack by Uganda, and therefore its act of aggression
was not legitimate. Israel’s invoking the right of selfdefence to justify its act parallels the mental attitude
of those advocates of terrorism who argue that against
arbitrariness,
injustice, the denial of fundamental
human rights and trampling under foot of the right of
self-determination,
any act of violence to change the

“Inhuman
repressive measures carried out by
colonial or racist regimes, and all measures conducive to the exercise of alien domination,
in denying
Peoples their legitimate right to self-determination
and independence and other human rights and
fundamental freedoms, shall also be deemed to bc
acts of international terrorism.
“Serious bodily harm, murder, the taking OP
hostages, kidnapping, the sending of letter-bombs
and damage to objects and property, when committed in foreign territory, or by or against foreigners, for the purpose of instilling
terror with R
4

view to achieving a political objective, shall also
be deemed to be acts of international
terrorism,
since they constitute offences against social morality
,and violations of the dignity of the human person.“2

34.

Mr.

DATCU
(Romania)
(htrrprrtatiorr
jkm
President,
in offering you our most
cordial congratulations
on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Council for the month of July,
I should like to assure you of the confidence and
unreserved support of the Romanian delegation. Your
outstanding personal qualities, your long and rich
diplomatic experience,
so well known and highly
appreciated, are for us, we are convinced, the best
possible guarantee that the deliberations
of this
important body will be conducted in a competent and
impartial fashion. It is with both pleasure and satisfaction that I also venture to mention on this occasion
the excellent relations existing between Romania and
your own country, Italy, as well as the long-standing
ties of traditional friendship between our two peoples
of common origin.
Fwrzch): Mr.

38. In our opinion, the work of the Committee is a
splendid contribution that should be taken into account
in any future action, especially as regards the underlying causes of international terrorism and measures
for its prevention. Some delegations have invoked as
justification for Israel’s action the right of that State
to protect its nationals who had been kinapped on
foreign territory. We must point out, however, that
the International
Court of Justice at The Hague,
though admitting that it is an elementary principle of
international
law that a State has the authority to
protect its nationals who have been harmed by .acts
contrary to international
law committed by another
State, at the same time limits that right to the exercise
of diplomatic or international judicial action and, in
any case, to the means for the peaceful settlement of
disputes laid down in Article 33 of the Charter.

35. Allow me also to pay a well-deserved tribute to
your predecessors in the chair, Mr. Wills, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guyana, and Ambassador Jackson for the competence with which they directed the
Council’s debates during the long month of June.

3 1. The military action taken by Israel is not, therefore, characteristic of the right of a State to protect
its nationals, as this right is envisaged in the Charter
among the peaceful means for the settlement of disputes, but rather becomes an act of armed intervention
such as those frequently resorted to by powerful
countries against the weaker countries. The grievous
occurrence at the Entebbe airport, resulting in a tragic
toll in dead and wounded that has brought grief to
homes and families in Uganda, Israel, Germany,
England and Arab countries, demands concerted
action on the part of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Secretariat to eradicate the causes
that underlie acts of terrorism and the hijacking of
aircraft in flight, involving grave danger to the life and
well-being of the crew and disregarding the most
elementary humanitarian considerations.

36. The Romanian delegation would like to associate
itself, too, with your own words, Sir, in conveying to
the delegation of the People’s Republic of China its
profound condolences on the grievous loss sustained
by the fraternal people of China at the passing of
Comrade Chou-teh, a distinguished
leader of the
Chinese Party and State, who devoted his whole life
to the struggle for the victory of the cause of the social
and national liberation of the Chinese people and fol
the triumph of the revolution and the building of
socialism in the People’s Republic of China.
37. We should also like to express our profound
condolences to the Permanent Mission of the Federal
Republic of Germany on the death of the former President, Mr. Gustav Heinemann.

32. The presence, in actions of this kind, of Palestinian Arabs has, without doubt, as its underlying
cause resentment at the delay in implementing
the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in Palestine,
rights which include, by decision of the General
Assembly, the right to self-determination
and the
right to national independence and sovereignty, We
are in favour of respect for and recognition of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all States in the region and of their right
to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free from the threat or use of force.

38. The Council now has before it the complaint
submitted by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current
Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity, in
connexion with the military raid by Israel on Entebbe
Airport in Uganda. The account of the facts by the
parties concerned indicates that the armed action
undertaken by IsraCli troops was aimed at freeing a
group of passengers detained as hostages at that
airport following the hijacking in flight on 27 June of
an Air France airbus. Another result was that the
military raid on Entebbe caused the death of many
Ugandan citizens and also considerable
material
damage.

33. The Government of Panama, with all due respect
to the members of the Council who have sponsored
the draft resolutions submitted for its consideration,
is of the opinion that the question cannot be resolved
by condemning either Israel or those responsible for
the hijacking of the Air France airbus, or through the
award of reparations to the Republic of Uganda. My
delegation will therefore abstain when the two draft
resolutions are put to the vote.

39. The Romanian delegation believes that the Council, in considering the item on its agenda, should have
in mind the provisions of international
law as laid
down in the Charter and in the documents of the
United Nations. It should be stressed in this connexion
that the Charter of our Organization
enshrines the
principle that it is the duty of States in their relations
I

5
-

inadmissible
and dangerous to international
peace
and security. Such armed actions undertaken
by
States, with premeditation,
against the sovereignty
of other States cannot possibly be placed on the same
footing, as the irresponsible acts of isolated individuals, in an attempt to justify such acts by individuals.
That is why the Romanian delegation believes that the
Council should take a firm stand, in keeping with the
Charter, on acts of force committed
against Uganda
and in favour of respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that country, thus
ensuring the primacy of international law over force.

with all other States to refrain from the threat or use
of force. This principle forms part of the jars co@‘fls
and is of universal application. It is true that Article 51
of the Charter recognizes the right of States to legitimate individual or collective self-defence but this right
may be exercised only when the State concerned is
the victim of an armed attack. In the case before the
Council the conditions of Article 51 of the Charter
have not been met.
40. Romania disapproves of and condemns acts
involving the threat or use of force in international
relations, as well as armed attacks on the territory of
other States and, indeed, any attempts to vi.olate the
territorial integrity, sovereignty or independence of
States wherever these acts may be committed and
whatever the circumstances and the pretexts invoked.
Experience has shown that such armed attacks and
other similar acts involving the use of force cannot
lead to a settlement of international
problems; on the
contrary, they only make them worse. Such acts
cannot possibly be accepted or tolerated for the simple
reason that they represent an infraction of international law, a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and an attempt to replace
law by force.

46. At the same time, we are aware that the dangerous spiral of violence and lawlessness in international life can be halted only by joint, concerted action
by all Governments, We therefore believe that the
United Nations and the Security Council should, with
a view to finding appropriate remedies, give more
consideration to the negative phenomena
in international life which revive and foster hatred among
peoples and which complicate and impair relations
between States.
47. We believe that the action of the United Nations
would be more effective if it were also to include
preventive measures and if it were aimed at harmonizing the efforts of the nations for the achievement
of the common goals of respect for international
law
and justice, in the interest of mankind as a whole
without any discrimination.

41. As has been stressed in the course of this debate,
the military raid on Entebbe formed part of a chain
of events triggered off by the hijacking of the Air
France airbus.
42. In this connexion we should like to make it clear
once again that Romania disapproves of and condemns acts of international terrorism, including aerial
hijacking and the taking of hostages. International
terrorism is a profoundly negative phenomenon, a
disturbing phenomenon which harms co-operative
relations among States and confidence between
peoples.

48. Mr. ABE (Japan): Mr. President, I should like
first to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July. It is
a particular pleasure for me to see you in the presidency because you are not only one of the most outstanding Ambassadors of Italy, with which my country has always enjoyed traditional relations, but you
have for many years shown a particularly
warm
friendship towards me, both officially and personally.
My delegation looks forward to working with you and
with all the members of ihe Council under your wise
guidance, and assures you of its full confidence, support and co-operation.

43. Acts of terrorism against innocent persons
cannot be considered as revolutionary
means of
‘struggle, even if they are undertaken in a noble cause.
Such acts have never had and cannot have the desired
results. On the contrary, they are prejudicial to the
genuine interests of the peoples’ struggle against
imperialism
and for freedom and national independence.

49. My delegation would also like to express its
congratulations and appreciation to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guyana and to Ambassador Jackson
for the exemplary manner in which they conducted
our proceedings in the month of June, which were
indeed demanding.

44. Moreover, we should not confuse or identify
the peoples’ struggle for national liberation with terrorism. The struggle for national and social liberation
is a legitimate and lawful struggle in keeping with the
deepest aspirations of peoples. It is in keeping with
the Charter and the norms of international law and has
been so recognized by our Organization. That is why
Romania has given whole-hearted
support to the
peoples struggling for their national liberation, and
we are determined to continue doing so.

50. My delegation wishes to join other speakers in
expressing to the delegation of China most sincere
condolences on the untimely death of Chairman Chouteh, who was one of the greatest leaders of the People’s Republic of China.
51. My delegation would also like to express its
sincere condolences to the delegation of the Federal
Republic of Germany on the demise of Mr. Gustav
Heinemann, that country’s former President.

45. The violation of Ugandan sovereignty by Israeli
military aircraft is an illegal act and, consequently,
6

52. My delegation
has listened with the utmost
attention to the statements made by the preceding
speakers, particularly those of the representatives of
the Republic of Uganda and of Israel [/939f/r meeting],
the principal parties in the present dispute.

though the motives as well as the circumstances
which led Israel to take such action were presented
in detail to the Council by the representative of Israel,
my delegation is bound to state that there was an act
of violation by Israel of the sovereignty of the Republic of Uganda. This fact cannot be overlooked. My
delegation strongly believes that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of any State must be respected by
other States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

53. I should like to state, first of all, that my delegalion followed with great anxiety the course of these
events from its beginning on 27 June. Our concern
was particularly grave since Japan itself has fallen
prey to similar hijacking and international terrorism
several times in recent years.

58. My delegation reserves its opinion as to whether
the situation which led to the Israeli military action
meets the conditions required for the exercise of the
right of self-defence recognized under international
law, as the Israeli representative seemed to contend.

54. It is the firm belief of my Government that international terrorism, whatever form it may take, constitutes an abhorrent crime against mankind and must
be denounced in the strongest terms by the world
community.
The countries of the world must take
effective measures to prevent and eliminate such a
crime against humanity, and they are required to
co-operate fully with each other in attaining this goal.

59. The PRESIDENT:
I give the floor to the representative of Mauritius for a point of order.
60. Sir Harold WALTER
(Mauritius): Mr. President, yesterday, in the course of the debate, you were
asked a very pertinent question: “When is a point of
order a point of order?” [1940th meeting, para. 15.1
Well, I am putting it to you today that this debate
cannot be allowed to travel in a world of personal
likings. The Council has a clear issue before it which
you all agreed should be discussed. This issue today
is haloed by something which is extraneous to the
issue before the Council. And more than this: a draft
resolution has been submitted by the United Kingdom
and the United States of America [S/12/38] which is
unacceptable, according to all norms of procedure and
contrary to the issue which is before this Council.

55. Based on this conviction,
the Government of
Japan has taken an active role in formulating international agreements such as the Convention for the
Suppression
of the Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,
signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970,” to which
Japan is a party. Our Government has also constantly
given full support to the resolutions and decisions of
the General Assembly and of the Security Council
designed to prevent and eliminate hijacking and international terrorism. Would any of the Member States
represented on the Council or any of the delegations
participating in the debate dare condone hijacking and
international terrorism such as occurred in the present
case’? What we will need to do, therefore is to implement our common view to the fullest extent.

61. The point of order arises from the fact that what
is being discussed, apart from the very issue before
us, which is clear, is not only extraneous to the issue,
it is irrelevant to the debates. I humbly submit that
we cannot allow, if only for the sake respecting the
normal and correct procedure in our debates, something to be debated which is totally irrelevant and
totally extraneous to the issue before the Council. If
we want to discuss that issue, let it be put on the
agenda; then we can discuss it. But can this draft
resolution even be receivable when the issue before
the Council is clear and has been accepted by the
Council?

56. First, all possible measures must be taken to
prevent such a crime. If they fail and the crime is
committed, we must join our efforts in the fight against
the common enemy, regardless of whatever differences, political or otherwise, might exist between US.
It goes without saying that our efforts must be aimed
above all at saving the lives of the innocent victims
of the crime. The hijacking of an Air France plane was
exactly the type of case which I have just described.
Again this time, prevention was not found effective,
but when the hijacking occurred, all the Governments
involved made joint efforts to save the hostages of
the plane. It is a matter of deep regret, however, that
while most of the hostages could be saved, we had to
see the loss of many human lives also. My delegation
expresses its deep sympathy and condolences to those
victims and their bereaved families. The tragic end of
the incident underscores once again the need for
reaffirming our determination
to pursue all possible
means, both preventive and punitive.

62. I submit, Mr. President, with all due respect
-and you may rest assured of my collaboration and
co-operation to help you in your difficult task-that
you should give’a ruling as to whether it is possible
for an extraneous and irrelevant matter to be brought
into our debate just for confusion-to
hover around
the main issue.
63. The PRESIDENT:
In answer to the point Of
order raised by the representative of Mauritius, I might
remind him that in the verbatim record of the other
day’s meeting this point of order has already been
raised and settled. Nevertheless, out of respect for

57. The Air France hijacking was terminated in an
extraordinary
circumstance, namely, military action
by a State within the territory of another State. Al7

have the right to propose any draft resolution. 1 said
it is a question of courtesy...”
[194/St ~~r~J~‘ti/rg,

you, Sir, I did not interrupt you when you raised this
point of order which, to my mind, has already been
settled.

pcr,o. 192.1

and a little later on he said-and
with this:

64. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): I apologize for taking the floor now, but I should like to support the point of order raised by the Foreign Minister
of Mauritius, In fact, my delegation raised the same
point of order yesterday, and I think it was not settled.
I made an appeal to you, Mr. President, and we are
still hoping that you will do everything you can to
keep the discussion in line and within the framework
of the subject and the item agreed to by the Council.

“It is always a delicate matter. And then, after
that, any country can propose a draft resohtion.”
[I/id.]
And finally, he accused me of being “not orthodox”
[ibid., puw. 1931.

71. It does seem to me that, whatever his views on
my orthodoxy, my courtesy or my lack of normal
consultation, the one thing it cannot be, with due
respect to him or the Foreign Minister of Mauritius,
is a breach of the rules of the Council. Any delegation
has the right to propose any draft resolution. We have
done so. The remedy thereafter, if it is put to a vote,
lies with the members of the Council.

65. The PRESIDENT:
I might remind the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic that he himself
said the other day, speaking about the draft resolution
introduced by the delegation of the United Kingdom,
that he agreed that there was no objection to the submission of a draft resolution-that
any delegation had
the right to introduce a draft resolution which it
thought would be relevant to the item under discussion, and that this was a right he himself recognized.
SO I think this adds even more weight to what I stated
before.

72. The PRESIDENT:
May I appeal to our colleague
and friend from Libya, as well as to all members of
the Council, not to raise procedural questions. These
have already been settled in my own mind; this is my
own conviction. This was settled yesterday, and
I think we should not go back to it. We have enough
problems as it is, so we should proceed with our
debate.

66. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Yesterday, when I commented on the move made by the
delegations of the United Kingdom and the United
States, I expressed my disappointment that it was not
along the lines of the normal procedure of consultations, courtesy and the established practice in the
Council.

73. The next speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

67. As the representative of the United Kingdom
said, there is nothing in the rules that can prevent him
from presenting a draft resolution, to which I replied
that I knew there was nothing in the rules to prevent
him from presenting a draft resolution. But the point
raised now is not a question of the right of any delegation to present a draft resolution; the question raised
by the Foreign Minister of Mauritius was whether this
draft resolution was relevant or irrelevant. It is not;
it has nothing to do with the item we are discussing.
This is the point of the Foreign Minister of Mauritius,
and I agree with him in that.

of Israel,

74. Mr. HERZOG
(Israel): May I, at the outset,
express my delegation’s condolences to the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany on
the passing of the former President, Mr. Gustav Heinemann, a leader of moral standing and outstanding
qualities.
75. I can appreciate the concern demonstrated
the Foreign Minister of Mauritius in introducing
point of order.

by
his

76. The mention of such imagined errors in my
speech as he may have drawn attention to was, I believe, prompted by expediency, and not by his own
moral or legal convictions. I say this because we both
benefited from the same education in the same distinguished centre of legal studies. The principles of
natural and international law which we both absorbed
entirely justified the Israeli action at Entebbe, as the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius knows only too well.

68. Mr. President, we trust you, and we hope you
will guide our work on the right path so that we can
achieve success in our discussion in the Council, You
are “commanding”
our work, and as you say in your
beautiful language, “Chi cmnmcrnd~rfn legge”.
69. The PRESIDENT:
command.

I agree very much

I hope that our work is not a

70. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): I only wish
to say that I agree with what the representative of
Libya said yesterday, as reported in the verbatim
record of our proceedings. He said this:

77. The weight of the evidence to prove TJgandan
complicity has been growing by the day as the detailed
statements of the hostages are analysed and new
evidence becomes available. We now know from the
debriefing of the passengers that the map in the hands
of the leader of the hijacking group, Wilfred Bose,

“I should like only to correct the representative
of the Wnited Kingdom. I did not say he did not
8

which he produced immediately
after the plane took
off from Athens, was already clearly marked with the
route Athens-Benghazi-Entebbe.
We know, too, as has
indeed been published, that before the arrival of the
plane at Entebbe, Idi Amin dispatched his personal
plane to Somalia in order to pick up and bring to
Entebbe the leader of the terrorists, who took control
of the plane after it landed at Entebbe.

82. Similar reports appeared in many other newspapers and magazines and on many radio and television stations, All reports were based on information
given by released hostages and government officials.
There is not the slightest doubt in anyone’s mind that
in fact the hijackers were reinforced in Uganda. Careful reading of President Amin’s message to the President of the Security Council at the statement by his
Foreign Minister
reveal an inadvertent,
indirect
admission of the fact that the hijackers were indeed
reinforced by other terrorists in Kampala. In President Amin’s message, he states that “the Israeli
invaders quickly mounted an attack on the hijackers,
killing seven of them” [S//2/24, 01717~.~].

78. Furthermore,
the members. of the Council are
fully aware by now that four terrorists hijacked the
plane at Athens. The evidence which I have produced,
and which other representatives
have confirmed,
shows that the plane was met at Entebbe Airport by
reinforcements of terrorists, some five in number. Four
terrorists hijacked the plane. Seven terrorists were
accorded a State funeral with full military honours by
the Government of Uganda. In other words, by all
accounts-including,
impliedly,
by Ugandan accounts-terrorist
reinforcements
appeared on the
scene in Entebbe. In fact, we know that they were
driven on to the scene in two official Uganda cars,
one driven by a soldier in uniform.

83. A similar reference to seven hijackers killed also
appears in the Ugandan Foreign Minister’s statement
[1939th uwting, pcm.. Sl]. President Amin’s reference to “seven of them”, implies that there were more
than seven. However, as we all recall, only four
commandeered the Air France plane after it departed
from Athens Airport. Thus, in fact, both President
Amin and his Foreign Minister have implicitly
admitted that the original hijackers were reinforced by
more terrorists at Entebbe Airport. What better proof
of Uganda’s complicity in this crime does one need
than the fact that Uganda allowed a reinforcement
of
four to five Arab armed terrorists to join the hijackers?

79. It is interesting to note that, despite the overwhelming body of evidence which confirms the fact
that the hijackers were reinforced in Kampala, there
is no reference to it directly in either President Amin’s
message contained in document S/12124 or the two
statements made by his Foreign Minister here on
Friday, 9 July [1939th nwcting].

84. Furthermore, the important role played by the
terrorists who joined the hijackers at Kampala adds
further proof that the Entebbe part of the hijacking
was a carefully planned operation which could not
have been carried out without the complicity of the
Government of Uganda. T/~E Nru’ York; Times, which
was correctly referred to by the Foreign Minister of
Mauritius as a highly respected newspaper, interviewed one of the released hostages, Mr. Michel
Cojot, and the following was reported on 6 July:

80. I listened carefully to the statement made by the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius [/940th nwtin,q], and
nowhere was there any reference to the reinforcement
of terrorists awaiting the hijackers at Entebbe. So far
as is concerned, they did not exist. His eloquence in
speech was equalled only by his eloquent silence.
81. Shortly after 101 hostages were released on
I July, the following dispatch was sent from the Associated Press in Paris:

“Although the West German man was clearly in
charge on the plane, Mr. Cojot said, he added that
it was equally clear that the four hijackers were
simply the soldiers in the plot and did not have
authority to negotiate for the hostages or to make
any decisions beyond capturing them and keeping
them calm.

“Hostages newly released by hijackers of an Air
France jetliner arrived here early today and said
three or four heavily armed men, apparently Arabs,
were waiting to reinforce four original hijackers
when the plane commandeered over Greece landed
in Entebbe, Uganda”

” ‘It was the three Arabs who joined them on the
ground at Entebbe who were in charge of the further
decisions’, he said. ‘The orders were coming from
somewhere else. One of them spoke Spanish’.”

After the Israeli rescue operation, the French newspaper LCJ Mode gave full details of this act of aerial
piracy in its issue of 5 July, which included the following:
“On their arrival at Kampala, they were joined
on the field, immediately
after landing, by a group
of four or five Palestinians armed with sub-machineguns.“:!:

85. In other words, the hijacking operation of the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP)
could not have been carried out as planned unless the
hijacked plane arrived at its predetermined
destination, Uganda, where the leader of the operation was
waiting.

‘a Quoted

86. If Uganda was not implicated, how did it happen
that these reinforcements were allowed to drive up’?

in French

by the speaker.

9

“ ‘The terrorists packed up their grenades and
put them back in the sacks they had carried aboard.
They put the 7.65 Czech automatic pistols, which
had never left their hands for a second during the
flight, into their belts and sat down together in the
front of the plane’, he said. ‘Until then there had
always been at least one in front and one in back
to cover us’.

Why have those representatives, who have identified
themselves in so moving a manner out of a feeling
of common interest with Idi Amin’s Uganda and with
the cause of international terror, not addressed themselves to this rather strange development,
which in
itself proves their thesis to be false? Furthermore, if
there was no connivance, where are the other terrorists? What has happend to the two or three survivors of the rescue operation at Entebbe Airport? Why
have they not been apprehended and produced in
accordance with The Hague Convention of 1970?’

“Mr. Cojot said that at that point he managed to
talk with one of the crew members and suggested
that it would be possible to overcome the four
hijackers, who were grouped together without weap
ons in their hands, and for someone to slip out of
the exit and summon help.

87. Since the press has been quoted at length in our
proceedings, let me do my share, too. Another detailed account of Ugandan collusion apptared on
5 July in The NW
York Times. Allow me to quote part
of the article, for it summarizes numerous reports
which confirm that the Ugandan authorities worked
hand in glove with the terrorists. The report from
Paris states:

I‘ ‘We agreed, ,though, that the hijackers were
acting as though they felt completely at home. The
sudden relaxation of their previously
thorough
discipline showed they considered themselves on
friendly ground’.

“Officials and released hostages said here today
that they had substantial evidence that President
Idi Amin had been in collusion with the hijackers
of an Air France airbus in the seizure of the plane
as well as after it landed in Uganda.

.I . I t
“ ‘...The whole time, we felt we were being
guarded by both the hijackers and the Ugandans’.

...

“Friends of the hijackers who joined them at the
airport appeared to be Palestinians, Mr. Cojot said.
‘They came and went freely in a Datsun with local
license plates and a diplomatic
plate, carrying
weapons’, he added.

“A highly placed French source said that President Amin had refused to allow Pierre Renard, the
French Ambassador to Uganda, or a special French
envoy to deal with the hijackers directly.

“The Uganda civilian manager of the airport had
food and drink ready for the hostages not long after
their arrival. ‘But nonetheless I had to talk to him’,
Mr. Cojot said, ‘because there weren’t enough
plates at one time and then not enough glasses.
I was joking and said, “Well, it must be hard to look
after 263 unexpected guests”.’

LL..*
“They also noted that during the first 24 hours
after the aircraft reached Entebbe, the hijackers
withdrew to rest and Ugandans guarded the hostages.

” ‘The manager replied, “Oh, but I was expecting
you” ‘, Mr. Cojot said.”

“Other evidence pointing to the Ugandan President’s involvement with the terrorists was included
in comments by French diplomats and the reports
of hostages freed earlier by the terrorists., ,

88. T/w Wtrshi@o/? Posr of 5 July similarly
a detailed indictment of President Amin:

“Among the passengers released last week were
Michel Cojot and his 12-year-old son, Oliver.
Mr. Cojot, a French management consultant, served
as interpreter for the hostages, and negptiated on
their behalffor small conveniences during the ordeal,

carried

“The accounts of ‘the 148 non-Jewish hostages
released earlier in the week supported the Israelis’
view.
“The freed hostages spoke of Amin’s embracing
the leader of the hijack gang and of the four hijackers
then leaving the hostages to be guarded by Ugandan
troops for 24 hours.

“Mr. Cojot said that he had ‘not a shadow of a
doubt’ that the Uganda President knew of the hijack
plan in advance and had prepared for the action.

“Afterward,
the two Arabs and two Germans
who hijacked the Air France plane over Greece
returned, looking refreshed after a night’s sleep and

Lb. . .

a bath.

“Mr. Cojot said that after landing at Entebbe,
Uganda’s international airport, everybile remained
on the plane for several hours.

“The four hijackers were later joined by at least
three Palestinians, and the gang was supplied with
10

additional automatic weapons, according to French
and Greek hostages.

it would prove very time-consuming.
However, there
is one abominable lie which my country cannot pass
over in silence, and it is incumbent upon me to show
the true faces of the President of Uganda and his
Foreign Minister for what they tire.

“A Greek ship mechanic,
Christos Sarantis,
speaking for the seven Greeks freed earlier in the
week, said, ‘We were guarded by black soldiers
and by about a hundred persons in civilian dress,
who had excellent relations and-co-operated with
the hijackers. There was full co-operation between
Amin, his men and the hijackers.’ ”

93. The Foreign Minister
fore the Council that

of Uganda has stated be-

“When she”-Mrs.
Bloch--“got
better in the
evening of Saturday, 3 July, she was returned by
the medical authorities to the old Entebbe airport
to join the other hostages...

89. I am fully aware of the statement made by Captain Bacos, as reported in The NW York Times of
6 July and quoted here by the Foreign Minister of
Mauritius.
However,
the overwhelming
body of
evidence corroborated by the majority of the hostages
that were released-as
was indeed, reported many
times in the press-proves
that indeed Ugandan troops
participated, together with the terrorists in guard duty
‘over the 260-odd innocent passengers and crew.
I regret that the Foreign Minister of Mauritius chose
to ignore the extensive evidence available, which
probes Uganda’s collusion with the terrorists.

“The Israelis committed a naked act of aggression
by invading Entebbe airport where the hostages,
including Mrs. Dora Bloch, were being held by the
hijackers. . . . The members of the invading force
took away all the hostages-dead,
injured or otherwise. . . .
“The press reports and diplomatic
sources
according to which one diplomat saw Mrs. Dora
Bloch in hospital on Sunday are’false. There is no
concrete information
about it.” [/93Yt/? meeting,

90. I have already, in my statement of Friday last,
referred to the fact that the terrorists, always aided
by the Ugandans, interrogated some Israelis, at times
using force and even threats of death. The New York
TI’II~PS of Sunday, 11 July, carried a vivid description
of one such interrogation conducted by both the terrorists and the Ugandans:

poro.s. 254256.1

So much for the statement of the Foreign
Uganda before the Council.

Minister

of

94. I repeat that that is a damnable lie. Mrs. Bloch
was visited in the hospital by a British diplomat on
Sunday 4 July, after Israel’s rescue operation at
Entebbe Airport, as was clearly stated to the Council
by the representative
of the United Kingdom.
The
diplomat reported that she was being guarded by two
men, and when he returned an hour later he was not
allowed to see her. That diplomat, we were informed
yesterday by the representative of the United Kingdom, is to be expelled from Uganda today.

“During one period of questioning by the terrorists about what he really knew about Israel,
Mr. Dahan was slapped in the face, punched in the
back and his fingers were twisted backward. He
was told to write long reports about Israel and he
proceeded to turn in documents dealing with kibbutz
life and how he picked grapefruit.
“After one of these exercises, a Ugandan tore
the paper out of his hand and threw it on the floor,
saying: ‘This is not what we want. ,,. We want to
know about the army. We want to know where the
bases are. We want the name of your general.’

95. And we now have the ominous news that the
Government of Uganda is applying the threat of blackmail to foreign nationals in Uganda in connexion with
the current proceedings in the Security Council. In
other words, for the first time in history, a direct
attempt is being made by threats of blackmail of the
most ominous character to influence the proceedings
in the Council.

“A tall Palestinian carrying a gun and another
called ‘George’ joined four Uganda officers in the
questioning.
At one point, George put a gun to
Mr. Dahan’s chest.”

96. How can the Council pass this over in silence?
How can it ignore a blatant attempt to influence this
body? How can ‘the members of the Council ignore
this flagrant attempt to interfere with their national
sovereignty? This whole sordid affair condemns not
only the Government of Uganda but all the countries
which have spoken against the Israeli rescue mission
during this debate. They have ignored the basic cause
of this issue, namely the hijacking of the plane, and,
for reasons of political expediency, they have not even
had the good grace to say one word about the fate of
an old lady of 75 dragged out of the hospital, in all

91. In view of the overwhelming body of evidence
corroborated by most of the 260 passengers and crew
of the hijacked plane, I am left with no other choice
but to call the two statements of the Foreign Minister
of Uganda nothing but the most formidable collection
of distortions, half-thruths, deliberate omissions and
outright falsehoods the Council has heard in a long
time.
92. I shall not tire the Council by listing each and
every distortion, They are too numerous to count, and
11

when action is taken designed to combat terror in
cases where the victims are not Mexicans. It is utterly
incredible and beyond the realm of comprehension
that political expediency should dictate to the Government of Mexico and lead it to attack a small State
defending itself against a common enemy of Mexico
and Israel, namely international terror.

probability to the horrible fate that has been meted
out to hundeds of Kenyan citizens in Uganda, a fate
the nature of which has been described by the Foreign
Minister of Kenya in the letter he addressed to you
yesterday, Mr. President [S/12/40].
97. With all due respect to the Foreign Minister of
Mauritius and to other members who have joined him
in condemning Israel, the fact that they did not see
fit even to mention in passing the fate of Mrs. Bloch
and did not see fit to address an appeal to the Ugandan
authorities with respect to her whereabouts removes
from them the moral right to any standing in this
debate.

102. I cannot hide my amazement at the fact that
the representative of Yugoslavia saw fit, this time too,
as in cases in the past, to intervene on the side of
those condemning Israel, in his anxious desire to
demonstrate his loyal alignment with the remarks of
the so-called non-aligned countries. If any country in
the world should be interested today in a move against
terror, if any country in the world should have had a
word of condolence to say for the victims of the
hijacking and terror, then it should have been Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav representative, let it be noted,
had words of condolence for Uganda. Innocent Israeli
hostages were killed too in this operation. Why had
Yugoslavia not one word to say for them? It is sad
indeed to see the Yugoslav Government,
on each
occasion in this f&urn, rushing to the head of the line
in order to condemn Israel, regardless of the issue,
blinded apparently by an extreme anti-Israel attitude
and by an espousal of the cause of the new antiSemitism in the world today. Yugoslavia, like many
other countries which spoke in this debate, does not
realize that international
terrorism-from
which it
suffers no less than do others-will
yet make them
eat the words expressed by their representative on
this occasion at the Council table.

98. The case of Mrs. Bloch only emphasizes in a
most tragic manner the scope of the complicity of the
Ugandans. And let me quote from a statement by
Mr. Yigal Allon, our Foreign Minister, in the Knesset
today:
“The disappearance of Mrs. Bloch constitutes an
inseparable part of the whole hijacking
incident.
The fate which befell her gives vivid substance to
the awful danger which threatened the lives of all
the hijacked passengers at Entebbe until they were
freed in the magnificent rescue operation conducted
by the Israel defence forces. It also proves once
and for ever how empty and devoid of content,
human, moral and legal alike, were those voices
which rushed to condemn Israel in the international
arena for carrying out the elementary duty towards
its citizens and saving them from this awful danger.”
99. Again I wish to draw the attention of the Council
to a fact conveniently ignored-namely,
that to date,
IO days after the release of the hostages, the French
Air France plane has not yet been released. Again,
this is a significant factor, though perhaps a minor one
against the background of the bloodshed,
terror,
human misery and suffering which that operation has
entailed.

103. Frankly, I regret perhaps more than many of the
other interventions
that of the representative
of
Tanzania. I regret it because of the personal high
regard in which I hold him and because of the very
great respect in which I, together with many others
in Israel, regard his great teacher, the President of
Tanzania, whose ‘guest I have had the honour to be.
In his legal arguments he conveniently forgets that the
legal authorities which he quotes do justify, in international law, such actions as we are discussing, on the
grounds of individual self-defence or collective selfdefence, as I believe I pointed out when quoting at
great length from authorities on international law in
my speech last Friday. He and others quoted Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter, obligating countries to
settle their disputes by peaceful means. Let me again
quote D. P. O’Connell in Internotionrrl
Ltrw,
second
edition,4 pages 303 and 304:

100. I do not wish to refute many of the speeches
made at this table, because they have been made by
countries whose rCgimes have so much in common
with the rkgime in Uganda that there is no point in
addressing myself to their remarks on a legal or moral
basis. One of those countries is Somalia, which, as
I have mentioned before, has become a centre for terrorist operations and a threat to its neighbouring State.
The representative of Somalia furthermore
went out
of his way to misquote some of my remarks, a fact
which does not surprise me. However, I should like
to refer to some of the statements that have been made.

“Article 2 (4) [of the United Nations Charter]
should be intepreted as prohibiting
acts of force
against the territorial integrity and political independence of nations, and not to prohibit a use of
force which is limited in intentions and effect to the
protection of a State’s own integrity and its nationals’ vital interest, when the machinery envisaged by the United Nations Charter is ineffective
in the situation.”

101. As to the Mexican letter [s/12135] addressed
to you, Mr. President, we have always followed with
understanding the very active campaign that Mexico
is conducting against the terrorism which affects it.
We are therefore all the more surprised that Mexico
is unable to reveal a similar measure of understanding
12

104. One’s mind tends to be dulled and one’s memory to be hazed as the debate goes on in the Council,
Let me remind the Council that we are talking about
a decision by the Government of Israel to protect its
citizens, hostages threatened with their very lives,
over 100 men, women and children held at gun point
by terrorists who had hijacked them, who recognize
no sovereignty, know no law, and who have proved
in the past that there are no limits to their bestiality.
These are the self same people who shot diplomats,
bound hand and foot; who murdered sportsmen at
the Olympic games, bound hand and foot, and who,
in the past, have held children hostage and were ready
to slaughter them. These people were being aided and
abetted by a Government headed by a racist murderer
who had applauded the slaughter of the Israeli sportsmen, bound hand and foot, by the same terrorists;
who had called for the extinction of Israel in the United
Nations, and who had not only praised Hitler for the
murder of 6 million Jews but had proposed building
a monument to Hitler-a
move which prompted even
the Soviet Ambassador in Kampala to suggest to
President Amin that he was going too far.

flown? You know as well as Ido that they are directed
against Kenya and Tanzania, which have been threatened and continue to be threatened openly in statements by the President of Uganda, and that the planes
are flown by, amongst others, PLO pilots,
110. Who is threatening Africa and the Africans?
Israel, whose refusal to be associated in any way with
President Amin’s proposal to invade and bomb Tanzania in 1972 brought about Uganda’s break with
Israel, or the Head of State who produced in Israel,
and in other countries incidentally, maps describing
his plans to invade Tanzania?
111. Who has treated Africa with contempt if not the
President of Uganda, who has labelled the President of
Tanzania, a man of international stature and standing,
in words which are despicable and disgusting and
which I do not wish to repeat because of the high
regard which I and my people have for the President
of Tanzania.
112. The representative of Tanzania says he “would
have preferred principles to be given priority over
expediency” [1941st nlc~fi/r~q, ptr,o. f18]. What principles are you talking about? The principles of Uganda
which are reflected in the grim recital of murder, kidnapping and banditry in the document distributed
today by the Foreign Minister of Kenya? Have you
said one word here against these Ugandan principles?
Is it principle or expediency which brought you, the
distinguished representative of a very distinguished
country, to be a co-sponsor of this draft resolution
with Libya, the pay-master and centre of world terrorism and the country which is supplying fighter
aircraft to Uganda? You know as well as I do that
those planes will not be used by Uganda against Israel.

105. This was the problem that faced the Government of Israel: over 100 men, women and children,
innocent hostages with terrorist guns pointed at them
and with no doubt whatsoever in anybody’s mind as
to the intention of these terrorists to carry out their
wicked plan and slaughter innocent people as they had
done in the past. This is the picture which must be in
the mind’s eye of representatives as they discuss this
problem.
106. I regret many of the remarks made by the representative of Tanzania because I suspect they do not
reflect his true feelings of the true feelings of the
Government of Tanzania.

113. If you, my dear friend, wish to discuss principles
and expediency, by all means let us do so. But let us
spell them out too. Let us not be selective about principles and expediency, just as we should not be selective about terror and rescue operations.

107. I reject out of hand his ridiculous attempt to
equate with an attack on Africa this Israeli rescue
operation to save its citizens. How can the representative of Tanzania make such a remark? Would Africa
have looked better if Palestinian terrorists, in connivance with President Amin, had slaughtered over
100 men, women and children? Would Africa have
looked better with the blood of those innocent victims
bespattering the soil of Africa‘?

114. I can only reiterate what I said on Friday: let
us stop being selective. If terror is bad, it is bad everywhere, for everybody and on every occasionIt is bad
whatever the colour, race, creed or nationality of the
terrorist. It is bad whatever the colour, race, creed
or nationality of the victim. That is the issue before
us. That is the issue with which the United Nations
had failed to deal. That is the issue which will plague
the whole world until we deal with it.

108. Who has besmirched Africa? Israel, for exercising its right to save its citizens in accordance with
international
law? Or that racist regime in Uganda,
waging a heroic war against a defenceless old lady
of 75 years?

115. I listened to the remarks of the representative
of Pakistan. Frankly, I would have accorded them
more respect if they had not come from the representative of a regime which has locked up its entire political opposition in gaol. Here was the miserable
apparition of the representative of a State whose own
people were brutally driven out of Uganda by the
racist regime of Idi Amin falling over himself to in-

109. Who is threatening Africa? Israel, which has
done so much to help so many African countries,
including many today, in the fields of agriculture, of
technology, of health? Or the country which has dispatched this week 30 fighter-planes as reinforcements
to Uganda, namely the Government of Libya? Against
whom are these planes directed and by whom are they
13

-

,. -~

---

--

delighted if the Soviet intervention had been to save
100 hostages and had been of a duration not exceeding
53 minutes, as was the case at Entebbe. At that time
the Soviet Union went to great pains to explain its
position. Sergei Kovalev, in “Sovereignty
and the
international duties of socialist countries”, published
in an article in Pravda on 26 September 1968, explained
the Soviet Union’s justifications
of such actions as
follows:

gratiate himself with the oppressors of his own kith
and kin. How despicable can one be?
116. The representative of the Soviet Union asked
me why we did not quote the documents of the United
Nations banning aggression in international
relations.
The representative of the Soviet Union must be aware
that the Definition of Aggression adopted by the
General Assembly on 14 December 1974 [/~so/ution
3314 (XX/X)] has been widely criticized in all legal
circles. It is not a binding statement of international
law and does not, incidentally,
rule out an act like
that carried out by Israel.

“Those who talk about the illegality of actions
of the allied socialist countries in Czechoslovakia
forget that in a class society there is not and there
cannot be a law that is independent of class.”

117. When the representative of the Soviet Union
asked why Israel did not make a complaint to the
Security Council, I did not know whether he was na’ive
or whether he assumed that I was na’ive. Let me assure
him that at least in this respect I cannot be characterized as such, and I have no doubt that he is anything
but nai’ve.

In a civilized society there is not and cannot be law
that is independent of the loftiest principles of man,
namely, the freedom and dignity of man. That, my
colleague from the Soviet Union, was the principle
that Israel was defending at Entebbe.
122. Perhaps the most indicative of all in attitude of
Governments is the document from Algeria [S/12/32],
which was welcomed yesterday by the representative
of the Soviet Union. It is indeed appropriate that
Algeria should speak out for the terrorists and hijackers, having regard to the fact that it was Algeria to
which the first hijacked plane in operations against
Israel in 1968 was directed. Algeria was directly
involved in that operation and blazed the way for
future terrorist exploits. One could hardly expect
Algeria, which pas played such a prominent part in
the history of air hijacking, international kidnapping
and the use of diplomatic immunity for terrorist purposes, to forfeit its place -in the “hall of fame” of
international terrorism. They had to get into the act.
After all, what Amin did t,wo weeks ago, they did in
1968.

118. I ask the representative of the Soviet Union:
had we submitted a complaint, would the Soviet Union
have supported us? Why was there no Soviet statement when the plane was hijacked? Why have they
not condemned the terrorist acts of the PLO on many
occasions in the past? Why did they not issue a statement or an appeal when the innocent hostages were
being held at Entebbe? Why did not the representative
of the Soviet Union have even one word to say about
the fate of Mrs. Dora Bloch? Or one word of appeal
directly to the representative of Uganda in this respect? After all, you have influence in Uganda.
119. Is the representative of the Soviet Union not
aware that since 1954 the Soviet Union has blocked
every attempt on the part of Israel to bring its case
to the Security Council? For 22 years we have had no
remedy in the Council because of the Soviet veto.
We are used to cynicism in this body but the cynical
question of the representative of the Soviet Union
- “Why did we not complain to the Council”-when
he knows in advance that, without regard to the substance of the claim, he would have vetoed it, is,
I submit, the height of cynicism.

123. In the course of all these .discussions some
delegations have tended to ignore the group which
organized this hijacking, namely, the PLO. The PLO
has issued a statement disassociating itself from this
operation. This is a lie. The PFLP, to which the
hijackers belonged, is a constituent member of the
PLO. Members &ill recall that in the past the PLO
denied any knowledge of the Black September organization, although Yasser Arafat’s second-in-command
actually commanded it. They were the group which,
according to the President of the Sudan, Yasser Arafat
personally instrbcted to execute the American and
Belgian diplomats in the Saudi Arabian Embassy in
Khartoum in 1973.

120. I note the Soviet representative’s
concern for
the inviolability
of African territory, and I sincerely
trust that his touching concern will be reflected in his
country’s policies and actions. The representative of
the Soviet Union talked about aggression and the
inviolability
of territorial integrity and national sovereignty. On these subjects I defer to him, having regard
to the Soviet Union’s very considerable
record in
these respects in Hungary, in Czechoslovakia
and in
other countries in Eastern Europe. My colleague from
China could doubtless elaborate on this subject.

124. The PLO’s policy is a matter of record. It is one
based on the most brutal terrorism, in the course of
which attacks have been made upon innocent people,
including unsuspecting women and children, These
gangs have cut down pregnant women in cold blood
at Kiryat Shmona, have shot Olympic athletes bound
hand and foot, have hijacked planes, have engaged
in open assassination, have held small school children

121. Let me assure the representative of the Soviet
Union that the people of Hungary in 1956 and of
Czechoslovakia in 1968 would habe been only too
14

porting international
terrorism financially,
militarily
and politically and its involvement in attempts at the
assassination of foreign leaders, including Arab Heads
of State, is known to all of us, and I need not repeat
it here.

hostage in Ma’alot, causing the death of over 20 children and over 60 wounded. These are the same individuals who tried to impose a reign of terror on the
Palestinian Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza, killing
cold-bloodedly
those suspected of not agreeing with
them. These are the same individuals who planned
the assassination of the Heads of five Arab States at
Rabat in 1974. Fourteen members of the PLO were
then arrested by Morocco. These are members of the
same organization which executed in the most cowardly manner Wasfi Tal, the Prime Minister of Jordan,
during a visit to Cairo. One of the assassins, not content with shooting the Prime Minister in the back, felt
obliged to drink his blood publicly on the steps of the
Sheraton Hotel in Cairo. These are the same people
who on 31 January 1974 sabotaged the oil installations
at Singapore. These are the same people who gained
control of the Egyptian Embassy in Madrid and held
three members of the staff, including the ambassador,
as hostages. These are the same people who murdered
American and Belgian diplomats at Khartoum in 1973.
These are the people who have been instrumental in
destroying the Lebanese State, tearing it apart while
the Security Council remains silent, killing tens of
thousands of people and wounding thousands of
others. These are the terrorists who kidnapped and
held as hostages the ministers attending the Conference of the Organization
of Petroleum
Exporting
Countries in Vienna and were then released by the
Government of Algeria in an act which constituted
a blatant condoning of the criminal terror acts of that
group. From there they proceeded to Libya, where
they were greeted and embraced by Prime Minister
Jalloud of Libya-the
same terrorists who had shot
one of Libya’s citizens a day before in Vienna. These
are the people who have brought misery, murder and
assassination to the area of the Middle East and who
have introduced terrorism as a form of international
idiom-terrorism
which affects innocent
people
wherever they may be.

127. However, the motivation behind the timing of
the point of order is quite clear in view of information
revealed over the weekend by the President of Egypt.
In an interview with the Egyptian newspaper Akldm
El- Y~~~I, as reported by the Middle East News Agency
on 10 .July, President Sadat, who only last week
expelled the Libyan Ambassador
for complicity
in acts of terror, discussed publicly and on the record
Libya’s criminal involvement in international
terror.
128. It is apparent that Libya is the haven and refuge
for the most wanted international
terrorists, whose
colleagues were among those who carried out the
hijacking of the Air France plane to Uganda. Indeed,
while the deliberations in the Council were proceeding,
forces financed and backed by Libya were actively
continuing subversive operations in Sudan against the
Government of Sudan.
129. What further evidence is necessary to prove
that Libya has forfeited its right to vote on this question and indeed is disqualified to be a member of the
Security Council, a body charged with the duty to
promote international peace and security?
130.’ In conclusion, may I express my appreciation
to those representatives who have had the courage to
take a stand clearly and unequivocally on the side of
human decency and human freedom and against the
scourge of international terror and those countries that
support it, whether by commission or by omission.
131. The eloquent and moving statement by the
representative of the United States, and the call of all
the other delegations that urged this body to take
action, must evoke an echo throughout
the world,
regardless of political differences. I urge those countries that have already expressed their views on this
issue at this table to join together to take action against
hi.jackers and international terrorism. I am sure that
many will follow their lead. This series of meetings
will decide in more ways than one whether the United
Nations will continue its downward path in the grip
of despots or will reassume its rightful role on behalf
of humanity and international peace.

125. I note too, as I am already discussing Arab
complicity in terrorism, that the Government of Egypt
has co-sponsored the decision of the Organization of
African Unity to bring this matter before the Council.
Let me remind the Council that the Government of
Egypt released the cowardly assassins who shot Prime
Minister Wasfi Ta1 of Jordan on the steps of the
Sheraton Hotel in Cairo and then drank his blood.
In 1970 the Government of Egypt released the terrorists from the Black September organization who
had landed the hijacked Pan-American jumbo plane
at Cairo airport and had blown it up at that airport.

132, The PRESIDENT:
I should like, if I may, to
insert a personal note at this stage in order to lower
the temperature of this debate.

126. I listened carefully to the long-drawn-out point
of order made yesterday by the representative
of
Libya, and I must admit that I quite appreciate his
concern-which
he expressed again today. Who but
the representative of Libya, a country which has been
the paymaster and haven of international
terrorism,
would want to avoid a discussion in the Council on
this evil, international terrorism? Libya’s role in sup-

133. Speaking as the representative of Italy, I would
say that I am pleased to see this debate being increasingly brightened by the use of Latin words. As President of the Council I would note that delegations on
opposite sides round this table have, fortunately, at
least one thing in common, a knowledge of Latin.
15

lence, hijacking of aircraft, and the taking of innocent
passengers as hostages. We supported General Assembly resolut’ion 2645 (XXV), which called UP011 all
States to prevent such acts within their jurisdiction
and to prosecute and punish the guilty persons. MY
delegation is also a party to the consensus decision of
the Security Council of 20 June 1972, in which it condemned the hijacking of commercial aircraft [s//07115].

I take that as the first, however small, sign ofencouragement for the current President of the Council. At
the same time, I would express the hope that the use
of Latin will not lead representatives to indulge too
much in the rehearsing of history.
134. The next speaker is the representative of India.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

142. The facts of the case, according to the representative of France, are that the hijacking of the Air’
France aircraft took place on 27 June. May I say at
this point that my Government deplores this hijacking,
without any reservation. The French authorities took
steps immediately after the hijacking to alert some of
their embassies, including their embassy in Uganda,
and asked them to seek permission for their aircraft
to land, since it was running short of fuel. The French
Ambassador to Uganda accordingly approached the
Ugandan authorities, and permission to land, which
was given immediately,
according to the representative of France.

135. Mr. JAIPAL (India): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to the members of this Council for
granting it this opportunity to give its views on the
compIaint before them. Allow me first of all, however,
Sir, to extend to you my delegation’s congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
You have been conducting the Council’s deliberations
with the customary zest and vigour that are characteristic of the people of the great country that you
represent, and we have no doubt that the Council will
benefit greatly from your diplomatic skill and experience.

143. Now, there are conflicting versions as to what
happened after the landing of the aircraft-mainly
because different persons have given different versions, each from his particular observation point, The
truth, therefore, may never be fully known, but certain
facts have clearly emerged.

136. I should like to convey to the delegation of the
People’s Republic of China my delegation’s condolences on the passing away of Marshal Chou-teh, who
was a great soldier and an outstanding leader of the
Chinese people.
137. We should like also to convey to the delegation
of the Federal Republic of Germany our condolences
on the passing away of Mr. Gustav Heinemann, who
was President of the Federal Republic of Germany
from 1969 to 1974.

144. The facts are that negotiations began between
the concerned parties and lasted for almost a week,
during which 47 passengers were first released, and
later another 100 passengers, by the hijackers. Further
negotiations were proceeding concerning the terms
and the place for the release of the remaining hostages,
when Israel apparently came to the conclusion that
the lives of.those hostages who were Israeli nationals
were in imminent danger. Thereupon, Israeli armed
forces attacked the airport to rescue them. As a result,
three hostages, one Israeli officer, several Ugandan
soldiers and seven hijackers were killed. Many more
persons were injured, and Ugandan aircraft and
installations were damaged or destroyed.

138. We are participating in this debate because the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity, consisting of some
48 African States, has declared that the Israeli attack
on Entebbe Airport constitutes not only aggression
against Uganda but also a danger to Africa generally
and to international peace and security. We fully sympathize with the 48 African States and share their
concern-the
more so because they are all non-aligned
and are members of the movement of non-aligned
countries.

145. While we deplore this loss of life and wanton
destruction, the doubt that springs to mind is whether
all this might have been avoided if negotiations had
continued further. Would it not have been better to
risk further negotiations than to risk a military operation that could conceivably have led to much greater
loss of life? The fact that the nature of the military
operation was limited to rescuing hostages should not
hide the more important fact that it did involve a
violation of the United Nations Charter, and a breach
of Uganda’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity,
Whether or not this breach is temporary, it is nevertheless a breach. If it had been a permanent breach,
it would be tantamount to occupation of Ugandan
territory. There can be no doubt on this score, and this
fact is indeed readily admitted by a]]. However, some
seek tojustify it, while others question the justification

139. The issues before the Council are exceedingly
complex because of the historical circumstances
which have given rise to them-circumstances
which
have become even more complicated by the terrifying
frustrations of the parties and peoples involved.
140. In the tragic incident now under consideration,
the cause and the effect have become inextricable from
their own previous history, and we are faced with a
vicious circle. Even so, it is necessary to distinguish
between the initial action and its final outcome, and
to assess them separately as well as jointly, because
the incident is riddled with unanswered questions.
141. At the outset, I should like to say that the Government of India has always deplored terrorist vio16

and its imphcations
States.
146.
that:

for relations

between Member

if a doubt existed in my mind, as regards his mastery
of the English language and the perfect art of oratory
which he seems to play with, this doubt has disappeared. I confess, he is exceedingly good in the presentation of even the worst case that could ever be.

Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter stipulates

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State...”

152. But that leads me to the following point: I am
very surprised, after 25 years of parliamentary
experience, to find the debate reaching the personal level.
I would recall that in the course of my intervention
I made it absolutely clear that I intended no personal
attack on anyone, that I would speak only of the facts
of the case which have been brought before the
Council, which were being debated and commented
on, and from which deductions were being made, and
which are averred to be true.

It was therefore a very grave step indeed for Israel
to have used force on Ugandan territory, and it is odd
that in doing so it claimed the right of self-defence.
Article 51 of the Charter recognizes the right of selfdefence only if an armed attack occurs against a
Member State. In the present case, it is Uganda that
has been the subject of an armed attack by Israel.

153. The Israeli representative regretted that no one
in the Council had said anything about what was
alleged to be taking place in Uganda today. Well, let
me put him right. As a matter of fact, after the statement by the representative of the United Kingdom
yesterday, and the conversation he had with me,
I immediately
cabled my Head of State, as current
Chairman
of the Organization
of African Unity,
requesting him to use all his influence in getting in
touch with the President of Uganda to ensure that
everything is done according to law, and that nothing
as sinister as described should be tolerated.

147. In these circumstances,
the Israeli attack is
clearly a violation of Uganda’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Council should not allow this
attack to pass unnoticed in its resolution.
148. As to the hijacking, why was it not brought
before the Council immediately
after it occurred so
that the Council might have recalled its decisions of
1970 and 1972, and thus perhaps strengthened the
hand of Uganda? The Council should have taken up
the question of the hijacking immediately
after it
occurred so that appropriate international
measures
might have been considered for dealing with it, and for
preventing future hijackings in the manner now proposed by certain members of the Council. It would
be tragic indeed to ignore the Israeli attack and to
concentrate
now only on anti-hijacking
measures,
however desirable and urgent they may be. Both
aspects of the matter clearly ought to be dealt with in
the resolution of the Council.

154. In the course of his statement, the representative of Israel also said that I did not mention in the
debate certain facts published in the press. Now he
will recall that he has quoted The NCJH* York Times of
Sunday, 4 July. Well, for his information,
on Sunday
I was stilt under my blanket until about 5 o’clock in
the afternoon with a heavy cold and I did not read the
Sunday papers. But I based my statement on the
evidence that was given here. Since then the omission
that the representative of Israel mentioned has been
brought to my notice. It is abundantly clear that the
omission was not malicious, Neither was it witfull nor
was it deliberate. The facts alluded to were omitted
because they were not brought to my notice and I did
not come across them.

149. If the Security Council is to maintain international peace and security in terms of its responsibilities
under the Charter, it should pronounce itself also on
the Israeli attack. If it does not do so, it may well set
in train a chain reaction whose repercussions may be
even more tragic and far-reaching. This is indeed the
concern that underlies the statement of the Assembly
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity. The representative of Tanzania
stated yesterday that African States recognized the
Israeli attack against Uganda as a serious challenge
to Africa as a whole. They clearly feel that, but for
the grace of God-or perhaps the fuel tank-it
might
have been any one of them. The Security Council
should therefore reassure the African States in the
manner requested by them.

155. The representative of Israel also mentioned the
systems of government of certain States which are
similar to the one which he so cynically described.
Well let me remind him that my Government is propably the pinnacle of democracy, where an apposition
is allowed to criticize the Government every Tuesday
and every Friday, where any motion against the Government can be introduced, and yet those very members on both sides who were throwing invectives at
each other will sit down afterwards and have a drink
together and mix socially. Never does it become personal. It is the subject-matter which is discussed.

150. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
delegations which wish to exercise their right of reply.

156. I am here holding no brief for anyone. I am here
holding a brief from the Organization of African Unity
on a question of principle: whether the territorial

151. Sir Harold WALTER
(Mauritius): I must say,
after tistening again to the representative of Israel, that
17

4

integrity and political sovereignty of one State Member of the United Nations, a State of Africa, has been
violated-yes
or no. But the way in which the debate
has gone today, both the cause and the effect-as the
representative
of India has just said-have
been
blended together. It must be made abundantly clear
that what the Organization of African Unity is seeking
from the Council is words of warning, so that there
could never be a repetition of such a violation of territorial integrity.
157. The representative of Israel has also quoted
abundantly from the press. May I return the compliment and tell him that he, too, omitted something very
serious from a responsible paper from which he
quoted, Le Mond~, of 9 July, which reads thus:
“In order to justify a violation of Ugandan sovereignty, the right of any State to protect its nationals
is invoked, a right which certain jurists have described as the protection of mankind. However, to
leave the appreciation of such a right to each State
is not only contrary to commitments
entered into
by United Nations Member
States, but is also
extremely dangerous. Furthermore,
it is forgotten
that negotiations conducted by French diplomacy
were under way and had already yielded results
which were quite appreciable and that the negotiations were not broken off when the Israelis under.took their raid on Entebbe. Instructed by all interested States, France intended to pursue these
negotiations to the end and would inevitably have
established the responsibilities
for failure in case of
failure.“”
The Council should take note that in the same paper,
Le Moml~, we read this:

158. I am sorry if the representative of Israel took
it amiss when I played on a question of semantics.
I did that only to lighten the debate and not to leave
it with the serious tone it then had. If the representative of Israel felt hurt and has taken amiss the pun
which I tried to make on a word in putting it right,
then I am exceedingly sorry. I can assure him that
there was no intention of trying in the least to belittle
his eloquence, which, I must say, few can equal. I can
assure him that there was absolutely no intent to belittle what he had stated. As a matter of fact, if the
Council will recall, I took the spirit in which this was
said and played upon it when I said: “.,. the world
does not belong to Rome nor are Romans allowed with
impunity to trample upon other nationals through
bloodbaths” [194&h meeting, pnrcr. 521. That is what
I said.
159. There is one last thing that I should like to make
clear. The representative of Israel said that the letter
which was sent to you, Mr. President, by the current
Chairman of the Organization’of
African Unity was
co-sponsored by Egypt. This is incorrect. This is a
resolution passed unanimously
by the Organization
of African Unity, and in the course of the resolution
the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government
charged the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius
by name, as I am the current Chairman of the Council
of Ministers, and two other nations, Guinea and Egypt,
to support Uganda in the submission of its case to the
Security Council. Let the representative
of Israel
know that we all sympathize with the loss of lives
which occurred there at Entebbe, that we all deplore
international terrorism. But I hope he will have the
courage, too, to say that what has bound the United
Nations so far is that there should under no circumstances be a violation of the territorial integrity and
political sovereignty of any country.
160. Now I want to ask the same question as appeared
in LLJMomk, again of 9 July: Would the permanent
representative of Israel say that he would have dared
to make the same raid if the plane had landed at Schipol
in Amsterdam or at Orly? Would he have done it?
Probably yes. But according to all probabilities,
I would say no. But it was Uganda. It could have been
Kenya; it could have been Tanzania; it could have
been Mauritius. The performing of a humanitarian
act-and this is unchallenged, that the French Ambassador asked the Head of State of Uganda to allow
the plane to land because it did not have enough
petrol to go on and President Amin said yes to thatis what is today to be compared with the vitriolic words
we have heard about certain representatives in the
Council.

“The International
Association
of Democratic
Jurists confirms its condemnation
of the airbus
hijacking in Kampala and the keeping as hostages
of Israeli citizens and members of the crew, However, it notes that the air-bone operation of the Israeli
Army, undertaken at a time when negotiations were
under way with the purpose of finding a solution,
had the effect of violating the sovereignty of the
Ugandan State and of causing many victims. It
considers that the criminal act committed does not
constitute a justification
for recourse to force in
violation of the most elementary rules of international law. “The International
t Association
of
Democratic Jurists protests against the statements
of the heads of Government who congratulated the
authors of an operation executed in violation of the
United Nations Charter, which shows. their racist
temperament in holding of no account the territorial
integrity of an African State and the lives of its
nationals.“*

161. Mr. ABDALLA
(Uganda): The allegations
made by the Israeli delegation are not true. In the first
place, on the question of complicity, the Israeli representative has referred to Mr. Cojot’s words, but Cojot
is just one of the people who have had something to
say on the Entebbe incident. On the other hand, some

ai Quoted in French by the speaker.

18

accounts have been given by. other members of the
crew which are favourable to my President, For
example, the plane’s mechanical engineer and captain
gave accounts that may be found in Le MoIK/~. As
regards Mrs. Bloch, I have nothing to add to what
I told the Council on Friday. As I said then, the Israeli
invading forces took away with them all the hostages
remaining at Entebbe, including Mrs. Bloch.
162. Let US not digress. We have come here to condemn the Israeli aggression and nothing else. On
behalf of the Ugandan delegation I therefore totally
reject all the allegations levelled against my country
by the representative of Zionist Israel. Most of what
he said is nothing but a pack of lies.
163. This debate is dragging us nowhere but to a pack
of lies and confusion, and, Mr. President, it is your
responsibility
to guide this Council so that we can
arrive at a concrete condemnation of Israel.

and incomplete reply. I need not take long this time,
especially since I have spoken at every meeting since
last Friday. I do not want to abuse the indulgence of
members. I reserve my right to speak again to answer
the false allegations and cynical distortions of the
representative of the Zionist entity.
171. I know I cannot match the representative of the
racist regime of Tel Aviv in his indecent language.
My knowledge of English is limited and humble. It is
not my mother tongue, as it is that of the Irishman
representing the Zionist entity. I am limited to correct
-1 mean morally correct-and polite English. Out of
respect for this august body I will be precise and
clear, and I will put simple honest facts and truths
against his lies, distortions and immoral allegations.
172. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
The hour is late, and I believe we are all somewhat
tired. As I said last night, we should try to debate this
problem with as much composure as possible, calmly
and without emotion. If I exercise my right of reply
at this late hour it is only because some of the. statements made by the representative of Israel cannot be
allowed to go unchallenged. If the necessity arises,
I will of course ask the indulgence of the Council and
reply more comprehensively to some aspects of the
statement of the representative of Israel. In fact
-1 must be quite frank about this-1 did not intend
to exercise my right of reply this time. I have felt all
along that it was not absolutely necessary to exercise
one’s right of reply unless one was forced to. Particularly in the case of the representative of Israel, I would
have refrained from doing so, if only because I know
that, as a result of his usual complaints and lamentations, he always finds himself isolated, whether in the
Council or in the General Assembly. I do not want to
give him the privilege of having to answer so many
statements in exercise of the right of reply. But despite
all those considerations I think it is my duty to clarify
a few points.

164. Israel, of course, has the right to boast here of
the killing of Ugandan officers and men and the destruction of property, and those so-called superPowers try to cover up for Israel. Perhaps it will not
take a long time; it will, perhaps, be by the will of God;
but those who say they are super-Powers today will
be buried.
165. We are not children, although we are small
countries. We are not to be toyed with.
166. Israel condemns Uganda, all the African States
and the third world for what it has done. Because we
are small, we cannot fight the United States, the
United Kingdom and Israel. We have no arms. We
have nothing to bring them to their knees. But I am
telling you that one day we shall be vindicated by
history.
167. 1 reserve my right to reply further at a later
stage.

173. First, I do not know whether I should say I feel
flattered, but certainly I would say that I noted that
the representative of Israel devoted a considerable
part of his statement to replying to mine. I think the
Council will make its own judgement on that. There
are, however, a few things the representative of Israel
said which I must rebut immediately.

168. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Again,
the representative of the racist terrorist entity of Israel
has come to,attack my country and my leaders, as he
has attacked many other countries and leaders. We
have become accustomed to the traditional Israeli
false allegations, gross fabrications and immoral distortions. We know he is trying to avoid the main issue,
which is the felonious and criminal Israeli attack on
a sovereign State Member of the United Nations in
violation of all established rules of international law
and morality.
169, Mr. Herzog has again been very generous to
my country. As I have already said, I am impressed
by how much he hates my country and my leaders.
He knows he is lying as usual.

174. My many friends both within the Council and
outside it can accuse me of a number of things but
certainly not of saying things I do not believe, and
I want to assure the representative of Israel that I am
not in the habit of making statements that do not reflect
my feelings. I should like the Council to believe me
when I say I suppose I am better placed to know the
position of the Government of Tanzania than the
representative of Israel. I hope he will grant me that
much.

170. I replied to him briefly last Friday. For the
moment I would refer the Council to my earlier brief

175. The representative of Israel took issue with my
statement that the Israeli military action at Entebbe
19

178, Therefore-and
I say this in all solemnity-we
view the Israeli action against Entebbe not only as a
threat to Uganda but as a threat to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial
integrity
of African
States. We consider this a very dangerous precedent
in international
relations, all the more dangerous
because it is the rights of smaller and less powerful
nations that are under attack. I entirely concur with
the Foreign Minister of Mauritius that there have been
hijackings before, but that the Israeli authorities would
never undertake a military operation in Athens, in
Paris, in London, or elsewhere in Europe, to say
nothing of the United States or Canada. That is unimaginable.

constituted a threat to the African continent. Apparently, he chooses conveniently to ignore the fact that
this position is in fact a position that has been articulated much more forcefully by the distinguished Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, the Prime
Minister of Mauritius, in his telegram to the Security
Council. If I may refresh the memory of my colleague
from Israel, I would refer only to one sentence in that
telegram, circulated as an annex to document S/12126:
“This unprecedented aggression against Uganda
by Israel constitutes a danger not only to Uganda
and Africa but to international peace and security.”
This is a solemn statement, solemnly sent to the Council by a responsible Head of Government
and a responsible leader of Africa, specifically mandated by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government.
It
was not a statement lightly made. Neither, for that
matter, was the statement issued by my Government
lightly made.

179. The representative of Israel more or less challenged my position and said, perhaps by implication,
perhaps directly, that my Government and I myself
preferred expediency to principles. He gave what I consider to be a long lecture on principles. But I want
to assure the representative of Israel that we in Tanzania attach the greatest importance to principles.
And I must say, with all candour, that it has not been
easy to do so., More often than not, we have suffered
because of that. There are members of the Council
who know that, and if it becomes necessary I will ask
the indulgence of the Council again to go into the
details of a number of situations where the Government of Tanzania has taken a position of principle
which has caused it economic and other difficulties.
So we do not need to be lectured about principles,
We think, in fact, and we have consistently maintained
in this Organization, that the only way in which countries like ours, the smaller countries, can defend themselves is through their firm attachment to principles
-principles
of international law, principles of international morality, principles of international co-operation, and above all the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. These are the only safeguards
which can ensure the survival of smaller countries,
because no matter how much we may try, it is inconceivable, at least in the foreseeable future, that we
shall be in a sufficiently powerful military position to
defend ourselves in the way that those who are mightier and more powerful can. Therefore, we attach
importance to principles.

176. The military action undertaken by the Israeli
authorities at Entebbe constitutes nothing short of a
flagrant violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Uganda. Since this debate
started I have heard a number of statements made
both by the representative of Israel and by those in
the Council who seem to share some of his views and
nothing in those statements has denied this important
factor, the factor of the violation of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Uganda.
177. When we say that the Israeli action constitutes
a threat not only to Uganda but to Africa as well, we
do not say so lightly; because from our own history,
from our own experience of centuries of colonization,
we know that a flagrant action against one African
State should be a lesson to other African States. In
the particular case of the Israeli action, we have on
record the parallel example that Israeli actions normally give to Africa’s worst enemies. I remember
very vividly-1
have not been long in this Organization, but I know-that
when the Israeli authorities
started their so-called series of blitzkrieg
strikes
against their Arab neighbours,
the first people to
applaud this new rule of international
law were the
Fascist regimes in southern Africa. There was jubilation in Rhodesia, jubilation in Pretoria, whenever the
Israelis attempted their raids, whether on Lebanon, in
Jordan or on other Arab States. It is not surprising,
therefore, that in this particular case of the Israeli
raid at Entebbe, one of the most glowing commendations, the most glowing congratulations
to emanate
from other States came from no less a person than
Mr. John Vorster, the Prime Minister of the racist
regime in South Africa, who considered the action by
the Israeli a daring exploit, and who, for obvious
reasons, will, I suppose, be planning how to put into
practice what he has learned from the Israeli action.

180. So far as the sanctity of human life is concerned,
we have made it clear before, and I want to make it
clear again, that to my Government and my people,
no less than to myself personally, life is sacrosanct;
the loss of human life is to be regretted, whether it
be Jewish life, African life, Arab life or any other type
of life. Human life must be preserved, human life
must be protected, and every step must be taken to
ensure the preservation of that life. I am, however,
disturbed that the representative of Israel, who has
been so eloquent in his defence of the sanctity of life
and who has made such powerful presentations in
defence of those whose lives were, from his own
point of view, at stake, omitted to express any lamentation, any profound regret, for the lives of the
20

Ugandans that were lost at Entebbe as a result of the
Israeli military action. And yet the representative of
Israel, in his presentation at the beginning of the
Council’s session, was the very first one to talk in
terms of avoiding selectivity, and to express his Government’s fear of the selective process that he says
was undertaken at Entebbe. We would have expected
that he would at least ‘tell the Council how sorry his
Government
was for the death that its troops had
inflicted on so many Ugandans, for the damage and
destruction that they had caused to the people of
Uganda. This, in the view of my delegation, does not
do much credit to the argumentation
of the Israeli
representative
about the sanctity of life, or to his
accusations-indirect
as they may be-that those of
us who have failed to make reference to one specific
case or another are in any way unconcerned with the
sanctity of life.

better position to know the state of affairs between
Uganda and Tanzania. But, with all respect, I beg to
submit that we are not discussing here UgandaTanzania relations; we are discussing here Israel’s
violation
of Uganda’s sovereignty
and territorial
integrity. In all humility, I also beg to submit that we
are not discussing here the international
situation in
Uganda, nor people’s likes and dislikes in so far as
the Government
of Uganda is concerned. It is not
Uganda which is being discussed here; we are discussing an action againt Uganda; and nothing would
be more hypocritical, I submit, than to transform the
victim of aggression and make him the principal culprit
and the principal villain of our deliberations.
185. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrL’I.~~rrtotio,r @/rr Rrlssirrn): I dicl not
intend to speak,’ but the representative of Israel in his
statement today-or,
rather, in the lecture which he
gave us all here-did
not answer everything that was
said at previous meetings on this matter and, quite
rightly, the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania has just pointed out that we are discussing
only one fact: the aggression by Israel against Uganda.
No other proposals exist here, and no one officially
put forward any. other proposals.

181, The Israeli representative again tried to take
issue with us because we have emphasized that the
issue before the Council is the violation of Ugandan
sovereignty. I deliberately did not indulge in a procedural discussion on whether or not we are discussing
hijacking because I am quite aware of the rules of
procedure of the Council. I am also aware of the
practice in the Council that, even if an issue is not on
the agenda and even if an issue is completely irrelevant
to the topic, members of the Council are free to say
what they like, and there is no way in which the President of the Council or any other member of the Council
can prevent anyone from saying what he wants to say.

186. The representative of Israel has two standards
which he applies to these events; he creates two moralities. He tries to justify what is difficult to justify. On
Friday and today he attempted to accuse us. He
accused the entire Security Council; he accused the
United Nations;, and he even proposed that some
members of the Council should be expelled, clearly
transcending everything that is relevant to the item
under discussion.

182. Because of the considerations I have deliberately refrained from saying whether or not our meeting
has been convened to discuss hijacking. But no matter
what consideration one may give to the conduct of the
debate, one thing remains patently clear, that is that
lhe Council was convened, following the specific
request of the Organization of African Unity through
its Chairman, only for the purpose of discussing the
flagrant violation of Uganda’s sovereignty. It is therefore to this particular point that we are addressing
ourselves.

187. The most dangerous thing is not what is said
here by the representative of Israel-he
has only
repeating time-worn false allegations-but
what he
has called for, and what he has called for is that we
should follow the example set by Israel in attacking
Uganda, killing Ugandan citizens, doing a great deal
of material damage and not even apologizing or wanting
to apologize to the Government.
But no one would
want to follow Israel’s example. We cannot apply a
double standard to human life. The lives of Ugandans
are as precious as other People’s. We think that it is
not right to kill anyone and we condemn the armed
attack by Israel against Uganda.

183. We have said it before and 1 shall say it again,
I note how selective the representative of Israel is in
quoting. I was impressed when he quoted extensively
the other day the resolution of the Organization of
African Unity, adopted in 1970, on the question of
hijacking. I note, not without concern, that he has
deliberately omitted to quote equally extensively from
the resolution most recently adopted by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity condemning the Israeli violation of
Uganda’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

188. There is something else that surprises me in
this matter. The United Nations, after all, created
Israel, and it is rather strange to hear here in the
Security Council the representative of Israel making
such insulting, I would even say such cynical stalements about the organization
which founded that
State, breathed life into that nation. Whatever has
happened since then, it is equivalent to a son saying
to his monther: “Go to the devil, mother, although
you gave birth to me.” There is no moral or international law that can justify such an act.

184. 1 have one l&t point. The representative of
Israel referred extensively to the relationship between
Tanzania and Uganda and the relationship between
Uganda and Kenya and the situation in East Africa.
As the representative of Tanzania I am perhaps in a
21

---

193. The representative of Israel had recourse to his
normal Zionist attacks against the Soviet Union. He
should rise above such things. After all, he represents
a country; he does not represent some organization.
He wjj] understand what I mean. The lack of foundation for his slanders against my country is obvious.
I have no intention of dwelling upon the matters he
referred to. In due course, if I deem it necessary to do
so, I shall go into more detail in answering his accusations.

189. The representative of Israel in his statement
today used the Council to accuse all those who assessed the action of the Israeli soldiery as an act of
aggression against a small, sovereign and independent
African State, the Republic of Uganda. This is not a
new manceuvre. This is the first time I have met here
with the representative of Israel around this table, but
l am perfectly familiar with his previous statements.
This is not the first time that he has had recourse to
such fallacious statements as he has made here today
in his attacks against other countries; it has already
become a system. His whole statement today was
designed to divert the attention of the Council from the
item on the agenda, the act of aggression by Israel
against Uganda. No matter what he says, no matter
what jurists he quotes, it is a fact that he is asking us
to discuss some other matter. We are ready, along
with other States, to take new additional measures
against acts of international terrorism.

194. The delegation of the Soviet Union categorically
rejects the representative of Israel’s cynical attempts
to confuse the issue we are discussing, to camouflage
it. I want to put this courteously, so I would merely
say that the representative of Israel should think over
everything that was said before his statement to the
Council.
195. His attempt to justify the act of aggression that
is committed by references to the right of States to
defend their citizens was unfounded and inadmissible,
No matter what references the representative of Israel
has recourse to, no matter what authorities he invokes,
he still gives the impression of being unable to conceal the fact that Israel has committed a flagrant act
of aggression against a small African State. I believe,
I hope, I am convinced that no State will want to follow
Israel’s disgraceful example. Actions of the kind we
are discussing create dangerous threats to peace in
Africa-and not in Africa alone. We really must reflect
on this matter in the Council and ponder it seriously.

190. But let us put things in their proper place. What
we are discussing today is the armed attack by Israel
against Uganda, the killing of Ugandan citizens, the
material damage inflicted on Uganda. As the representative of Tanzania quite rightly pointed out, the
representative of Israel did not even express any
regrets about that. He wanted people to express
regrets about other things.
191. In an attempt to divert the Council’s attention
from the item on its agenda, the representative of
Israel-in
accordance with what has become his
system-had
recourse to lying attacks and fabrications. I would even say; although I do not like to use
coarse language, but I am practically forced to do so
here, that he made slanderous attacks on my country,
among others. As I said earlier, he has attacked practically ail the members of the Council, attacks that
cannot be justified in this chamber. But the representative of Israel miscalculated. No doubt he is a
good lawyer, but I would not say that his juridical
practice can be applied to politics, Whatever relations
his country may have with other countries, he must
not forget that sovereign States are represented on the
Security Council and that this is not the place to disCUSS the actions, policies or rCgimes of other countries,
if such questions are not on the agenda. Today, there
is just one item on the agenda. I have stated what that
item is.

196. Mr. MIKZA (Pakistan): The representative of
Israel, in referring to the statement I made yesterday,
did not mention any of the arguments or facts presented in that statement. It is significant that he did
not do so but, instead, made some irrelevant and false
remarks about my country.
197. The represzntative of Israel said that he would
have dealt with more respect with my remarks had
they not come from the representative
of a rCgime
which has locked up its entire political opposition in
gaol.

192. But the representative of Israel did not shrink
from making slanderous attacks, What is he trying to
do? He is trying to prevent a concrete, businesslike
discussion of the item on the agenda and to confuse it
with other matters. Most of the members of the Council and most of the non-members who have spoken
here have condemned the act of aggression against
Uganda. Toddy, the representative of Israel appealed
to 11sto follow his example. But in that case, it would
not be international law that would govern relations
between States: it would be the li~w of piracy ;jn,-J
aggression. That conclusion cannot be avoided.
22

198. The representative of Israel is a soldier-or
at
least he was a soldier until he came here. But perhaps
he has some qualified person on his staff who could
easily have briefed him on the actual situation in my
country. As his knowledge of the conditions in my
country appears to be rather rudimentary,
judging
from his remarks today, we have no option but to state
the facts very briefly for his benefit.
199. The Government of Pakistan is a democratic
Government. duly elected by the people of Pakistan
in free fair elections. The system of government is
parlian$entary in character, and the Government of the
country is accountable to the Parliament,
consisting
of the elected representatives of the people.

200. We are indeed touched by the concern expressed
by the representative of Israel for the political opposition in my country. However, he is fiictually incorrect
when he says that the entire political opposition has
been locked up in gaol. The fact of the matter is that
only one opposition party, which according to the
evidence available was acting against the territorial
integrity of the Stale, was banned. That ban was subsequently, after due process of law, upheld by the
Supreme Court of Pakistan.

struggle which we fought against the Nazis from 1941
to 1945, many Jews were in the National Liberation
Army; that many Jews became outstanding leaders
of modern Yugoslavia; that all Jews in Yugoslavia
enjoy the same rights that other nations and nationalities enjoy, and that we have very active members
of .the Jewish community in the political, economic,
diplomatic and other services of modern Yugoslavia.
That is one thing. The other thing is that att those who
were active anti-Semites and who were associated
with the Nazi atrocities during the Second World Wat
fled from Yugoslavia and are still living in the countries which, unfortunately,
are supporting Israel’s
irresponsible behaviour in international relations. So
I would like to tell the Israeli representative that he
should address himself in this respect to them, and ask
for the eradication of anti-Semitism in those countries,
not in our country.

201, Perhaps the representative
of Israel will be
interested to know that in Pakistan there are other
opposition parties, such as the Muslim League, Jamate-Islami
and Jamat-e-Ulema-e-Islam,
and that all
these opposition parties are actively and fully participating in the work of the national Parliament and the
provincial assemblies.

205. The representative of Israel said that international terrorism, from which other countries suffer
no less than Israel, will make their representatives
eat the words they spoke in this debate. Everybody
is aware that this represents a threat-which
is normal
for the Israeli representative, because he has been
threatening everybody in this chamber and the policy
that he represents is nothing but a threat to peace and
security in the world. It is all the more dangerous as
it comes in the context of his efforts to justify the
53-minute-long aggression against and violation of the
national sovereignty of an independent State Member
of the United Nations.

202. I hope that in future the representative of Israel
will operate within the parameters of the subject of
our debate and not make such patently false and irrelevant statements against a Member State.
(Yugoslavia):
In his
203. Mr. MUJEZINOVI@
second speech, the representative of Israel mentioned
my country. He said that Yugoslavia was anxious to demonstrate its loyal alignment with the remarks of the
so-called non-aligned countries. In this regard, I should
like to say that not only were we anxious to express
our solidarity with the position taken by all non-aligned
countries, and not only those that spoke at this meeting
on the item on the agenda, but that Yugoslavia is
actually a country that has, together with all other
non-aligned countries, been active in evolving and
formulating
a policy of international relations which
is in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. That means that we are advocating the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and national independence which have become the basic principles of
the policy of non-alignment and which have, from the
very inception of this Organization, been the principles of the United Nations. So we are not a so-called
non-aligned country, we are a movement dedicated
to those principles, and we shall carry on our struggle
for the implementation
and strict observance of these
principles
in international
behaviour.
Naturally’,
whoever violates those principles will be condemned
by all of the non-aligned countries, including my own
-which
happens to be a founder member of the
non-aligned movement. So I am very happy that the
representative
of Israel mentioned
that we have
demonstrated
our solidarity with our brothers from
the non-aligned world.

206. I should like to express my complete agreement
with the statement by my friend from Tanzania that
the attempts to justify the temporary aggression are
actually the real danger of today, because we all know
that there are no long-lasting aggressions, nor can
there be without lasting and grave consequences fat
international peace and security.
207. So what we have to face today is actually
Israel’s new practice in international
relations of
trying to legalize and to get support for its act of
aggression and its temporary violation of territorial
integrity. But I am sure that Israel will not get that
support, On the contrary, I am sure that the entire
international community-and
this international organization especially-will
find ways and means to
prevent such behaviour and such practices.
208. Regarding the remarks of the Israeli representative that I did not say anything in my speech about
other victims of the raid, I should like to advise him
to read my speech once again to see what I said.
209. In conclusion, let me say that all this shows
that Israel, whose policy of aggression is very well
known to the world community and to our Organization-and which has been condemned repeatedly and
most strongly by the vast majority of the Member
States and by all peace-loving forces in the world,
continues to defy the fundamental norms of behaviour

204. Secondly, the representative of Israel said that
Yugoslavia was apparently blinded by an extreme
anti-Israeli attitude and by an espousal of the cause of
the new anti-Semitism in the world today. Well, I think
Mr. Herzog has not the least moral right to be speaking
about anti-Semitism
in connection with Yugoslavia.
I should like to remind him that during our liberation
71

among States as laid down by the Charter. Israel has
once again manifested its aggressive intentions by
resorting to aggressive action. The treacherous Israeli
air r-aid on Entebbe Airport in Uganda clearly shows
that Israel continues to flout the decisions of the
United Nations and the interests of the international
community,
and that it persists in its policy of aggression, threatening the security of other independent
countries and thereby jeopardizing international peace
and security. The first and especially the second statement made here by Mr. Herzog are nothing but a
confirmation
of such behaviour,
which is deeply
rooted in the expansionist character of Israeli policy.
Therefore,
I have nothing to add to what I said yesterday in this chamber.

indeed, in two.of the cases mentioned, in the past they
have actively collaborated in action against terrorism
when it occurred on their soil.
217. Finally, in reply to the representative of the
Soviet Union, let me remind him that the United Nations did not create Israel. Israel was created ovet
3,000 years ago and was a nation dispensing moral
values to the world thousands of years before the
Soviet Union was ever dreamt of, The United Nations
merely reaffirmed the debt owed to the Jewish people
by history and by the world.
218. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): As I said
before, I will answer the fabrications, allegations and
distortions of the representative of the Zionist entity
later on. But now he obliges me to speak again just
to say that Mr. Herzog can have Libyan friends. No
problem. As an Irishman and. as a Jew. We have
nothing againt the Irish and we have nothing against
the Jews. We are fighting the Zionist aggressors and
the terrorists.

210.
I reserve the right to speak more comprehensively at a later time, if need be.
211. Mr. HERZOG
(Israel): I fail to understand the
statement made by the Libyan representative to the
effect that I hate Libya. I never said so. Indeed, some
of my best friends are Libyans.

219. Also, I want to point to another aspect of
Mr. Herzog’s statement. He is repeating, again and
again, that Libya is the paymaster of international
terrorism and that it is promoting international
terrorism, I do not know what is behind that. This whole
question of international terrorism poses a big question mark. Who is perpetrating international
terrorism? What is international terrorism? Who is responsible for international terrorism? There may be many
groups known as international terrorists but which
have their own national or ideological background.
But many groups are penetrated. Maybe one day we
shall know the truth. Mr. Herzog was the head of the
secret service of his country, in his counterfeit State,
Israel. Maybe one day he will write his memoirs, when
he has retired to his green Ireland. At that time he will
not be bound by the laws of secrecy of this counterfeit State, Israel. Maybe Israel will be history by that
time.

2x2. I should add that it is, perhaps, germane to
quote President Nimeiri of Sudan, who said only yesterday in a speech that “the international community,
as it is represented in the Security Council, must adopt
resolutions which will put an end to the madness of
the Libyan regime, a regime which threatens the
security of the entire region, Arab and African”. I did
not say that; President Nimeiri said it.
2 13.

And

President

Sadat

announced
yesterday
terrorist, Carlos,
is now residing in Libya”, and he went on at great
length to describe Libya’s implication.
that “it is no secret that the notorious

2 14. it might interest my Libyan colleague to know
that we have here a wire service report to the effect
that the Secretary of Libya’s ruling Arab Socialist
Union, Mr. Mohammed Hejazi, who is visiting Australia at the moment, said that he did not support the
attack an the freedom of Uganda, but that since the
hostages were Israeli passport holders the Israelis did
-in
his view-what
they had to do. That is said just
as a matter of curiosity.

220. The PRESIDENT:
There are no other delegations wishing to exercise their right of reply. I shall
now call on the representative of China who would
like to respond to some words addressed to his delegation.

215. I should like to assure the representative
of
Yugoslavia that I did not make any threat. I bad no
intention of doing so. I made a statement of fact, and
I personally hope and pray that it will not come true,
because I trust that neither Yugoslavia nor any other
country will ever have to face the dilemma which my
Government
had to face 10 days ago.

221. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (frrr/ls/trtion .f>cl~r?
Ckincse): Allow me, in the name of the Chinese delegation, to express deep thanks to the representatives
of Panama, Romania, Japan and India for the cordial
sentiments they have shown in connexion with the
passing away of Chairman Chou-teh.

216. In reply to the Foreign Minister of Mauritius
and to my colleague from Tanzania who asked me,
“Would
Israel have carried out similar rescue operations in Amsterdam, Paris, Athens or other European
cities?“, my reply is so obvious: none of the Governments mentioned would ever have stooped so low as
did the Government
of Uganda; they would never
have become accomplices of international
terrorism.

Notes

24

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your baokstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
dcs Nations
Units
monde
entier.
Informe;r;vous
nuprts
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLJCATJONS

DES NATIONS

sent en vente dsns les lihrairies
de votre libraire
ou adrcssez-vous

PUBLJCACJONES

Ltls publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
a Cincbra.

Litho

PUBLJCATJONS

may be obtained
t’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

DE LAS NACJONES

Unidas
estln en venta en librerias
a su librero
o diti,jase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNJES

et Its agcnccs
B : Nations

depositaircs
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidores
en
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas,

83-60801-February

198%2,200
