TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

st

MEETING:

NEW

5 SEPTEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/lSSl)

Page

1

,.~.,.,..,.,,,I..,.....,tl.,.,......

Expression of thanks to retiring Presidents and statement by the President
Adoption

1

of the agenda , . , . +. . . , , a, , . , , . , . . . . , . , I . , a, , . , , , , . , , . . , , . . . . 2

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 September 1970 from the Charge d’Affaires, a-i. of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9925) , , , . . . . , . . ) ( . , \ . . , , ) , , . . , . , . * , . * . , , . , . ‘ , . I * 1 , . . , . . . . . * * I . b 2

S/PV.l551

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normaliy published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

I

N HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 5 September 1970, at 4 p.m.

Presiderzt: Mr. Davidson S. H. W. NICGL

(Sierra
Leone).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.
Provisional

experience in diplomacy. He was for some years his
Ambassador to my own country and helped
to forge strong links between Poland and several African nations. My delegation congratulates him on his
successful Presidency of the Council during the month
of August,
country’s

4. The matter which we have before us is an important
aspect of the situation in the Middle East. This situation
is of cardinal iinportance to international peace and
security. We are aware of the condition of cease-fire
now existing, and we congratulate all concerned on
the initiative and restraint which have been displayed.
Our best wishes go to the Secretary-General and his
representative for success in those talks. A great deal,
will depend on the high level of sincerity and the high
degree ofpatience which, we are sure, will beforthcoming from both sides.

agenda (S/Agenda/l551)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2,

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 September 1970 from the Charge
d’Affaires, a.i. of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9925).
Expression
of thanks to retiring Presidents
and statement by the President

5. This meeting of the Security Council has been convened at the urgent request of the Charge d’Affaires,
a.i. of Lebanon.

1. The PRESIDENT:
During this month, the twentyfifth commemorative
assembly of the United Nations
will commence. We look forward, firstly, to a felicitous
gathering which will crown the efforts of Ambassador
Akwei of Ghana and his colleagues in the Committee
for the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the United
Nations. Secondly, we fervently hope that the numerous contacts which will take place among Foreign
Ministers
and Heads of State and Governments will
bear fruit in the enhancement of peace and prosperity
for all mankind.

6. Yesterday, it will be recalled, I received a letter
from the Charge d’Affaires, a.i. of Lebanon, transmitting the text of a letter addressed to me by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon That communication
has been distributed as Security Council document
S/9924. Early this morning I received a further letter
from the Charge d’Affaires, a.i. of Lebanon, transmitting the text of a letter addressed to me by the Minister
body in order to consider the question brought by his
Government. Copies of today’s letter have been circulated in document S/9925. Upon receiving that letter
I immediately undertook to contact all members of
the Council in order to consult them as to the time
when this meeting should be convened. I have
endeavoured to meet the situation in accordance with
the wishes of the Council’s members. I might mention
at this juncture that the delegation of Nicaragua has
agreed to the present meeting of the Council and that
the representative of Nicaragua is already on his way
to join this meeting. Accordingly, the Council should
not feel inhibited from proceeding with the question
on its agenda.

2. Our Chairman for the month of July was Ambassador Sevilla Sacasa of Nicaragua, He embodies in
himself the finest qualities of diplomacy in the great
tradition
of Hispanic culture. As one’ of those who
actually
signed the Charter at San Francisco, this
twenty-fifth
anniversary must bring back many
memories
of the hopes and ideals of the United
Nations.
The patience and understanding with which
he presided over the major African resolutions that
were adopted in July won him universal praise and
admiration.
3. I regard myself as being fortunate in succeeding
my good friend Ambassador Kulaga of Poland as President of the Council, His personal distinction, modesty
and wisdom were clearly evident in his conduct of
our affairs during the past month. This is not the first
time that my delegation has encountered his profound

7. I have little doubt that the wisdom of the Council
and the good sense and humanity of those concerned
will lead us to a speedy and harmonious solution of the
matter now in hand.
1

Adoption of the agenda

“2. I have instructed Chairman ILMAC”-that
is, the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice Corn&sion--“ to provide two UNMOs
fop on-the-spot
enquiries. ”

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 5 September 1970 from the Chargb
d’Affaires, a.i. of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9925)

As soon as I receive reports from these observers I
shall promptly report to the Security Council,
“3. Up to 1500 GMT”-that
is, 1700 local time
today, 5 September-“
assistant IDF
liaison
officer”-that
is, the assistant Israel Defence Force
liaison officer-“ did not have any information on
the alleged incident.

8. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, pursuant
to their requests, which I have received in writing today
&?I9926 and S/9927], to.participate without vote in the
discussion of the item just inscribed on the agenda.

“4. I will await the report of UNMOs
keep you informed.”

At the invitation qf the President, Mr. Y. Mahnzassani (Lebanon)and Mr. S. Rosenne (Israel)tookplaceb
at the Council table.

13. The second message sent at 1755 hours GMT
on 5 September--that
is, 1955 hours local time-is as
follows:

9. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the matter inscribed on its
agenda this afternoon at the request of Lebanon.

“Assistant IDF liaison officer”-that
is the
assistant
Israel
Defence
Force
lilaison
officer-“called
at 1705 GMT 5 September”-that
is, 1905 local time-“and
informed that at this time
all IDF forces had withdrawn from Lebanese territory.”

10. Before calling on the representative of Lebanon,
I call on the Secretary-General
who wishes to make
an announcement to the Council.

14. This is the information given by the assistant Israeli
Defence Force liaison officer. I have received no other
information from UNTSO thus far. In this regard, the
Council will recall the statement I made before it on
12 May 1970 on a similar occasion. This statement WS:

11. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
With regard to the
matter before the Council at this meeting, it is my duty
to inform the Council of the relevant information available to me. I have until now received from the Chief
of Staff of theUnitedNations
Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine (UNTSO) two cabled messages.

“As members of the Council will be aware, I have
for long sought to increase substantially the number
of United Nations observers on both sides in this
area, but without success. This accounts for the fact,
among other things, that I cannot have detailed information of actions such as that now in progress in
this area.” [1537th meeting, para. 8.1

12. The first message which was sent from Jerusalem
today, 5 September, at 1740 hours GMT-that
is, 1940
hours local time-reads
as follows:
“1. The following message was received by the
Chairman of ILMAC” --that is, the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice Commission-‘
‘from the Lebanese
authorities on 5 September 1970:

1.5. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

“ ‘On 4 September 1970 Israeli aircraft attacked
the Lebanese region of El Arkoub. At the same time
the same area was subjected to artillery bombardment.
The bombardment caused various material damage.
When the bombardment ceased an Israeli mixed infantry and armoured force penetrated the region opening
a way to our village of Kfar Chouba, approximate
map reference 2150-3035, destroying our road networks in this region as they blew up several houses.
Up to the present, 0930 GMT” ‘--that is, 1130 local
,time 5 September- “ ‘the Israeli unit continued to
remain in our territory, on the outskirts of Kfar
Chouba. For this reason we request:

16. Mr. MAHMASSANI
(Lebanon): Mr. President,
I wish to thank you for your prompt action in convening
this urgent meeting of the Security Council at our
request. My thanks go also to the other members of
the Council for responding to your urgent call. It is
an element of satisfaction to the Lebanese delegation
to see you presiding over this august body in these
extremely difficult circumstances, for it is needless to
refer to the strong and cordial ties which link Sierra
Leone and Lebanon.
17. Yesterday I communicated to Your Excellency and
to His Excellency the Secretary General a letter fram
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Lebanon [s/99HJg
bringing to your attention that the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon has been escalating at an alarming rate
in the past few days, in flagrant violation of the pertinent
resolutions of theUnitedNations
and the Lebanon-Israel
Armistice Agreement.

“ ‘(1) The confirmation by a United Nations military observer (UNMO) on the spot.
“ ‘(2) The immediate
from our territory.’

and will

withdrawal of the Israeli unit
2

18. During the last two weeks, Israeli armed forces
committed
fifty-eight
acts of aggression against
Lebanon-air
attacks, mortar bombing, incursions
inside the territory of Lebanon, abduction of civilians,
dynamiting civilian installations and construction of
roads for military purposes.

24. We have come to the Council on several occasions
always seeking guarantees promised by the Charter.
We are still confident and hopeful that this august body
will npt shy away from its responsibility to condemn
the aggressor and the aggression and to take effective
measures to stop them.

19. A few hours- after I had communicated
the
aforementioned letter to you, Israeli armed forces consisting of two companies of infantry, backed by its
air force and tanks, launched a sneak attack inside
Lebanese territory reaching the village of Kfar
Chouba, which is four kilometres inside the Lebanese
border, and then constructed a road to ‘allow them
frlrther military expansion.

25. Lebanon asks nothing more from the Security
CounciI than the following: immediate and complete
withdrawal of all Israeli forces from all Lebanese territory; a strong condemnation of Israel for its repeated
acts of aggression against Lebanon, in violation of the
Charter and the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council-262
(1968) of 31 December 1968; 270 (1969)
of 26 August 1969, 279 (1970) of 12 May 1970 and 280
(1970) of 19 May 1970; Lebanon demands further the
application of Chapter VJI of the Charter against Israel,
in accordance with operative paragraph 3 of Security
Council resolution 280 (1970), which states:

20. Today, Saturday, at 1300 hours local time, the
Israelis have continued their aggression, backed by
the Israeli air force, bombing Lebanese territory and
civilian populations. They have penetrated an additional seven kilometres from the border. Our latest
information is that the military operations are still continuing and the Lebanese Army is still resisting the
aggressor. In fact, a few minutes before I came into
this Chamber, about 4.15 p.m. New York local time,
I received an official call .from Beirut confirming that
the Israeli forces are still engaging units of the Lebanese
Army inside Lebanese territory. This flagrant violation
of our frontier and territory has, so far, resulted in
the death of two civilians and two others were wounded
seriously. Considerable material damage has been
inflicted qn civilian installations. These acts of aggression
take place at the same time when Israel is trying, by
all,means, to obstruct a just solution of a peaceful settlemerit in the Middle East. These acts further constitute
a direct threat to regional and world security by the
grave implications and the consequences that could result
from the extension of the area of conflict.

“Declares
that such armed attacks can no longer
be tolerated and repeats its solemn warning to Israel
that if they were to be repeated the Security Council
would in accordance with resolution 262 (1968) and
this resolution consider taking adequate and effective
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant articles of the Charter to implement its resolutions”.

26. The PRESIDENT:
of Israel.

I now call on the representative

27. Mr. ROSENNE
(Israel): Mr, President, I should
like first on behalf of my delegation to express to you,
Sir, our best wishes that your term of office will be
tranquil and constructive. I would also take this opportunity to pay our respects to the oufgoing. Presidents
for July &id August, the Ambassadors of Nicaragua
and Poland. I would also pay my respects across this
table to the Secretary-General and to his Special Representative.

21. Let me say now that the Israeli aggression has
intensified because it is clearly apparent to the Israeli
leaders that any just solution sought in the Middle East
would expose Israel to serious difficulties and internal
divisions,

28. The attempt of the Lebanese delegation to
dramatize a minor patrolling incident, fully justified
by the free hand given’to the terrorists by the Lebanese
Government, by suddenly asking for this urgent meeting of the Security Council, knowing fUl well that
nothing justified this step at a time when many members
of the Council were taking advantage of the public
holiday to Epose andgatherstrength for the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly, will not have passed
unnoticed. :‘Perhaps it is the vocation of Lebanon, which
has beeu mentioned before in this Chamber, to excuse
its own evil intentions, that supplies the real justification
for the panic evidenced in the letter addressed to YOU,
Sir, yesterday by the Chargk d’Affaires at the request
of the Foreign Minister of Lebanon, followed by the
request for this meeting.

22. Israeli aggression, which is taking the shape of
ominous military hostilities directed against Lebanon,
is undoubtedly a prelude to the resumption of hostilities
on other fronts in the area. This aggression is directed
not only against Lebanon but also against other Arab,
States, as well as against all efforts to preserve peace
in the Middle East and in the world.
23. The da.i!,y bombardment of Lebanon by Israel and
the latter’s threats offer the world an example of the
agonizing and sad circumstances created by Israeli
military expansionists. The drama that Lebanon is living today at its southern border represents a challenge
and a test of the ability of the Security Council to
Live up to its obligations under the Charter and to ensure
the safety, the security and the independence of small
and peaceful nations, which are constantly threatened
by military and expansionist aggressors.

29. It was clear when the Security Council adopted
the inequitable
and one-sided text of resolution 280
(1970) on 19 May last, that the resolution would, as
similar ones in the past, give encouragement to the
3

aggressor. Three days after the adoption of that
resolution, attackers from Lebanese territory in a particularly dastardly operation, ambushed an Israeli
school bus and murdered nine children and four adults.
That gave rise to universal disgust from virtually every
part of the world, with one ominous exception. My
delegation has submitted written complaints about the
Lebanon to the Security Council twice since then, on
22 May [S/98IO] and 12 June [S/9834]. In all, since
then, over 200 acts of aggression have been committed
from Lebanese territory, and with the connivance of
the Lebanese authorities, against Israel territory and
civilians.

have at one time or another served on the Council,
Israel has been denied this position. More than this,
not only has membership in the Security Council been
withheld from Israel, but Israel has never been allowed
to influence the choice of candidates representing, or
purportedly representing, the geographic area to which
Israel belongs.
37. Israel’s rights in the Security Council have been
further whittled away by the fact that in the last fifteen
years the Council has become paralysed by the use
of the veto in all instances concerning the situation
in the Middle East in which consideration for and recognition of Israel’s interests and rights was necessary.

30. Since the Security CounciI adopted that resolution there have been in fact at least 204 terrorist aggressions from Lebanese territory; fifteen Israeli civilians
have been killed; five Israeli soldiers have been killed;
thirty-eight Israeli civilians have been wounded; fiftyfive Israeli soldiers have been wounded.

38. Israel’s exclusion from representation on the
Council and the Council’s inability, because of the
veto, to accord due consideration to Israel’s righls,
are aggravated by the composition of this organ. Onethird of its members maintain no diplomatic relations
with Israel. Some of them even deny or question
Israel’s right to exist. Of the remaining members,
several unreservedly identify themselves with the Arttb
position irrespective of its merits, which indeed they
disdain to examine. What is more serious, some of
the States represented on the Council follow a policy
of unilateral measures against Israel which in fact constitute illegal sanctions contrary to Charter provisions
on this matter. Their manifest lack of neutrality, their
blatant partialities, deprive them of all claim to the
status of impartial observers, let alone arbiters of the
situation in the Middle East.

31. To show the intensification
of terrorist activity
in this area between 12 May 1970, when the last debate
on the Lebanese question began, until 31 May, twelve
civilians and cne soldier were killed, twenty civilians
and five soldiers were wounded. This corresponds to
the openly-proclaimed
designs of the terrorist leaders
to sabotage the major diplomatic
efforts now being
made, to reach a peaceful and just solution of the Middle
East crisis,
32. According to the Lebanese daily newspaper El&K// K$//, of 31 December 1969, Chouba-which was
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General and
again just now in the statement we have just heard by
the representative of Lebanon who, I should have
thought, should perhaps have not been too eager to have
mentioned that name-serves as one of the main front
posts of the terrorist organizations in the El Arkoub
area, the area with which we are dealing.

39. The most recent and flagrant deviation from Charter principles has been the seating as a member of
the Council of Syria, which repudiates the United
Nations Charter in relation to Israel, has rejected the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 1242
(1967)] on the establishment of a just and lasting peace
and has even refused to accept the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, and to explore with him the road
to peace. Syria’s membership in this organ has made
a mockery of the Council’s responsibility for international peace and security . . .

33. I am now talking about the resolution of last May.
That was not the first time that the Security Council
had demonstrated its inability to address itself fairly
and constructively to the situation in the Middle East,
That was not the first time that it had set up a double
standard, applying one measure for the Arab party and
another for Israel, and failed to deal with the situation
on its merits.

40. The PRESIDENT:
I give the floor to the rep
resentative of Syria on a point of order.
41. Mr. JOUEJATI
(Syria): Mr. President, I think
you will agree with me that it is high time for the representative of Israel to deal with the complaint brought
by the delegation of the Lebanon, which is the question
of the invasion of Lebanese territory. The candidature
of Syria is not in question. If the delegation of Israel
has a complaint about that, it can bring it before the
Security Council at any time. I think that we are all
faced with a very grave problem and we should adopt
a resolution as soon as possible. Any delaying tactics
would be interpreted, and rightly so, as allowing the
aggression, the invasion, to continue. I hope that the
Security Council will not be an accomplice to that.

34. In these circumstances it is necessary for my
delegation to make certain clarifications concerning its
position in the deliberations in this organ.
35. The Charter of the United Nations states that
the Organization
is based on the sovereign equality
of all Member States. That is a basic premise of our
Organization.
IsraeI, however, has consistently been
deprived of this fundamental prerogative, particularly
in the Security Council.
36. Although it is intended that the Security Council
should be representative of the entire membership of
the United Nations, Israel’s right of representation has
been brushed aside. While all of Israel’s neighbours

42. I waive my right of consecutive interpretation
deliberately because we want to achieve results and
because we do not want any theses on Security Council
4

-

candidature and geograihic distribution, I hope that
the Security Council will pass on to action as soon
as possible.
43. The PRESIDENT:
may now continue.

The representative

action and it contains no less than fifteen points; such
is the detail into which it goes. One point reaf%-ms
that the Palestinians’ armed struggle was in Lebanon’s
interest as it was in the interest of the Palestinian
revolution and of all Arabs in general. In another point
of that Agreement the Lebanese Army undertook to
co-operate in the installation of supplies, rest and aid
posts for the Palestinian commandos. I shall not take
up the time of the members at this stage to read any
more of this Agreement. But it is a matter of common
knowledge and the existence of this Agreement highlights the excessive abnormality of the situation which
subsists with the full knowledge of the Lebanese
Government
in the Mount Hermon foothills, It is
against this background of continuous acts of aggression committed from Lebanese territory and of the
admitted helplessness of the Lebanese authorities to
control their own territory that again today it was
necessary for my Government to exercise its right of
self-defence and to take appropriate action in the
affected part of Lebanon.

of Israel

44. Mr. ROSENNE
(Israel): I thank you, Mr, President, and, of course, I thank the representative of Syria
for indicating to me how to make my views known.
But I prefer to do it in my own way.
45. As long as these circumstances prevail, the SecuritY Council cannot be considered as an organ capable
of acting or entitled to act in the conflict between Israel
and the Arab States. My delegation, however, comes
before the Council to put its views on record.
46. The members of the Security Council are well
aware of the Agreement,
the so-called Cairo
Agreement, which was signed on 3 November 1969
between the then Commander in Chief of the Lebanese
Army, General Bmile Bustany-he is now in retirement
-and Yassir Arafat, whose name will be well known
around this table. Mr. Arafat is the man who claims
over-all responsibility
for directing and co-ordinating
terrorist activities against Israel. That is the Agreement
which provides the basis and the licence for terrorist
activity against Israel from Lebanese territory. Let me
give members of the Council one or two paragraphs
Of that Agreement which are directly relevant to the
situation on the affected part of the frontier between
Israel and Lebanon. I will add that an English translation of that Agreement can be found in the weekly
English edition of Le Mondc of 29 April last. The first
part of that Agreement dealt with what is called the
Palestinian presence in Lebanon, allowing it to have
its own army command and the necessary mechanisms
to ensure relations with the local authorities, bearing
in mind, in&a &a, what is politely termed “the interests of the Palestinian revolutionary cause”. What is
that interest? Let me quote from an interview given
by that same Mr. Arafat to the Italian weekly magazine
L’Ewopeo,
as reproduced in the Washington Post of
29 Marchlast. It is in the form of questions and answers:

48. Yesterday and today a small unit of the Israel
Defence Forces carried out a search and comb mission
in the south-westerly foothills of Mount Hermon, east
of the Hasbani. They completed their mission a few
hours ago and have since evacuated the territory.
explosives
and
sabotage
ammunition,
Arms,
impedimenta
were found. This was a minor action in
which the Lebanese Army was not directly involved
except for some shelling from a distance. As on a previous occasion this action was directed solely against
terrorists in the area affected. Incidentally,
according
to a Reuter’s report from Damascus today, the Syrian
Government has admitted that the Israeli actions in
this area were posing a very serious threat to the terrorist operations, especially those of the El-Saiqa Group.
49. I should like to add once more some statistics.
In the four-week period ending today no less than
eighty-four acts of aggression against Israel have been
committed from Lebanese territory. In these five days
of September alone we have endured from Lebanese
territory seven cases of mortar shelling, three cases
of mining, one case of sabotage in a village, and four
attempts at hostile and illegal crossings into our territory. I think the Council might be interested in a
statement of the Minister of the Interior of Lebanon,
Mr. Jumbalatt, circulated by the wire services in the
course of today. According to the Reuter’s News
Agency, Mr. Jumbalatt:
“ . * . asked Palestinian terrtirist organizations not
to set up offices in Lebanese border villages in order
to avoid giving Israel a pretext for retaliatory action
against the villages. He also asked them to move
what bases and offices were already close to the
border back to some 10 or 15 kilometres from Israel.

‘ ‘Arafat: We will not accept it”-that
is, a peaceful
settlement. “We will continue to wage war against
Israel by ourselves until we get Palestine back. The
goal of our struggle is the end of Israel HL?I! there
can be no compromises or mediations whether our
friends like it or not, the dimensions of our struggle
will always remain those outlined by the principles
of Al-Fath.”
“Question:
Thus you are not at all seeking the
peace everyone is hoping for.
“Answer: Right. We don’t want peace, we want
victory. Peace for us means Israel’s destruction and
nothing else. ”

“Mr. Jumbalatt told reporters he had made the
request at his regular meeting with representatives
of terrorist organizations here (in Beirut) yesterday.
He added that the terrorist delegates had promised
to consider his request and reply to him soon, probably after his return from a visit to Cairo.”

47. Those are the interests which are recognized by
the Lebanese Government in the Cairo Agreement.
That Agreement goes on with a section on resistance
5

50. This same Mr. Jumbalatt-the
Minister of the
Interior-reported
once to his Government, according
to a report of the Middle East News Agency from
Damascus on 5 June, that the terrorists ‘<now have
a free hand to sport with our fortunes”. Well, some
sport!

cess in your Presidency of this august body, You, ~r.1
President, can count on the completk co-operation of
my delegation.
5’7. I should also like to send a greeting to your predecessor, the Ambassador of Poland, who, although
he did not convene us in public, did call us together
in private and with his great skill he succeeded in sparing us several meetings. Nevertheless, he carried OUI
his duties as President.

51. All this shows that in reality the Lebanese
Government has long given up its control of the area
concerned which, following a series of agreements and
accords and understandings with the terror organizations, is now a central base for terror activities.

58. My delegation would also like to send greetings
to the Ambassador of Nicaragua for the fine manner
in which he presided over the Council during July.

52. Does any member of the Security Council who
is honest with himself, does any responsible Government in the world seriously expect the direct victim
of this aggression to wait until these terrorist delegates
will be obliging enough,, to give Mr. Jumbalatt their
reply? Does not the very fact that the Lebanese
Government had to adopt this manner of speaking with
the terrorists show conclusively how hollow and how
tendentious is that Government’s
request for this
urgent meeting of the Security Council?

59. We have just heard the statements made by the
representatives of Lebanon and Israel after having
heard the statement made by the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, this is not the first time that the army
of a Member State has penetrated by force into the
territory of another Member State of the United
Nations. These facts are undeniable and the delegation
of Israel does not deny them although it attempts to
minimize them, In this situation and without prejudice
to the fact that the Security Council may in furlher
meetings consider the facts in detail, and take pertinent
decisions, it is evident that what is not possible is that
the Israel army should continue to be present in the
ferritory of Lebanon.

53, Resolutions adopted by the Security Council in
recent debates have reflected the Council’s disabilities
to consider questions arising from the Israel-Arab conflict with equity’and in conformity with fundamental
Charter precepts. The Council has thus, I regret to
say, failed to pronounce itself on the statements made
repeatedly
by Arab Governments,
including the
Government of Lebanon and their representatives in
the United Nations and elsewhere, that their aim is
to bring about Israel’s annihilation
as a State. The
Council has failed to act on the incessant warfare
openly pursued by Arab States against Israel. It has
even failed to uphold and reaffirm the obligations to
observe the cease-fire established by its own resolutions.

60. Last May, my delegation submitted a draft resolu-,
tion which was adopted unanimously [279 (I970)3 and
which forced the Israel army to withdraw from
Lebanon. My delegation still recalls that we weregiven
assurances that the withdrawal had been completed
at the moment when the Council was taking up the
matter. The facts later proved that, because of a series
of circumstances which I need not relate, the withdrawal had not been completed as had been announced
here in the Council.

54. Neither Israel, nor the international community,
requires Lebanon to favour Israel’s interests or support
Israel’s views. Lebanon is obliged, however, as a
Member of the United Nations to prevent irregular
as well as regular forces from using its territory for
aggression against another Member State. No pretext
can weaken this obligation. No excuse can diminish
the responsibility incurred in flouting it. No fine words
can conceal the underlying truth. This has always been
a tenet of international law and aUnited Nations principle repeatedly vindicated by United Nations jurisprudence. If Lebanon chooses to repudiate it, it opts
for war, with all its dangers and repercussions. If Lebanon chooses to open its frontiers to aggression against
Israel, it cannot claim to be immune to Israel’s defence
against aggression.

61. Under these circumstances
my delegation
believes that this Council cannot remain inactive. The
facts have been proved. The invasion has occurred
and the fact that a withdrawal ha’s been initiated is
not, in the opinion of my delegation, sufficient proof
for the Council to remain completely inactive.
62. Under these circumstances and bearing in mind
that it is a repetition of actions which have occurred
in the past with the flagrant violation of specific Principles of the Charter, my delegation believes that the
Council should act with all the urgency required by
the situation. Consequently, my delegation submits the
following draft resolution:

55. With that, and stressing once again the defensive
and very limited nature of the action which was completed several hours ago, I wish to reserve my delegation’s rights and position in this debate.
56.

“D~III&S
the complete and immediate withdrawal
of all Israeli armed forces from Lebanese territory.”

Mr.

DE PINIES
(Spain) (iizte,p,‘etation from
Mr. President, allow me first of all to welcome you, congratulate you and wish you every suc-

63. The appeal issued by this Council on 12 May
has produced its results and we trust that the Government of Israel will immediately bow to this qecision.

Spanish):

6

64. We hope that the present draft resolution will
be submitted to the vote as urgently as is required
and in any case before the conclusion of the present
meeting. Once we have approved this draft resolution,
the Council in its future meetings can consider the
remaining problems which have been raised in the
statements made by the representatives of Lebanon
and Israel.

made by the adoption of one-sided resolutions. I have
also informed the Council that the action has been
completed
and that Israeli forces have evacuated
Lebanese territory, In these circumstances, as it was
last May, the draft resolution which the representative
of Spain has proposed is utterly divorced from reality.
It would be unfortunate if the Council should now be
stampeded into voting on and adopting a draft resolution which is marked not only by an absence of equity‘,:
but also by a refusal to take cognizance of the plain
facts of the situation.

65. Mr. ICOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (irzterpretnfiorz .porn French): Mr. President, in tendering
you our warmest congratulations, I should like. first
to thank you for the speed with which you called
this meeting of the Security Council and to assure you
of the complete support. of my delegation in your
delicate work.

75. Mr, DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Spnnish): I do not wish to hold up the work of the
Council, since I myself have asked that we proceed
urgently; however, my delegation does not wish to
let a fact pass without comment. When an armed force
of a State penetrates into the territory of another
sovereign State-that,
with all my respect for those
who do it, is a flagrant violation of the United Nations
Charter, Article 2, paragraph 4, of which states:

66. I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to your predecessors, Mr. &villa Sacasa, Ambassador
of Nicaragua, who presided over the Council in .Tuly
with great mastery, and Mr. Ku&ga who, very happily,
had no occasion to call a plenary meeting ofthe Security
Council but who nevertheless carried on intensive diplomatic activity and many informal meetings with talent
and tact to which I should like to pay tribute.

“AI1 Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.”

67. For my part, I am prepared to waive my right
to speak so as to make possible a rapid vote on the
draft resolution submitted by our colleague from Spain.
If there were other speakers I should, of course,
address the Council; if not, I would be in’favour of
proceeding as rapidly as possible to a vote.

76. Now, you can say “minor patrolling incidents”
or whatever one wants to call them; but, in my delegation’s opinion, the invasion of a territory by a foreign
army is a flagrant violation of the Charter. And in the
light of this my delegation believes that the Council
should proceed to a vote and call for the immediate
and complete withdrawal of the forces of the Israeli
army which have ‘penetrated into Lebanon.

68. In the circumstances, I reserve my right, if necessary, to explain my vote subsequently. I may add that
I support fully the proposal of the Spanish representative.
69. The PRESIDENT:
resentative of Lebanon.

77. Mr. BUFFUM
(United States of America): Mr.
President, first of all I should like to join those ‘who
have already spoken in welcoming you to the Chair.
Not only your distinguished record, but our experience
of very cordial and very enriching contacts with you
since your arrival in New York assures us that you
will be presiding over the Council with great wis,dom
and great distinction and we look forward to your
tenure in the Presidency.

I give the floor to the rep-

70. Mr. MAHMASSANI
(Lebanon): I intended to
re$y to the spokesman of Israel, but under the present
circumstances
I shall waive my right until after the
vote.
71. The PRESIDENT:
resentative of Israel.

I give the floor to the rep-

78. I should also like to convey my congratulations
to Ambassador Kul’aga for thevely serene, competent 1
and courteous manner in which he conducted our consultations during the previous month.

72. Mr. ROSENNE
(Israel): I shall be brief, but I
should like, if I may, to refer to something that was
said just now by the representative of Spain.

79. Turning to the matter at hand today, I think we
all recognize that some- of the facts which have been
put before us about the current situation along the
frontier between Lebanon and Israel are in dispute.
However, there can be no dispute that for a long period
of time now there has been a pattern of guerr’illa-type
raids conducted from Lebanese territory against Israel
and Israeli counter-attacks directed against Lebanese
territory. This problem has been subjected to lengthy
consideration in the Security Council in August 1969,
in May 1970, and more recent &vents have been
reported in document S/9822 of 5 June 1970 and in

73. I should like to recall-1 was listening to the English interpretation-that
when he submitted the draft
resohltion, the representative of Spain found it appropriate to describe Israel’s a&tin-the
word used was
“invasion”-without
however, referring to the warfare
which, as everybody knows, is being waged continuously against Israel from Lebanese territory in flagrant
-breach of the Charter.
74. I have already mentioned in my statement that
no contribution
to peace in the Middle East can be
7

statements by official spokesmen both in Lebanon and
in Israel.

84. There is one other point which my delegation
would like to make in connexion with consideration
of this complaint. However much we may deplore the
Israeli attacks on Lebanese territory, we do not think
that the Security Council in all fairness can continudl!
disregard m such a total fashion the continuing p~jvocations which are directed against Israel from ~,,&-,a=
territoiy. Israel as well as Lebanon, and indeed all othr
Members, have a full and equal right under the Charkr
to freedom from outside intervention and attacks agajmt
itsterritory.AmbassadorYostsaidon
14May: “ Icannot
emphasize too strongly that my Government contin=
to oppose all acts of violence across frontiers in violatk,n
of the cease-fire from any source” [1540th lneetitlg, ~XIF~I.
34).

80. The statements to this Council by representatives
of the United States last May and August have made
it abundantly clear, I believe, that my Government
fully supports the political independence and the territorial integrity of Lebanon, that we cannot, we do
not, condone any threat to Lebanese territory from
any source. We were indeed happy to support Security
Council resolution 279 (1970) in May, which called for
the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli forces from
Lebanese territory-and
we were indeed happy when
Israel complied.
8 I. The situation which confronts the Council today
is in our judgment somewhat different. We have listened attentively to the statements made this afternoon,
first of all to the report, delivered by the SecretaryGeneral in such a thoughtful and timely manner, from
the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, in which he informed us of allegations about continuing Israeli attacks on Lebanese territory, together with a statement by the Israeli representative to him that Israeli troops had been withdrawn. We have also heard before this Council the
concerns which have quite understandably
been
reflected in the statement of our colleague from Lebanon about military operations on his territory and informationfrom his Government that those operations continue. At the same time, we have also listened to a
statement by the representative of Israel in which he
has assured us categorically twice-at
least, I took
it as a categoric assurance-that all Israeli trcops have
in fact now been withdrawn from this most recent
operation.

85. I should like today to reiterate that concern. I
also wish to reaffirm our special concern for the intcgrity of Lebanon, a democratic State with an illustrious
history and one which has repeatedly demonstratd
its commitment to the United Nations Charter and to
peace.
86. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Israel.

I now call on the representil-

87. Mr. ROSENNE
(Israel): Referring to the last
statement made by the representative of Spain, I should
simply like to express the hope and understanding that
the doctrine which he advanced will always be applied
by him even-handedly and that he would demons&arc
the same degree of solicitude at the situation in which
Israel finds itself.
88. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Lebanon.

I now call on the represent*

89. Mr. MAHMASSANI
(Lebanon): I should still like
to reserve my right to reply after the voting has b@cn
completed.

82. Therefore, this text which has just been handed
us strikes me in a way as passing judgment not only
on the principle that Israeli troops should be withdrawn-which we fully support-but
in asense is asking
us to make a judgment as to which of the two parties
is giving the accurate version of the present situation
on the ground: to wit, are the troops still there or are
they not there? If they are not there, then such a resolution is redundant. If they are there, then it would command the full support of the United States because we
believe that they should not be on Lebanese soil,

90. However, may I just say now that I should like
to reject categorically Israeli allegations that their
forces of aggression have withdrawn from Lebancg
territory. The fact is that right now Israeli forces art’
still inside Lebanese territory. We are all acquainted
with Israeli tactics of distortion, which were refcrrd
to by the Ambassador of Spain.
91. The last time we came to this CounciI, A&assador Tekoah declared in front of all the members &at
the Israeli forces had withdrawn. But at a later meeting
he retracted that statement by stating that it was tm
dark for them to withdraw and therefore they remained
on Lebanese soil. I believe now in Beirut that it is
already later than twelve midnight and I am sure it
is still too darkfor the Israeli forces to withdraw. Therefore, I will refrain from replying to the Israeli representative until the vote has been completed.

83. But we frankly find ourselves in the face of this
conflicting evidence confronted with a rather painful
dilemma. We merely regret that the draft resolution
has been introduced with such haste and that there
has not been an adequate opportunity
to ascertain
through some impartial source, such as the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, what the precise situation is as of the present time along the border.
Now, that being so and taking account of the conflicting
evidence, the haste with which we are asked to pass
judgment on a matter of this seriousness, my Government has instructed me under such circumstances to
abstain, while makingclear that this in no way detracts
from our continued full and complete support for the
maintenance of the territorial integrity of Lebanon.

92. The PRESIDENT:
Are there any objections 60
the Council’s proceeding to the vote on thedraft resolb
tion submitted by the delegation of Spain? Are there
any further explanations before the vote’?
8

93. The draft resolution

states:

98.

“The Security Council

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Burundi, China, Colombia,
Finland,
France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Zambia.

Abstaining:

of Lebanon.

99. Mr. MAHASSANI
(Lebanon): I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the remarkable manner
in which you have handled our complaint. My thanks
also go to all members of the Security Council for
their support and understanding, particularly to the
Ambassador of Spain who submitted
the draft
resolution.

“Demands the complete and immediate withdrawal of all Israeli armed forces from Lebanese
territory. ”

Against:

I now call on the representative

100. It is a matter of distress and great regret to see
one delegation unable to support the principle of withdrawal of foreign armed forces from the territory of
independent and sovereign States, thus definitely
implying support for aggression. It is ironical that this
delegation in particular alleges that it is working for
.peace, particularly in the Middle East.

None.

101. The spokesman of Israel referred to responsible
Governments. I wonder if there is one responsible
Government in the United Nations which has the
audacity to send a representative to the Security Council to admit openly committing an act of aggression
against a Member State.

United States of America.

The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none,
with 1 abstenti0n.l
94. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative of the United Kingdom who wishes to make a
statement after the vote.

102. Mr. Rosenne referred to the Palestinian people.
Let me tell Mr, Rosenne that if there are 300,000 Palestinians on its territory, it is not Lebanon which is responsible but Israel which drove that Palestinian population
from its homes. It is Israel which must bear the responsibility of failure to implement the United Nations
resolutions adopted both before and after the war of
5 June 1967 and for the consequences of that failure.
It shares that, responsibility with all other countries
which give it direct support. It can on no account shift
the responsibility on to Lebancm. Indeed of the whole
international community Lebanon is without a doubt
the country which least deserves to bear the responsibility for the Palestinian presence and activity for which
Israel claims to be punishing it.

95. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): We have
this afternoon heard conflicting statements from the
parties about the present position on the ground and
this has put my delegation in a difficult position. The
representative of Lebanon maintains that Israeli forces
are still operating on Lebanese territory. The representative of Israel maintains that all Israeli forces have
now withdrawn. It seems impossible for the Council
at this stage of the game to determine the exact facts.
It is, however, clear that an armed incursion into
Lebanese territory did take place and the representative of Israel has not denied this. Hence, in spite of
the conflict of evidence, it is the view of my delegation
that it was appropriate to adopt the resolution before
US. If the Israeli forces have in fact withdrawn, the
fact is welcome to us all. If they have not, then there
is every reason for the Security Council to demand
their immediate withdrawal. That is why my delegation
voted in favour of the resolution.

103. Through its threats and its aggression Israel
intends to compel Lebanon to force its 300,000 Palestinian refugees who are fighting heroically to return to
their homes, through the use of armed force, to resign
themselves indefinitely to the miseries of their exodus
under penalty of itself suffering further aggression by
Israel. Thus Israel’s aim is none other than to destroy
Lebanon either from the inside or from the outside
by confronting it with the alternatives of undergoing
Israel’s raids against its own territory and its population
or practising towards its own brothers who are resident
in its territory a permanent policy of violence and civil
war.

96. In voting in this manner, however, my delegation
nevertheless.deplores
all actions which are likely to
impede the progress of Mr. Jarring’s mission and Of
the negotiations for an eventual settlement. In this we
include breaches of the cease-tire by the fedayeen
which cannot in any respect assist toward this end.
97. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to take this
opportunity
to extend a very warm welcome to the
representative of the United Kingdom at this his first
meeting of the Security Council. He is no stranger
to many of us here as he has ‘served before on his
country’s delegation, served with distinction during the
past decade. We hope that his stay with the United
Nations will be a fruitful and successful one and we
look forward very much to his future deliberations in
the work of this Council.

104. The Israel representative spoke of obstacles to
peace talks. His very presence here in this Council
is an excellent proof of who is obstructing the peace
talks.
105. Mr. BUFFUM
(United States of America): I
shall be very brief in right of reply. I very much regret
that my friend from Lebanon was apparently a bit
preoccupied during part of my statement and failed
to note that I made very clear that the abstention of

‘See resolution 285 (1970).

9

me to express without hesitation the certainty that y
Presidency will be marked with these outstanding y
ities and, I sincerely hope, with results.

my Government was in no way related to the principle
of withdrawal, Let me set this forth succinctly and
clearly. It appeared to us that unfortunately the facts
before the Council about the state of withdrawal were
in dispute, If the Israeli troops have been withdrawn,
as we were assured, we welcome that. We do not feel
that they should have entered Lebanese territory. If
they have not been withdrawn, it is the view of my
Government
that they should be withdrawn
immediately.

108. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to thank members f@
their very kind words of congratulations address& lo
the President, and so to the delegation of Sierra IJYJ~~
We are very grateful to them indeed and we skaI1 do
our best to conduct the Council’s business withes
tion and integrity.
109. As the representative of Spain has said, we ~&VC
devoted this meeting to the discussion of an in resolution, without prejudice to any further me
which we shall hold to discuss this matter furt
understand that other delegations wish to particip!#e
in this debate. After consultations, we have fixed Ihe
date and time of the next meeting to be Tuesday. 8
September, at 3 p.m., but I hope that we shall sti
in readiness should we be requested to hold furlher
meetings before then.

106. Mr. KU,LAGA (Poland) (interpretation from
I have asked to speak notin order to deal
with the substance of the question before us or even
to explain the vote that my delegation has just cast.
I shall do that at the appropriate time. However, Mr.
President, I should like to extend to you and to my
colleagues in the Security Council my thanks for the
very generous, not to say too generous, things that
they were kind enough as to say about me. I was particularly appreciative of the mention which you made,
Mr. President, of my stay in your country and in other
African States, a stay which remains a very pleasant
memory.

French):

110. I wish once again to thank members of the Couhlcil and the delegations of Lebanon and Israel for
ticipating in this debate at such short notice duri
the holiday period. I wish to thank the Secret
General and his secretariat for their willing
immediate response to our request for a meeting.

107. I could not conclude these remarks without
extending our congratulations and best wishes to you,
Mr. President, upon your accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. The experience,
tact and distinction which we know to be yours allow

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

The meeting rose at 6.35 pati.

PUll.lCATlONS

United Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

moly be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and dirlribulors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Se&on,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente
dons les llbroiries
et les agences
dipositairsr
du monde entlar. Informez-vous
aup&
da votre librairie
ou odresser-vour
61
Notions Unlcr, Section des vcntes, New York ou Get&e.

KAK llOJlYYKTb

KS~AKKFI

&~~(aIinx
arewwrnax

06!be&nHennb~x
Haqnfi
pf&laX
ampa. BanoAaTe

OprallnSaqnA
no ncex

OPrAKH3A~KM

06bEfiHKEHHblX
~o%nO
cnpanKu

HAuHfl

KynnTb
B KmKHHX
ldftra31ll~aX
06 sisjqawmx B naKxe>r KwmiKo3t

II

alaraanlrenmnnnunTeno aApecy:Opraaaaaqarr065eAnHeHnnxIIaqnfi, CeKqnr no
npoAaxenB&aHnii, Hbro-tfopx
Am >xeKesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacioncs
de lar Nacioner
Unidas sst6n
en todos porter del mundo. Conrulte
a su librcro
Ventor, Nuevo York o Ginebra.

I Aho

in Uniml

N;dons.

New York

Price:

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y cases dlstrlbuidoros
o dirljare
ar Nacionss
ltnidos,
Seccidn

%U.S. 0.50 (or equi4ent

in other

currencies)

de
