S/2016/803

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 21 May
to 29 August 2016
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2294 (2016).

II. Situation in the area of operation and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a continuously volatile environment attributable
to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and notwithstanding a
significant number of violations of the Agreement on Disengagement between
Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are
set out below. The Syrian Arab Armed Forces and non -State armed opposition
groups engaged in exchanges of heavy weapon fire in the area of separation and the
area of limitation. Different armed groups, including the listed terrorist group
Nusrah Front, 1 Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade, which pledged allegiance to Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant, continued to exchange fire in the UNDOF area of operation.
Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces and military
equipment, as well as any other armed personnel and military equipment other than
that of UNDOF, is in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As
underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2294 (2016), there should be
no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. All incidents of firing into the area
of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing by individuals of
the ceasefire line, are violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In his
regular interaction with both sides, the Force Commander continued to call upon
__________________
1

16-16093 (E)

In July, the Nusrah Front announced that it had changed its name to Jabhat Fath al -Sham and
declared that it had cut ties with Al-Qaida.

210916

*1616093*

S/2016/803

both parties to exercise restraint and prevent any miscalculations that might lead to
an escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line.
4.
A number of incidents of note occurred across the ceasefire line in violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 3 July, the Israel Defense Forces
informed UNDOF that a high explosive mortar round from the Bravo side had
impacted and damaged the Israeli technical fence, west of the ceasefire line,
approximately one kilometre from United Nations position 22. United Nations
personnel at position 22 had reported an explosion in the general area indicated by
the Israel Defense Forces but did not observe the impact or direction from which the
fire originated. The Israel Defense Forces also informed UNDOF that they had fired
on positions of the Syrian armed forces on the Bravo side as a response to the
spillover fire. UNDOF investigated the alleged site of the impact on the Alpha side
and confirmed that the Israeli technical fence had been damaged by indirect fire.
5.
On 5 July, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that Israel Defense
Forces soldiers had observed a canon in the area of separation firing onto the Alpha
side two kilometres from United Nations observation post 73. Later that day, the
Senior Syrian Arab Delegate informed UNDOF that an Israeli aircraft had flown
across the ceasefire line and fired a missile onto a location in the vicinity of Ba‘th in
the area of separation. At the time of the alleged air strike, United Nations personnel
reported hearing one heavy detonation in the vicinity of Ba‘th, but did not observe
any air activity. The Israel Defense Forces denied having conducted any strikes on
the Bravo side.
6.
On 17 July, UNDOF observed two jets from the Alpha side flying across the
ceasefire line and over Qunaytirah in the area of separation and subsequently flying
back to the Alpha side. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had
flown the jets across the ceasefire line in response to an unmanned aerial vehicle
from the Bravo side that had crossed the ceasefire line. Open sources reported that
the unmanned aerial vehicle had reportedly returned to the Bravo side. UNDOF was
not able to confirm reports of an unmanned aerial vehicle or of missile activity
across the ceasefire line, but indicated that it had observed explosions in the
10-kilometre zone of the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
7.
On 25 July, United Nations personnel observed two large explosions in the
vicinity of Ba‘th. Shortly thereafter, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that
in response to two mortar rounds from the Bravo side that had spilled over onto the
Alpha side, the Israel Defense Forces had fired at a location on the outskirts of Ba‘th
alleged to be the point of origin of the mortar rounds. The Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate informed UNDOF that an Israel Defense Forces strike had targeted a
position of the Syrian armed forces in Ba‘th. UNDOF initiated an investigation of the
alleged mortar impact on the Alpha side. Although an immediate investigation was
not possible due to the security concerns of the Israel Defense Forces about the area,
on 1 August, the Israel Defense Forces granted UNDOF access to the area along the
Israeli technical fence patrol road, 800 metres from the reported point of impact of
the mortars. No craters were identified on either side of the patrol road. UNDOF was
not able to confirm the impact of the reported mortar rounds on the Alpha side.
Throughout the site visit by the UNDOF investigation team, two armed men from the
Bravo side observed the UNDOF personnel. A single rifle shot was heard during that
period. The conduct of the investigation was limited by the presence of a minefield
and the risk to United Nations personnel posed by the presence of the armed

2/10

16-16093

S/2016/803

personnel on the Bravo side. The UNDOF Force Commander urged the Israel Defense
Forces to ensure facilitation of a prompt investigation in order to verify inciden ts.
8.
On 22 August, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that a mortar round
from a location in the general area of Ba‘th in the area of separation had impacted
the Alpha side and that, in response, the Israel Defense Forces had carried out an air
strike from an unmanned aerial vehicle on the location of the origin of the mortar
round. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate confirmed to UNDOF that the Israel
Defense Forces had carried out an air strike on a location in Ba‘th. On 23 August,
UNDOF initiated an investigation. The Israel Defense Forces facilitated the
UNDOF investigation team’s access to the technical fence road but the team was
unable to reach and examine the reported location of the mortar impact as it is
located in an Israel Defense Forces minefield. The UNDOF team therefore was
unable to find any evidence that might suggest the calibre, direction or impact of the
mortar round.
9.
Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, from the
Bravo side to the Alpha side was observed on an almost daily basis. On a number of
occasions, United Nations personnel observed instances of interaction betwe en
Israel Defense Forces soldiers and individuals from the Bravo side. On 22 and
23 June, 7 and 27 July and 3 August, UNDOF personnel at United Nations position
Hermon South observed interaction at Israel Defense Forces positions on Mount
Hermon between Israel Defense Forces personnel and groups of individuals from
the Bravo side. On several occasions, UNDOF assessed that the interaction
appeared to involve transfer of injured individuals to the Israel Defense Forces. On
one occasion, UNDOF observed unarmed individuals on mules in front of an Israel
Defense Forces position retrieving six bags from that location and the individuals
subsequently moving to the Bravo side.
10. Further south, United Nations personnel at observation post 54 on 1 and
29 June observed Israel Defense Forces vehicles moving from the Alpha side to the
ceasefire line where Israel Defense Forces personnel disembarked the vehicles and
unloaded items immediately east of the ceasefire line and thereafter returning to the
Alpha side. Several individuals in trucks from the Bravo side subsequently arrived
at the location where the items had been left and loaded the items on the trucks and
drove off in an easterly direction. On 14 July, United Nations personnel at
observation post 55 observed individuals from the Bravo side at the Israeli technical
fence handing over an injured individual to Israel Defense Forces personnel.
11. In the context of the Syrian conflict, the exchange of gunfire between Syrian
armed forces and armed groups continued with varying degrees of intensity in the
areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. The Syrian armed forces
maintained their positions, particularly around Ba‘th and Khan Arnabah, Hadar, and
east of the tri-village area of Jubbata al-Khashab, Turunjah and Ufaniyah. In the
northern part of the areas of separation and limitation, the exchange of heavy
machine gun fire between the Syrian armed forces and armed groups and heavy
explosions occurred particularly in the vicinity of Hadar, Harfa, Bayt Jinn , Mazra’at
Bayt Jinn and vacated United Nations position 17. On 30 May, UNDOF observed
air strikes in the vicinity of Bayt Jinn in the area of limitation. The second half of
July saw a return to low-level clashes in the northern part of the area of separation.
On several occasions, United Nations personnel at position 12 and Hermon South
observed and heard small arms firing in June, July and August. Further north, in the

16-16093

3/10

S/2016/803

border area between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, UNDOF observed, on
an almost daily basis, several incidents of transborder movements of unidentified
mostly unarmed individuals. The incidents of firing on Mount Hermon coincided
with several transborder crossings into Lebanon and interaction between individuals
from the Bravo side and Israel Defense Forces personnel across the ceasefire line.
Recent weeks have seen a return to low-level clashes in the northern part of the area
of separation.
12. In the central parts of the area of separation, United Nations personnel
observed intermittent exchanges of heavy machine gun fire, heavy explosions and
detonations, in particular between armed elements in Ba‘th and Hamadiyah
al-Jadidah but also in the vicinity of Qunaytirah, Qahtaniyah, Samdaniyah
al-Gharbiyah, Jaba and Umm Batinah. The intensity of the firing increased towards
late July and early August.
13. In the southern parts of the areas of separation and limitation, which remain
for the most part under the control of non-State armed groups, UNDOF observed a
high level of explosions and exchanges of heavy machine gun fire between different
armed groups. Open sources reported fighting between a coalition of armed groups,
including the Nusrah Front, against the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade and the Muthanna
movement, under the common umbrella named Jaysh Khalid ibn al -Walid. UNDOF
observed numerous explosions and exchanges of heavy machine gun fire in Ayn
Dhakrah, Abu Hasar, Abu Harten, and Bakr in the area of limitation. The intensity
of the firing decreased in late July and early August.
14. During the reporting period, there were a number of incidents of firing in the
central part of the area of separation that jeopardized United Nations positions and
personnel. On two occasions on 22 May, and on 10 and 11 August, United Nations
personnel at position 22 and United Nations personnel at observation post 51 were
forced to go into shelter as a result of firing in the vicinity of the positions.
15. Throughout the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces maintained their
positions in the area of separation, in particular in Ba‘th, Khan Arnabah and Hadar,
as well as along the main road connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus, and generally
deployed tanks at locations adjacent to the area of separation. On several occasions
UNDOF observed non-State armed groups using and transporting tanks and artillery
pieces in the area of separation. In addition, the Syrian armed forces maintained a
presence at vacated United Nations positions 25 and 32 and observation post 72.
UNDOF observed incidents of firing in the vicinity of vacated United Nations
position 10 and observation post 71. On 8 June, UNDOF obse rved two tanks at a
permanent Israel Defense Forces position inside the area of separation at Sabina and
protested to the Israel Defense Forces. UNDOF has not observed the tanks in that
location again.
16. UNDOF protested all violations of the Disengageme nt of Forces Agreement to
both parties, including the presence of unauthorized equipment in the area of
separation and firing into the area of separation. The Force Commander reminded
the parties of their obligation to abide by the terms of the Agreement a nd to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground.
17. On two occasions, UNDOF observed armed and unarmed persons on the
Bravo side unearthing and removing mines in close proximity to United Nations
positions. On 27 July, United Nations personnel at observation post 54 observed two

4/10

16-16093

S/2016/803

persons unearthing nine anti-personnel mines and removing the detonators, after
which the persons concealed the mines under rocks. Four armed persons from the
Bravo side were observed on 9 August collecting and defusing approximately 40
anti-personnel mines across the ceasefire line close to observation post 54.
18. UNDOF observed five locations where tents and other structures had been set
up for internally displaced persons in the area of separatio n and in proximity to that
area. Approximately 70 tents north-west of Aishah village, straddling the ceasefire
line close to United Nations position 80, were dismantled at the beginning of June.
The camp east of Burayqah village increased from 155 to almost 200 tents.
Additional tents were erected in the camp one kilometre east of position 80 on the
outskirts of Rafid. A further six tents were observed at a location straddling the
Bravo line north-west of the village of Ayn al-Qadi. UNDOF observed water tanks
and limited infrastructure in the vicinity of the tents. Small numbers of civilians
were observed intermittently in the camp. Owing to the closure of the established
crossing point at Qunaytirah between the Alpha and Bravo sides since late August
2014, UNDOF is not in a position to facilitate, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian crossings, including for students,
between the two sides.
19. Since its temporary relocation from a number of positions in September 2 014
and pending its full return to the area of separation, UNDOF has continued to
maintain visibility, albeit in a modified manner, of the area of separation and the
ceasefire line from its positions on Mount Hermon, position 80 in the southern part
of the area of separation and position 22 on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations
continued to be supported by United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO) military observers in Observer Group Golan, who maintained five fixed
and four temporary observation posts along the Alpha line. The focus of the
activities of Observer Group Golan was on continuous static observation and
situational awareness. On 7 August, Observer Group Golan redeployed military
observers to the UNDOF temporary headquarters in Damascus, with a view to
resuming operations and enhancing observation from Mount Hermon of the northern
part of the area of separation and limitation. Through Observer Group Golan,
UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly inspections of equipment and force
levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. Liaison officers from the Alpha
side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side remained suspended because of the security situation. As in the past,
UNDOF faced some restrictions on its freedom of movement, and its inspection
teams were denied access to some positions on the Alpha side. Engagement between
UNDOF and the Israel Defense Forces helped to reduce the delays and challenges
experienced by United Nations personnel in crossing through the technical fence to
United Nations observation posts 54 and 73 and position 80.
20. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel observed 155 mm
artillery weapons on a number of occasions on the Alpha side within 10 kilometres
of the ceasefire line, in Israel Defense Forces positions and flatbed trucks. On two
occasions in June and July, a missile carrier was deployed at an Israel Defense
Forces position. On 23 July, UNDOF personnel observed four multiple -rocket
launching systems at an Israel Defense Forces position within the 20 kilometre zone
in the area of limitation. Between 26 and 31 July, three multiple -launch rocket
systems remained at that position. On 2 August, nine multiple -rocket launching
systems were stationed at a nearby location to the Israel Defense Forces position. In

16-16093

5/10

S/2016/803

addition, on 11 August, two Iron Dome systems were observed at different Israel
Defense Forces positions in the area of limitation.
21. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation to assess whether the conditions on the ground permitted an
incremental return to vacated positions in the area of separation, commencing with a
limited return to Camp Faouar. The ultimate objective for UN DOF is to return fully
to the area of separation, conditions permitting. In recent months, UNDOF assessed
that, although the situation in the area of separation remained volatile, the security
situation in the northern part had improved and was conducive t o the Force’s return,
in a limited manner, to Camp Faouar. In keeping with the intent to return to Camp
Faouar, UNDOF personnel carried out further fact-finding missions, on 3, 13 and
14 June and on 14 July and 4 August, to vacated United Nations positions 10, 16,
25, 31 and 32 and observation posts 71 and 72 in the northern part of the area of
separation and to Camp Faouar in the area of limitation on the Bravo side. There
were no security incidents experienced along the routes taken by UNDOF personnel
to those United Nations facilities or at the United Nations facilities visited. UNDOF
personnel found the security situation calm. UNDOF personnel assessed that since
the United Nations positions had sustained significant damage and showed signs of
looting, repairs and reconstruction would need to be undertaken prior to the
eventual return to the visited positions.
22. UNDOF continued with work to move forward its planned limited return to
Camp Faouar, following consideration of the security, military and log istics/support
requirements for such a return. Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have reiterated
their commitment to assisting UNDOF in its plans to establish a greater presence on
the Bravo side, starting with a return to Camp Faouar, and to increasing its
operations in the area of separation, conditions permitting. In principle, the parties
agreed to the establishment of temporary crossing procedures between the Alpha
and Bravo sides for UNDOF personnel, when and if needed, to facilitate their
movement between the two sides.
23. The development and preparation of Camp Faouar is a prerequisite for any
return to the area of separation and will be undertaken in three phases. The first
phase, which is to commence in the near future, consists of the demining and
preliminary cleaning of the Camp by contractors and the establishment of a
temporary crossing point between the Alpha and Bravo sides. The second phase will
entail work on the Camp facilities, including the construction of basic troop
accommodations and the implementation of force protection measures. A military
company-sized guard force equipped with armoured personnel vehicles will provide
security. The third phase will involve the generation of an additional mechanized
company to be deployed to Camp Faouar for force protection and the completion of
works at the Camp.
24. The agreement of the parties with regard to the use by UNDOF of technology,
including technological enablers to enhance observation and monitoring of the area
of separation and the ceasefire line and capabilities to enhance force protection, is
essential. UNDOF continued to engage with the parties in that regard. It remains
important that UNDOF possess the appropriate force protection capabilities to
increase its operations on the Bravo side.
25. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon from
Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the Mount Hermon positions

6/10

16-16093

S/2016/803

are conducted almost daily and with an UNDOF security escort, accompanied by a
liaison officer from the office of the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate. UNDOF
continued to carry out contingency planning for the reinforcement and evacuation of
United Nations positions and observation posts and to update its contingency
planning for the relocation and evacuation of United Nations personnel on both the
Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as in Damascus. UNDOF, through its Force Reserve
Company, conducted regular rehearsals, exercises and training for all identified
contingencies. UNDOF and the Observer Group Golan continued regular evacuation
and reinforcement exercises and contingency planning.
26. The implementation of risk mitigation, including force protection measures
recommended in the military capability study of UNDOF, continued at observation
posts, positions and the operational base at Camp Ziouani. The Secretariat has made
progress in the generation of the appropriate capabilities, including additional
medical facilities, explosive ordnance disposal teams and additional protected
mobility for Mount Hermon positions and position 80. Additional force protection
measures, including defensive positions and newly constructed force protection
barriers, have commenced at United Nations positions 12A and 22. The UNDOF
main headquarters at Yafour Hotel has also been further upgraded in accordance
with the risk mitigation measures recommended in the United Nations security risk
assessment. UNDOF continued its efforts to strengthen its positions and presence in
the Mount Hermon area. The infrastructure works and groundworks at positions 12
and 12A continued. Enhancements at United Nations position 80, including
additional force protection measures, also continued.
27. As at 12 August 2016, UNDOF comprised 865 troops, including 21 women.
Troops are currently deployed from Bhutan (2), Czechia (3), Fiji (301), Finland (2),
India (219), Ireland (136), Nepal (200) and the Netherlands (2). In addition,
67 military observers from UNTSO, including 6 female observers, assisted the Force
in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
28. In its resolution 2294 (2016), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973), decided to renew the
mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 31 December 2016, and
requested the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for
a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the
situation in the Middle East (A/71/328), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 70/16 on Jerusalem and 70/17 on the Syrian Golan.
29. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in Dece mber 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution o f the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive,
just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its
resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

16-16093

7/10

S/2016/803

IV. Observations
30. I note with concern the serious violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that have occurred. The continued fighting on the Bravo side between
the Syrian armed forces and armed groups, and bet ween different armed groups,
including listed terrorist group Nusrah Front, in the southern part of the areas of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side, as well as the firing of missiles by the
Israel Defense Forces across the ceasefire line, jeopardize the long-term ceasefire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. The developments of 3, 5 and 25 July,
and 22 August across the ceasefire line are of deep concern. It remains critical that
the parties maintain a liaison with UNDOF in the first insta nce in order to prevent
any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. The mandate of UNDOF
remains an important element in ensuring the stability of the region. For its part, the
United Nations will continue to make efforts to ensure that the long-held ceasefire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold.
31. I am gravely concerned by the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its
potential implications for the stability of the region. These developments have
continued to affect the UNDOF area of operation significantly. The presence of the
Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment in the area of separation
are violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The increased use of
heavy weapons by the Syrian armed forces and armed groups, including listed
terrorist groups, in the continuing Syrian conflict is disturbing. I note that while the
reduction in the level of firing continues in the northern part of the UNDOF area of
operation, listed terrorist groups and other armed groups continue to maintain
control over significant sections of the areas of separation and limitation of the
UNDOF area of operation. The established crossing between the Alpha and Bravo
sides remains closed.
32. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions
throughout the country, including in the UNDOF area of operation, and to remove
all military equipment and all armed personnel from the area of separation.
33. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line.
The firing of missiles across the ceasefire line by Israel Defense Forces soldiers has
the potential to escalate tensions between the two sides. The continued presence of
unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of limitation on the Alpha side is
also of concern.
34. I remain concerned about the several incidents that have jeopardized United
Nations personnel and facilities. Any hostile act against United Nations personnel,
including threatening their physical safety, restricting their movement and direct and
indirect firing at United Nations personnel and facilities by anyone, is unacceptable.
I reiterate that all military activities in the area of separation conducted by any actor
pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the local civilian population, in addition to the
United Nations personnel on the ground. I call upon all parties to take all measures
necessary to protect civilians.
35. As UNDOF continues to move forward in planning a limited return to Camp
Faouar and to intensify its operations in the area of separation, it becomes critical
that the safety and security of United Nations personnel be assured. I call upon the

8/10

16-16093

S/2016/803

Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to fulfil its primary responsibility for the
safety and security of United Nations personnel in the areas of separation and
limitation on the Bravo side. I also call upon countries with influence to strongly
and urgently convey to the non-State armed opposition groups in the UNDOF area
of operation the need to cease any actions in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement that jeopardize the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and to accord United Nations personnel the freedom to carry out their
mandate safely and securely. The safety and security of United Nations personnel
must be ensured.
36. The continued presence of UNDOF in the area remains essential. Both Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF. I note
that UNDOF has advanced its plans to return in a limited manner to Camp Faouar
and gradually increase its operations in the area of separation, as a first step to
return to vacated positions in the area of separation on an incremental basis. The
Secretariat is supporting UNDOF in this endeavour. The full return of UNDOF to
the area of separation remains a priority for the mission. I also note that both parties
have stated their commitment to support UNDOF as it moves forward with its
preparations for the return to Camp Faouar. In preparation for the return, the safety
and security of United Nations personnel remains the primary consideration. I
acknowledge the support both parties have provided to UNDOF, in particular their
acceptance, in principle, to establish as a matter of priority temporary procedures
for the crossing of UNDOF personnel between the Alpha and Bravo sides in the
absence of the crossing at Qunaytirah. I count on the continued cooperation of the
parties with UNDOF in order for the mission to advance its planning. As a matter of
priority, the necessary technology and equipment to enhance the UNDOF
observation of the area of separation and the ceasefire line and to improve force
protection remains critical.
37. It is equally critical that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to
bear on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and freely. It is essential that UNDOF continue
to have at its disposal all necessary means and resources that will allow it to return
fully to the area of separation, as the situation permits.
38. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF
remains a key factor for the mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue to
count on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF proceeds with its
planning, including in relation to the augmentation of required capabilities, in
preparation for the planned limited return to Camp Faouar and increased operations
in the area of separation. I am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji,
Finland, India, Ireland, Nepal and the Netherlands for their contributions, their
commitment and their resolve. I am also thankful to the Member States contributing
military observers to UNTSO.
39. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Jai Shanker Menon, and the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances. I have full confidence that UNDOF will continue to use
its best efforts to carry out its mission.

16-16093

9/10

S/2016/803

10/10

16-16093
