S/2014/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 January 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 3 January 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 19 December 2012 (S/2012/954) informing the
President of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, and his reply dated 21 December 2012 (S/2012/955), in which
he took note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations support
team to the Mixed Commission with funding from the regular budget. In the same
spirit, by the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements and
activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002 on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial disputes.
Through my good offices, and with the support of the United Nations Secretariat, I
have continued to facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the Court.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority, addressing the situation of affected populations
and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. Achievements to
date in the implementation of the judgment of the Court include the withdrawal of
Nigeria and transfer of authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad area (December
2003), along the land boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi peninsula (a process
which began in June 2006 and was completed in August 2008); the delineation of
the maritime boundary (May 2007); and the end of the special transitional regime of
five years, established under the Greentree Agreement in June 2006, and the
exercise by Cameroon of full rights of sovereignty over the Bakassi zone (August
2013). The Mixed Commission also approved all of the recommendations of the
Working Group on the Maritime Boundary, including the provisions for cross-border
cooperation on hydrocarbon deposits straddling the maritime boundary (March
2011).
In the course of 2013, the Mixed Commission continued to facilitate the
process, including by helping to maintain dialogue and communication between the
two countries. The most significant development was the termination, on 14 August
2013, of the special transitional regime of five years in the Bakassi zone established
under the Greentree Agreement. This was confirmed in a joint declaration adopted
and signed by the heads of delegation of Cameroon and Nigeria and my Special
Representative for West Africa and Head of the United Nations Office for West
Africa at the end of the twenty-third and final meeting of the Follow-up Committee
14-20264 (E) 090114

*1420264*

S/2014/6

established to monitor the implementation of the Agreement, held in Geneva on
21 and 22 October 2013. Cameroon is thus fully exercising its rights of sovereignty
over the totality of the Bakassi zone, as stipulated in the Agreement. Throughout the
process, diplomatic and economic relations between Cameroon and Nigeria have
steadily improved, and a number of positive developments have followed, including
the initialling of a draft framework agreement on joint exploitation of hydrocarbon
resources straddling the maritime boundary of the two countries. A comprehensive
report of the proceedings of the Follow-up Committee since its inception in July
2006 is being prepared.
During the thirty-first meeting of the Mixed Commission, held in Yaoundé on
25 and 26 April 2013, the delegations of Cameroon and Nigeria endorsed the
outcome of the successful field assessment missions to the Gotel Mountains, one of
the most inaccessible areas of the land boundary, and to the village of Mada, which
has been a particular area of contention since 2005, paving the way for the
demarcation of another 63 kilometres of land boundary. Throughout 2013,
demarcation activities focused on the resolution of the remaining areas of
disagreement. To that end, a mission by an independent international expert in
hydrology organized in November 2013 to identify the course of the eastern channel
of the Keraua River and the main channel of the Mayo Tiel River, one of the longstanding areas of disagreement. To expedite the conclusion of the demarcation
process, the remaining outstanding issues and ways forward will be discussed and
agreed upon at the upcoming thirty-second meeting of the Mixed Commission. To
date, the parties have agreed on the demarcation of 1,893 kilometres of an estimated
total of 2,100 kilometres of land boundary.
The Mixed Commission launched the final mapping of the international
boundary during the first half of 2013. At the final mapping working session of the
Mixed Commission, held in New York in June 2013, the parties agreed on the
modalities and legal considerations inherent to the exercise; in follow-up, the first
set of maps at the scale of 1:50,000 will be submitted to the parties for their
consideration and approval at the thirty-second meeting of the Mixed Commission.
The cartographic representation of the Cameroon-Nigeria common international
boundary will be part of an international boundary agreement in which the two
States would, inter alia, record their concurrence on their common international
boundary line, the forms of which are currently under definition. A series of maps,
elevated to the status of “legally-agreed maps” depicting the boundary line, would
be appended. The statement, which will include an index of geographic coordinates
of the agreed boundary points resulting from the field assessment, will be the
binding source for the demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary.
Progress was also made on the emplacement of pillars along the boundary line.
Following the decision of the Mixed Commission in April 2013 to resume the
construction of pillars in the southern and central sections of the boundary, the
procurement of engineering work for the construction of 323 of the remaining 920
boundary pillars was launched by the United Nations in July 2013. The project
steering committee and technical monitoring team met in Ikom, Nigeria, from
9 to 12 October 2013 and agreed on the schedule of operations. Security and logistic
assessment, as well as sensitization of local communities, were conducted from
25 October to 12 November 2013 in the areas affected by construction activities,
with the support of United Nations civilian observers. On 12 November 2013, the
contract for the construction of the 323 boundary pillars was awarded to Geocyclic

2/4

14-20264

S/2014/6

Consult Limited for a total value of $1,412,904, financed under the trust fund for the
demarcation activities. The related activities commenced on 20 November 2013.
In February 2013, the European Union, which funded demarcation activities
from 2006 to 2010, carried out an independent evaluation of the assistance provided.
Highlighting the genuine ownership of the parties, the evaluation noted the positive
impact of the process towards reaching a sustainable settlement of the boundary
dispute. The review recommended, inter alia, a further contribution for the
completion of construction of the boundary pillars, along with accompanying
measures to minimize the risk of future disagreements and conflicts.
Throughout 2013, the Mixed Commission continued to support the formulation
of confidence-building measures to guarantee the security and well-being of the
populations in the two countries affected by the demarcation. My Special
Representative initiated contacts with potential donors with a view to securing
support for the socioeconomic programme of the Mixed Commission, which focuses
on development projects for the border communities. In this connection, the
European Union has expressed its commitment to continue to provide funding from
the eleventh European Development Fund (2014-2020), while the World Bank has
pledged to promote confidence-building projects for the populations affected by the
demarcation. Proposed socioeconomic projects were reviewed by the United
Nations agencies in Cameroon and transmitted to the Government on 26 September
2012 for validation. The Government of Nigeria approved, on 15 September 2013, a
United Nations programme document on socioeconomic projects for the
communities affected by the judgment of the International Court of Justice. The
feasibility study of the selected projects and related costs is ongoing.
United Nations civilian observers monitoring the situation along the land
boundary and in the Bakassi peninsula have concluded that the prevailing situation
continues to be peaceful. Noting that the special transitional regime under the
Greentree Agreement has ended, the ongoing process of confidence-building
measures should be pursued under the platform of the Mixed Commission to further
strengthen the relationship between Cameroon and Nigeria and consolidate the gains
achieved under the process.
Overall, it is expected that the field assessment of the areas of the boundary
not yet assessed would be completed by the end of 2014 or early 2015, depending
on the availability of the parties. Provision of required security by the host
Governments will continue to be critical, in particular along the northern part of the
boundary. Regarding the settlement of the outstanding areas of disagreement, most,
if not all, could be resolved during the same period if the parties demonstrate
flexibility and adhere to compromise solutions. This, in turn, would allow the
finalization of the demarcation process, the final maps and the pillar emplacement
work by the end of 2015. However, completion of the bulk of the demarcation work
will depend on the ability of the two parties to reach an agreement on the remaining
areas of disagreement in a timely manner.
After 31 December 2013, the following activities are required, in view of the
conclusion of the work of the Mixed Commission, as indicated above:
(a) Finalization of demarcation activities, final maps and the boundary
statement;

14-20264

3/4

S/2014/6

(b) Facilitation of boundary pillar emplacement, financed by the trust fund
for the demarcation activities;
(c) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and joint security monitoring along the land boundary;
(d) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation;
(e) Implementation of the exit strategy by handing over the activities of the
Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other subregional
structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period from 2004 to 2013, the
activities of the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular
budget. The Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway,
Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay have provided in-kind contributions for the
substantive and technical work of the Commission (military and legal experts), in
addition to the logistical support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and
Nigeria, and the voluntary contributions of both countries, as well as those of
Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
European Union, to the trust fund for the demarcation activities.
Given the cost-effectiveness of the operation and the important tasks
remaining at this juncture to help to advance the peaceful implementation of the
judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is my intention to ask for resources
from the regular budget for the Mixed Commission for the period from 1 January to
31 December 2014.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

4/4

14-20264
