United Nations

A/RES/69/269

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 April 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 115

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 April 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.55)]

69/269. Statute of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela
Prize
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/13 of 10 November 2009, by which it designated
18 July as Nelson Mandela International Day, which has been observed by the
United Nations every year since 2010,
Recalling also its resolution 68/275 of 6 June 2014, by which it established the
United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize, which will be honorary in nature,
as a tribute to the outstanding achievements and contributions of individuals to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Decides to adopt the statute of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela
Prize, as annexed to the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
2 April 2015

Annex
Statute of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize
Article 1
Aim
1.
The aim of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize, established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 68/275 of 6 June 2014, is to recognize the
achievements of those who dedicate their lives to the service of humanity, by
promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations while honouring and
paying homage to Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela’s extraordinary life and legacy of
reconciliation, political transition and social transformation.
Article 2
Prize
1.
The Prize shall be presented once every five years as a tribute to the
outstanding achievements and contributions of two individuals (one female and one
male), not to be selected from the same geographic region, and shall take into
15-05360 (E)

*1505360*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/269

Statute of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize

account the geographic region of the previous awardees so as to ensure equitable
balance. The Prize shall be awarded in recognition of their dedicated service to
humanity, in the promotion of reconciliation and social cohesion, and in community
development, guided by the purposes and principles of the United Nations. No
current staff member of any organization of the United Nations system shall be
eligible for the Prize.
2.
The Prize, to be awarded to each winner, in recognition of the humility of
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, shall be a plaque engraved with an appropriate citation
and a relevant quotation. The quotation shall be determined by the Committee for
the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize (see article 4 below), in
consultation with the Secretary-General.
3.
The individuals who are to receive the Prize shall be announced in May of the
year in which the Prize is to be awarded. The Prize shall be presented by the
Secretary-General at an award ceremony that shall be part of the commemoration by
the General Assembly of Nelson Mandela International Day (18 July) at United
Nations Headquarters.
4.
The first Prize is expected to be awarded in 2015. The Committee is requested,
on an exceptional, one-time basis, to take appropriate streamlined measures for the
first bestowing of the Prize.
Article 3
Nomination of candidates
1.

Written nominations for the Prize may be received from the following:
(a)

Governments of Member States and observer States of the United Nations;

(b) Entities and intergovernmental organizations having received a standing
invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and work of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council;
(c) Institutions of higher education, in particular universities and other
educational establishments, which provide a programme of education beyond
secondary education, grant post-secondary degrees and are approved and/or
accredited as institutions of higher education by the competent authorities of
Member States, as well as independent research centres and institutes that are
engaged in dedicated service to humanity, the promotion of reconciliation and social
cohesion, and community development;
(d) Non-governmental organizations
Economic and Social Council;

in

consultative

status

with

the

(e) Laureates of the Prize, unless they are currently serving on the
Committee.
2.
The secretariat of the Committee shall publicize the Prize on existing websites
of the United Nations and through existing communication and outreach channels.
Nominations shall reach the secretariat not later than 31 December of the year prior
to the year for which the nominations are to be considered. The secretariat shall
transmit nominations received, in accordance with the present statute, to the
members of the Committee.
3.
The Committee shall, if possible, be convened during the month of March of
the year in which the Prize is to be awarded, to select the two laureates for that year.

2/3

Statute of the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize

A/RES/69/269

Article 4
Committee
1.
The individuals who are to receive the Prize shall be selected by the
Committee (see article 2, paragraph 2, above), to be composed of the following:
(a) Five representatives of States Members of the United Nations, one to be
selected by each of the five regional groups, namely, African States, Asia-Pacific
States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean States, and Western
European and other States, for a period of five years;
(b) A representative of the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the United
Nations, to serve as ex officio member of the Committee;
(c) The President of the General Assembly, who shall serve as Chair of the
Committee.
2.
The Committee shall select five eminent individuals, based on equitable
geographical representation, who have made significant contributions to the service
of humanity and to promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Such eminent persons shall be honorary members of the Committee and shall serve
in an advisory capacity for a specific term during the selection process every five
years, which may be renewed as the Committee may decide. For those eminent
persons who are not present in New York, their contributions shall be shared in
writing or virtually, as appropriate.
3.
The Department of Public Information of the Secretariat shall serve as the
secretariat of the Committee.
4.
The seven members of the Committee shall make their decisions by consensus
and the Committee may adopt its own working methods.

3/3
