UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

24 MARCH

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/24201
Adoption of the agenda

1

.,*...............*..*,.......*.....

* , . . . . . . **......

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..“....L.....~.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) . . .

WV.2422

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ,) a.re normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficialRecords of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2422nd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 24 March 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and ‘Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2422)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2,

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15651). ”
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.

request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
this item. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abada (Algeria),
Mr. Sanz de Santamaria (Colombia), Mr. Zumbado Jimenez
(Costa Rica), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Purushottam
(India), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius),
Mr. Arcilla (Philip
pines), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mrs.
Coronet de Rodriguez (Venezuela) and Mr. Hoang Bich
Son (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Spain. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Njcaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651)

4. Mr, de PIN&S (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
Sir, until very recently we were colleagues in this very
important body of the United Nations, so it comes as no
surprise to me that you are guiding these deliberations
with such skill and ability. I wish you every success in
your important post.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [242&h and
2421st meetings], I invite the representative of Honduras
to take a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Barbados, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Grenada, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Panama
and Spain to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

5. I should like to comment briefly on the serious crisis
now affecting the Central American region. This crisis,
which is closely related to the processes of change in
which the region is immersed, in our opinion, stems from
profound social and economic imbalances and chronic
structural problems which can be resolved only by rneeting the just social and political aspirations of their peopies, free from any type of foreign interference.

Ai the invitation of the President, Mr. Grtez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table; and Mr
Mosefey (Barbados), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Al-A@
(Democratic Yemen), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico),
Mr, Ozores Typaldos (Panama) and Mr, de Pinies (Spain)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. My country’s Government views with great concern
the escalation of conflicts in the Central American region
those in Nicaragua,
which have
and, particularly,
recently been aggravated by the infiltration of armed elements into that country. The concern felt by the international community at the worsening of the crisis which
seriously endangers the peace and security of the entire
region is accompanied, in the case of my country, by a
profound distress at the untold suffering of some peoples
with which we have long-standing and deep historical,
cultural and blood ties.

The agenda was adopted.

2. Th.e PRESIDENT:
I should Iike to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, India, Mauritius, Philippines, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela and Viet Nam, in which they

7. The armed actions taking place at the present time
inside Nicaraguan territory are clearly aimed at desta-

bilizing the Government
of that country, The Government of Spain considers that neither aggression nor
armed intervention can be accepted and that in no case
can they constitute a solution to the grave problems
afflicting the Central American region.
8. My country’s Government
considers, furthermore,
that the military
actions that have been denounced
before the Council constitute a dangerous factor of instabiIity, not only for internal peace in Nicaragua but also
for the overall situation in the region and that, far from
helping to alleviate existing tension, they are heightening
it.
9, The Government of Spain once again emphasizes the
need to guarantee the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries, to respect the inviolability
of their
borders and to reject the use or threat of use of force in
international relations.
10. The events now taking place in Nicaragua
once
again underscore the urgent need to seek solutions for
the entire area through a peace-producing
process which
would eliminate both general and bilateral tension that
might affect the various countries of the region. In this
connection my country, Spain, views with hope the possibility of a genuinely Latin American solution based on
dialogue and making it possible to end any kind of external interference.
1I. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Sir, I have on
several earlier occasions already congratulated
you on
your assumption of the presidency for this month. March
has been a truly eventful and hectic month, You have
met the demands and challenges of the occasion with
remarkable energy, determination
and seriousness of
purpose. As your presidency nears its close, it would
perhaps be appropriate for us now to thank and congratulate you on your successful term of office. Our congratulations go also to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky,
whose stewardship of the Council was truly exemplary.
12. The deteriorating situation in Central America and
the Caribbean has for some time now attracted the attention of the international
community,
As we know, many
world statesmen have expressed concern about the escalation of tension and conflict in Central America, both in
the United Nations General Assembly and in many meetings of non-aligned countries. Indeed, even as recently as
January 1983, the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries
held an Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau at Managua, the capital of Nicaragua,
both to highlight and to draw world attention to the
rapidly and dangerously deteriorating
situation in Central America and the Caribbean regions in particular and
in Latin America in general.
13. It is only proper that the Council, the body charged
with primary responsibility
for international
peace and
security, should be very concerned about the situation in
Central America. We are therefore grateful for your
prompt response, Sir, to the request addressed to YOU by

Mr. Victor Hugo Tinoco, Deputy Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua, for an urgent convening of the
Council, The Deputy Minister described the situation
resulting from acts of aggression against Nicaragua and
the Sandinist People’s Revolution as grave. He also
stated that the purpose of the convening of the Council
was to analyse that situation, which was endangering
international peace and security.
14. It will be recalled that the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries held at Managua from 10 to 14 January expressed, in paragraph 36 of its final communique
[see S/15628], grave concern about the threads and acts
of aggression against Nicaragua, the financing of undercover operations and the use of the territory of Nicaragua’s neighbours for the training of criminal
and
counter-revolutionary
gangs, Those gangs have one and
only one purpose-the
destabilization and undermining
of revolutionary Nicaragua. Indeed, even as the Ministerial Meeting was in progress, those armed gangs were
being infiltrated from Honduras to commit acts of sabotage against Nicaragua’s economic infrastructure. Civilians working on their land and harvesting their crops
were and are still being kidnapped or murdered daily.
Even as the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries was meeting at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, students and other
civilians were being cold-bloodedly slaughtered by those
gangs that are externally financed, equipped and
directed.
15. Having won a bitter and protracted revolutionary
struggle against the brutal and archaic Somoza dictatorship, the heroic and hard-working Sandinist’Nicaraguans
very badly need time and all available material and manpower resources to rebuild their ruined land, cities and
homes and to reconstruct their economy.
16. I myself had the privilege of visiting Nicaragua in
January this year to meet and talk with Nicaraguans
from all walks of life and see things with my own eyes. I
also had the even greater privilege of going to the sensitive border area with Honduras. Therefore I now have a
better perception of the dangerous situation in which the
Nicaraguans find themselves. I can appreciate even better
than before the magnitude of Nicaragua’s reconstruction
and rehabilitation
problems. My appreciation of that
country’s economic and other potential has also been
enormously enhanced.
17. My own country and people understand and appreciate Nicaragua’s predicament all the more because of
our own situation, which is in many respects similar to
that of Nicaragua and needs urgent attention too. Like
the Nicaraguans, the heroic people of Zimbabwe won
their revolution through a bitter and costly armed struggle against an exploitative white minority racist dictatorship. As with the Nicaraguans, our people are faced with
two very daunting and challenging tasks. First, we must
defend our hard-won revolution, independence and freedom agajnst a neighbour who has not yet accepted our

right to be ourselves, a neighbour .who uses every conceivable method, including the recruiting, training and
equipping of Zimbabwean counter-revolutionaries
and
criminals to murder their own people and destabilize the
country’s economy. Secondly, we must forge ahead with
the reconstruction and development of our economy for
the benefit of our people and so that we can play our
rightful role in the development of our region.
18. This meeting of the Council has been convened to
deal with an emergency. Even as this meeting is in pro‘gress, Nicaragua’s revolution, independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty are gravely threatened by more
than 3,000 armed gangsters infiltrated, supplied and
directed by Honduras, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations. What is the Council going to do to assist
Nicaragua? Nicaragua does not need intervention and
interference in its internal affairs; it does not need armed
gangsters and murderers; Nicaragua needs financial,
material and technical assistance and support from the
international community. If that is too much for some,
as seems to be the case, Nicaragua is, however, entitled to
and has every right to expect of them at least understanding, respect for its borders and respect for its status as a
sovereign State and a non-aligned nation. The least the
Council can do, therefore, is to tell all concerned, in no
uncertain terms, that intervention and interference in
Nicaragua’s affairs are grave violations of the Charter,
violations which the Council condemns very strongly.
19. For Zimbabwe’s part, I wish to repeat here Mr.
Mugabe’s assurance that the people of Nicaragua can
count on our own full support and solidarity with them
in this, their new struggle to defend the gains of the glorious Sandinist revolution. We understand and share
their political, social and economic aspirations.
20. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Barbados. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
21. Mr, MOSELEY (Barbados): Sir, I consider it my
first duty-and a pleasant one it is-to offer my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to voice my sincere hope that your
term of office will be marked by real progress in the task
of achieving the central objects for which this body was
founded. I must also thank you for the privilege granted
my country by allowing its voice to be heard on a matter
which, by any standards, must be one with serious implications for Barbados in the exercise of its rights and
duties as an active Member State of the Organization.
22. My country is ever mindful of the central function
of the United Nations, which is the constant struggle,
amid the competing interests of nations, to strive for the
achievement of world peace and justice. Thus it is that
my country takes the view that Nicaragua, in bringing
before the Security Council its expressed fears for the
future peace of the region, speaks to the very heart of the
purpose and reason for the existence of this great
Organization.

23. We have all heard the case $ut by Nicaragua, and
we have heard the other side. There is no draft resolution
before the Council, and my understanding of the matter
is that Nicaragua seeks to bring to the notice of the highest authority of the world community its fears for the
future. In spite of the allegations and evidence tendered
that the shooting has already started, it seems clear that if
only the right formula were discovered there would be a
first-rate opportunity to nip in the bud a situation which,
if allowed to escalate, promises almost unlimited tragedy
for the immediate region and possibly beyond.
24. In such a situation as this, I perceive that a small
country such as my own has a very real role to play. Very
simply, that role is to press as hard as possible for a
reversion to first principles-in
other words, the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
25. These provisions require the avoidance of resort to
force to settle international disputes. This in fact means a
constant search for negotiated settlements. In the case
before us, it seems clear that much of the difficulty would
disappear if the opposing sides could be brought to a
conference table. But here, perhaps, lies the rub. Where
Powers which, at least nominally, are not parties find
their interests threatened-whether
those interests are
expressed in terms of defence or of aggression-there
arises that fishing in troubled waters which can sometimes yield a most unpredictable catch.
26. This fishing in troubled waters, which more formally is called outside intervention, takes the form of
supplies of arms and money-the
very tools of war. The
tragedy of it all is that those who are the main suppliers
of arms and money are, more often than not, immune
from the physical scars and wounds suffered by the little
people in the countries where the conflicts take place. It
seems to my country that the matter brought before the
Council by Nicaragua is a classic example of a situation
in which the use of arms will solve nothing. In an area in
which ideological pluralism is admitted by many as inevitable, surely the use of force will not obliterate the rationale for the acceptance of ideological pluralism in
the first place.
27, Not very long ago, it was my privilege to have an
opportunity to speak out in this forum against the hateful practice of the use of mercenary forces to overthrow
by force or to destabilize an established, legitimate
Government, The final definition of the term “mercenary
forces” unfortunately continues to elude the committee
which deals with this subject. Nevertheless, the principle
behind it can, I think, be easily understood. Thus, while
it may be true to say that in Nicaragua there is armed
insurrection
by Nicaraguan
nationals
against the
Government of Nicaragua, it is submitted that in the end
a more profitable course to be taken by those who find
their interests involved would be to seek the negotiating
table in order to reconcile the differences between the
parties immediately concerned. Nor can there be a really
valid objection to such a course on the ground that it
amounts to unwarranted interference in the domestic

affairs of a foreign country-certainly
not when the alternative is to suppiy arms and money to the practitioners
and advocates of violent overthrow.

35. The strengthening of democracy and social change
are commitments for which each of the Central American nations is struggling, zealously defending the principle of self-determination.

28. I make no apology for sounding what is perhaps
too idealistic a note. Indeed, the whole of the United
Nations is founded on idealism, but there must be some
degree of pragmatism bound with idealism. It is in that
context that Barbados will urge the development of
peace initiatives,
including the effort most recently
entered into at Contadora, that island off Panama. It is
suggested, in the development of these initiatives, that
those who now supply arms and money to fuel the fires
of war can use their very considerable influence to save
from suffering and terror those thousands of poor and
unhappy people who will inevitably be the cannon
fodder of war.

36. To attain their aspirations, peoples need peace, and
that peace cannot be established without the most suitable machinery for attaining it: genuine and constructive
dialogue. Restoring tranquillity is the prerequisite essential to advancement on the path of coexistence and development. My country has considered that in order to
achieve those objectives, it would be extremely useful to
eliminate the harmful influence of military apparatuses
which, in one way or another, have been involved in
Central American policy. In keeping with these criteria,
Colombia has participated in various meetings of foreign
ministers which have been convened to seek formulas for
the harmonization
of views and to ‘discuss concrete
action that would make possible the restoration of normal conditions. In those gatherings, upon the request of
Colombia, a request was made for the withdrawal of all
military and security advisors who are now in the region,
especially in El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua.

29. Barbados would therefore urge the Security Council to redouble its efforts to defuse the situation in Nicaragua. It seems not beyond the wit of man to use the
yardsticks of human rights added to the balm of economic development and assistance and the moral suasion
of diplomacy to bring peace and justice to a region which
has suffered so much for so long.

37. Precisely a year ago, I listened, with respect and
concern, to the statement made by Commander Daniel
Ortega Saavedra in this very chamber [2335th meeting],
and I followed very carefully the explanations provided
at that time, in order accurately to assess the problems
brought to the Council by the Government of Nicaragua.
Since then, serious incidents have occurred, and these
have visibly worsened the situation in the region.

30. I can do no better in closing my brief statement
than to quote paragraph 140 of the Political Declaration
issued at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see S/15675] in
New Delhi in March. That paragraph reads as follows:
“The Conference also expressed the view that all
States in the region should deploy maximum efforts to
resolve their problems themselves, free from all external interference, and help to generate a situation of
peace and tranquillity.”

38. With equal interest and concern, my delegation
heard the complaints made yesterday by the representative of Nicaragua [242&h meeting] when he reported on
the attacks that have been made on his country with the
intent of destabilizing the Government, and the concern
he expressed about the danger of war with a neighbouring country. This is of deep concern to my country, and
these are events that we vigorously repudiate.

31. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

39. In the statements yesterday by the representatives
of Nicaragua and Honduras we heard both Governments
express observations and attitudes indicating the two parties’ interest in establishing constructive dialogue with a
view to peace. There were differences of view as to the
scope of that dialogue, as to dates, the venue of the talks
and the countries that should take part, Compared to the
magnitude of the risk of possible armed conflagration,
those details can all be resolved through negotiations,
through diplomacy-careful,
prudent diplomacy-which
is precisely what must be accomplished when peace is
sought despite different points of view.

32.

Mr. SANZ de SANTAMARiA
(Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): I am grateful to you, Sir, and to
the members of the Security Council for giving me this
opportunity to participate in this debate. I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the important
post of President of the Council. Your ability, your skill
and your experience all guarantee the proper guidance of
these deliberations.
33. My delegation has asked to speak on this occasion
to express its view on a problem which is of concern and
interest to Colombia, not only in its capacity as a Latin
American State but also as a peace-loving nation.

40. The Colombian position on the situation in Central
America was set forth by the Minister for External Relations, Mr. Rodrigo Lloreda Caicedo, who, together with
the Ministers for External Relations of Panama, Mexico
and Venezuela, signed the Contadora declaration2 on 9
January of this year. The affirmations contained therein
remain completely valid, and we believe they may be
useful in the immediate future.

34. Colombia,
as was stated by our Minister in his
speech during the thirty-seventh session of the General
Assembly,’ views with sincere concern the prospect that
Central America, a region so close to our own and so
dear to us, may become the stage for international
confrontation.
4

41. For the information of.the members of the Council
I shall read out certain relevant sections of the Contadora declaration:

those countries. Such au accomplishment
would be
almost impossible in the present circumstances.
43. How much better than painful confrontation is cooperation among countries that are so alike and have
shared interests,

“The Ministers considered various topics of
regional interest and agreed on the need to intensify
dialogue at the Latin American level as an effective
means of confronting the political, economic and
social problems which are jeopardizing the peace,
democracy, stability and .development of the peoples
of the continent,

44. Colombia always defends peace. Our belief in the
need for dialogue as an irreplaceable means of achieving
understanding and peaceful coexistence moved the Minister for External Relations of my country, in his address
on the occasion of Colombia’s admission to the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to refer to the delicate
situation in Central America in the following terms:

“They considered the complex situation prevailing
in Central America and the political processes taking
place in the area, their interrelationship and their consequences for stability and peace in the region. In
expressing their deep concern about direct or indirect
foreign interference in the conflicts in Central America
and noting that it is most undesirable that those conflicts should be included in the context of East-West
confrontation, they agreed on the need to eliminate
external factors intensifying those conflicts.

“On the basis of these deliberations, and following
a careful study of the Central American crisis, we cordially invited the countries of the region that are
directly concerned to seek through dialogue and negotiations formulas that would make it possible to restore internal harmony and regional peace.
“We were emphatic in condemning any foreign
interference, and we warned against the dangers of
placing the conflict in the political framework of EastWest relations. With equal conviction we asked the
countries that are directly or indirectly involved to
refrain from any act that may worsen the situation.”

“They made an urgent appeal to all the countries of
the Central American area to engage in dialogue and
negotiation so as to reduce tension and lay the foundations for a permanent atmosphere of peaceful coexistence and mutual respect among States.
“In reaffirming the obligation of States not to resort
to the threat or use of force in their international relations, they called upon all States to refrain from
actions which might aggravate the situation and pose
the danger of a broader conflict extending throughout
the region.

He stressed:
“We believe that to the extent that a certain detente
is achieved there will be an atmosphere more conducive to dialogue. Our intention, ingenuous as it may
seem, is to help to create that atmosphere. That
endeavour of course requires the co-operation of the
protagonist countries, and other nations can and
should contribute.”

“They reviewed the various peace initiatives and
their effects. In that connection, while respecting the
principles of non-intervention and self-determination
of the peoples, the Ministers analysed possible new
actions and drew attention to the desirability of associating with those efforts the valuable contribution
and necessary support of other countries of the Latin
American community.

45. My country’s Government,
together with other
countries of the region, is making efforts in the cause of
peace. It is our intention to reconcile, not to divide. We
therefore fervently urge that the spirit of co-operation be
allowed to prevail, and we lend our full support to measures aimed at consolidating the peace and stability of the
Central American region.

“They reiterated their decision to continue to promote the economic strengthening of the Central
American and Caribbean countries through initiatives
such as the energy co-operation programme sponsored by Mexico and Venezuela and the financial cooperation plan put forward by Colombia. They felt
that those initiatives and other measures of economic
co-operation would contribute to achieving the goals
of political stability and social peace.”

46. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,
47. Mr, RUPIA (United Republic of Tanzania): Allow
me to begin by expressing to you, Sir, and to the Council
the gratitude of my delegation for the opportunity
.afforded to it to participate in the deliberations on the
issue ‘.before us, My delegation associates itself with
you on your
precedmg speakers in congratulating
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of March. I should also like to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for the skilful manner in

42. Long ago I had the good fortune of participating in
the co-ordination and promotion of the Central American Common Market, and I am therefore in a position to
say that the unity of the Central American countries at
that time made it possible in a short time not only to
increase tenfold intrazonal trade but also to achieve
increased rates of economic and social development in all
5

which he conducted the affairs of the Council during the
month of February.
48. Since the Council met at the request of Nicaragua
[S/14923] last year the situation in the Central American
region to which that country drew the attention of the
international community has further degenerated. Nicaragua has continued to be a victim of indiscriminate acts
of terrorism and aggression. Its territory has been transgressed and its people terrorized, maimed and abducted.
Innocent peasants, women and children, have fallen victim to the Somoza bandits, As time has passed, tensions
have heightened and prospects for peaceful solution to
the problems have continued to diminish. At the same
time Nicaragua’s offer for peace through negotiations
has been reciprocated by increased acts of sabotage,
aggression and show of force.
49. What is therefore before the Council is a serious
matter indeed: serious, on the one hand, for the direct
threat it poses to Nicaragua and, on the other, for its
inevitable consequences for the peace and stability of the
region.
50. The latest act of invading Nicaragua comes in the
aftermath of a series of actions aimed at undermining the
Nicaraguan social revolution. Campaigns of destabilization and economic sabotage, complemented by full-scale
parallel international efforts by the avowed foes of Nicaragua, have failed to subdue the revolution. The training,
arming and financing of groups of Somozist bandits and
infiltrating them into Nicaragua seem not to have been
enough. Now direct confrontation has been resorted to.
51. The sum total of this naked act of aggression can be
no less than either to precipitate a direct confrontation
with the Nicaraguan forces and use it as an excuse for the
internationalization
of the war and for intervention, or to
create a general sense of insecurity and havoc within Nicaragua. The Council must therefore see this latest strategy in this context.
52. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has expressed its unflinching support for and solidarity with the
Nicaraguan Government in its defence of its territorial
integrity and independence and in consolidation of the
revolution. Both in Managua and New Delhi this year
the Movement spoke with one voice. My delegation cannot but echo that position.
53. The right of Nicaragua to an existence in peace
should be respected. The Council can do no less than
uphold the right of countries and peoples to choose their
own political, social and economic systems. Equally, the
Council must deplore in the strongest terms the actions
of those countries which have arrogated to themselves
the role of conduits for the destabilization of other countries. The right of Nicaragua to security under the Charter must be upheld.
54. It is clear that a viable and lasting solution to the
problems of that region lies not in the policies of aggression and interference in the internal affairs of other

States but in the realization that, in the long run, respect
for territorial ‘integrity and independence, non-interference and non-intervention
in the domestic affairs of
States and the non-use of force or threat of force are the
key elements of peace and stability.
55. In this regard there are several initiatives already
put forward by countries of the region, in particular the
initiative by the Governments of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela,2 which are attempting to elaborate a framework within which the prevailing problems
can be solved through negotiations. While no consensus
exists on those initiatives, in particular among the parties
to the conflict, they nevertheless contain positive elements on which broad agreement is possible and provide
a more sensible alternative to continued tensions and
conflict..
56. Consistent with this position, my Government has expressed support for the offer by Nicaragua, on the basis
of the third part of the Mexican proposal, to sign nonaggression pacts with all its neighbours of the Central
American area in order to ensure the peace and internal
stability of the zone. As a corollary to this, commitment
by the international community to respect the arrangement could further strengthen the prospects for peace.
57, We renew our appeal to all those concerned to
refrain from further direct or indirect action which can
only plunge that region into more intense flames of war,
There must be a deliberate effort and total commitment
on the part of all those concerned to desist from confrontation and, instead, to pursue peace.
58. .The Government of Tanzania is in total\solidarity
with the Government and people of Nicaragua. We also
support the people of Central America and the Caribbean who are struggling for freedom, human rights and
dignity and the genuine independence of their countries.
59. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Grenada, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. TAYLOR (Grenada): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
Your vast experience and your great skills as a diplomat
leave my delegation assured that the work of the Council
will come down on the side of justice and peace in Central America and in the world.
61. Exactly one year ago this body heard [2335th meeting] a lucid, comprehensive and sober statement by
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Co-ordinator of the Governing
Junta of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua. With
great eloquence and sincerity Commander
Ortega
Saavedra detailed the numerous acts of aggression committed against his country. He unveiled his Government’s constructive proposals for peace and security and
appealed to the Security Council “to issue an explicit
pronouncement, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, regarding the obligation to seek by peacefuf

means a solution to the problems of the Central American and the Caribbean region”. He further called for a
rejection of “all acts of force or threats” and a repudiation of “any direct, indirect or covert intervention in
Central America”.
62. Today, Nicaragua is invaded. Lamentably this
meeting is a testament to the fact that the United Nations
has failed in its efforts to restrain certain Members of this
great Organization. Therefore we are here today not only
to express our frustration and outrage; our presence here
must be seen as further evidence of our irrevocable commitment to the sacred principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations.
63, The invasion of Nicaragua is not an accident, nor is
it a spontaneous act on the part of a motley band of
cut-throats. A permanent member of the Security Council has encouraged, contrived and financed the invasion
of this martyred country.
64. Since coming to office the Reagan Administration
has busied itself with every imaginable kind of activity
designed to frustrate the legitimate aspirations of the
people of our region and to intimidate, destabilize and
ultimately overthrow so-called unfriendly Governments,
including the Government of Nicaragua. I regret to inundate the Council today with information that it certainly
has at its disposal. However, I believe that the recounting
of certain events which have occurred over the past 24
months would assist our deliberations.

It is a misguided policy, and if it is not soon reversed
the people of this land and the rest of the continent
will suffer for decades from its grave consequences.”
67. Not satisfied with its own efforts, the Reagan
Administration
has sought to co-opt other Governments
in the region in its fiendish campaigns against Nicaragua.
Under the very distinguished patronage of the United
States Government, the Honduran army has had a phenomenal increase in its military capacity over the past
three years, High-ranking
United States officials have
been unabashedly advertising Honduras as a stalkinghorse and a hit-squad in the region.
68. Since July 1979 the number of Honduran troops
has increased from 14,000 to 22,000; military airstrips
from 5 to 10; fighter planes from 33 to 38; transport
planes from 28 to 50; helicopters from 7 to 21; naval
bases from 2 to 4; total number of naval units from 9 to
15; and merchant ships from 25 to 45. Between February
and August 1982 the number of United States instructors
in Honduras increased from 40 to 100, and a veritable
legion of United States personnel has visited that country
over the past few months.
69. In fiscal year 1980 Honduras received military
assistance from the United States to the tune of $3.1
million. In 1981 the figure rose to $5.5 million, and in
1982 $10.6 million, in addition to $21 million approved
for the modernization
of Honduras’ airports.
70. Just a few days ago, United States Congressman
Michael Barnes warned that “the United States is fanning the flames of conflict between Honduras and Nicaragua by contriving
to support groups trying to
overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.”
The Reagan
Administration
must therefore accept responsibility for
the deaths of innocent men, women and children in Nicaragua. The forces that they have unleashed are wreaking
havoc.

65. On 16 January 1981 the National Security Adviser
to the President, Richard Allen, wrote a letter in the
name of the President of the United States to one
Edmund0 Rappaccioli, a member of a Nicaraguan group
hostile to the Sandinist Government. The letter promised
co-ordination of plans to destabilize that Government.
On 1 April the United States Government truncated
assistance to Nicaragua. On 5 November The New York
Times reported that General Alexander Haig had asked
the Defense Department to study military options in relation to Nicaragua. Is this a fitting role for a permanent
member of the Security Council?

71, It is a truism that the motif of United States foreign
policy concerning Latin America and the Caribbean has
not changed since the enunciation of the Monroe Doctrine, which laid the ideological and political bases for an
imperial creed that has allowed successive United States
Governments to view Latin America and the Caribbean
merely as a collection of banana republics subject to the
whims and fancies of the United States. Indeed, Secretary
of State Philander C. Knox had scornfully referred to the
region as “a United States game reserve from which
poachers were excluded but where the proprietor may
hunt as he pleases”,

66. On 30 January 1982 the United States vetoed a loan
in the Inter-American Bank intended for co-operatives in
Nicaragua. On 23 February Patrick Leahy, a member of
the United States Senate Intelligence
Committee,
denounced United States plans to carry out covert operations in Nicaragua. On 10 March The Washington Post
published an article in which it reported on a United
States plan of covert action against Nicaragua. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) received $19 million to
fund a SOO-man paramilitary force that would “attempt
to destroy vital Nicaraguan targets such as power plants
and bridges”, On 2 September John Buchanan, a retired
marine lieutenant-colonel,
testifying before the SubCommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, stated:

72. The peoples of our region have been viewed by the
United States Government as the American beast of
burden. The United States has robbed us of our dignity
and spat upon our sovereignty. Every attempt has been
made to socialize our people into believing that our only
role in the hemispheric division of labour is to be the
hewers of wood and the drawers of water. Our people
have been made to believe that we are fated, to be poor,

“Speaking generally, I am here to criticize the present Administration’s policy towards Central America.
7

77. Speaking, first of all, some weeks ago before the
National Association of Manufacturers, Mr. Reagan
stated that Grenada is building a superior air base which
directly threatens the national security interests of the
United States. Mine is a developing country. It is a poor,
small country, a country that is 21 miles long and 13
miles across, a country that is open, a country whose
adult population could be comfortably accommodated
in Yankee Stadium. It is a small, weak country, a country
which has no intention ever to invade the United States,
Why, therefore, are the President of the United States,
Secretary of State Shultz and Vice-President Bush attacking Grenada?

miserable and wretched, and that we exist merely to
replenish the coffers of United States transnationals.
73. Exactly 30 years ago, in March 1953, the legitimate
Government of Jacob0 Arbenz in Guatemala nationalized 230,009 acres .of land beionging to the United Fruit
Company of the United States. The United States
Department of State, headed by John Foster Dulles,
intervened on behalf of the Company, backing its claims
for $16 million in compensation. Arbenz refused to pay
these excessive sums, since it was not consistent with tax
returns which the Company had submitted to the Guatemalan Treasury. The CIA sent in a trained army of
Guatemalan exiles, Arbenz was overthrown, and the new
President promptly gave back the land to the United
Fruit Company.

78. We have empirical informatioa berore us that certain attitudes, certain types of behaviour, precede the
invasion of countries, and so propaganda, terrorism and
economic sabotage laid the basis for military aggression
and the ultimate overthrow of Governments in our
region. It was the propaganda attacks, the economic sabotage that laid the basis for the overthrow of Salvador
Allende in Chile; it was those same attacks that led, to the
overthrow of Arbenz in Guatemala, of Jagan in Guyana,
of Sukarno in Indonesia, of Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana,
and the list goes on.

74. The history of our region is a catalogue of such
stories that reek of imperialist arrogance and insensitivity. Major General Smedley D. Butler has left us a perspicuous account of his stewardship in the region. He
boasted:
“I spent thirty-three years and four months in active
service as a member of our country’s agile military
force-the Marine Corps.. . . During that period I
spent most of my time being a high-class muscle-man
for big business, for Wall Street and for the bankers.
In short, I was a racketeer for capitalism.. . . Thus I
helped make Mexico.. . safe for American bil interests
in 1914. I helped make Haiti and Cuba a decent place
for the National City Bank boys to collect revenues
in. . . . I helped to purify Nicaragua for the international banking house of Brown Brothers.. . . I brought
light to the Dominican Republic for American sugar
interests in 1916. I helped make Honduras ‘right’ for
American fruit companies in 1903.”

79. And so the statement by President Reagan causes
grave concern and disquiet to the people of my country
and to the Government. We are told that the President’s
statement was in the context of an attack on Central
America and the Caribbean and therefore our mention,
the mention of Grenada, is a by-product. We are not so
nafve as to believe that. In the first instance, that action is
irresponsible, provocative and dangerous. It serves to
inspire mercenaries and dogs of war, who are bent on
attacking and overthrowing the Government of my country. We believe that the United States is a powerful country, a country of a great people, and that the statement
by President Reagan can only separate him further from
reality and undermine the greatness of the American
people.

75. From the end of the eighteenth century up to the
197Os, of the 200 United States military hostilities on
foreign soil, close to 100 have taken place in the Caribbean area north of the Panama Canal. The United States
has accroached to itself the right summarily to dismiss
Governments. In true imperialist fashion the United
States has concocted and disseminated the appropriate
mythologies to justify its ludicrous claims that history
has foisted upon it ‘the responsibility, in the words of
President Theodore Roosevelt, “to exercise the power of
an international police”. This bankrupt thesis entitles the
United States to intimidate
Libya and denigrate its
leader; it permits the provocation of Syria and Iran; it
permits threats against Mozambique and Angola and the
harassment of the Cuban Government and people. This
thesis allows the Reagan Administration
to embrace executions while at the same time excoriating the heroic
Palestinian people and our brothers and sisters in South
Africa and in Namibia.

80. We are building an airport because every Government in the history of Grenada has attempted to build
one. The British, when Grenada was their colony, looked
into the matter of an international airport, We have
received assistance from Canada in producing feasibility
studies towards the building of that airport. In 1967,
former dictator Eric Gairy went to Canada to discuss
those plans with former Prime Minister Lester Pearson.
When we overthrew the neo-fascist’dictatorship of Gairy
in March 1979, our Government proclaimed its desire to
real& this ancient dream of the Grenadian people. Thousands of Grenadians’ rallied around that cause. ?%ousands
of women in our country, under the umbrella of the
National Women’s Organization, sold ice cream in the
streets of our capital so as to raise funds for the building of
that airport. Thousands of youths in our country mobilized
their friends in an effort to raise money for the building of
that airport.

76. At this point I should like to draw to the attention
of this body a matter of grave concern to the Government and people of Grenada, based on statements made
by the President of the United States in a nationally televised broadcast to the nation last night.

81. When we decided that we wanted assistance, the
first Government in the world that we asked help from in
8

“Pledges have come from every sector of the
society-unions,
farmers, women, youth, the church
and community groups. Members of my own staff
attended a fund-raiser sponsored by the Women’s Airport Committee on Sunday, 11 April. They noted
that, during a briefing session afterwards, a broadbased and diverse sector of the population participated in the event. Of particular interest to the staff
was the active participation of Grenada’s elderly, i.e,
selling tickets, serving food, greeting guests and
accompanying newcomers around the airport complex.

building that airport was, in 1979, that of the United
States. The United States Government was the first we
approached when we wanted assistance to build the airport. We made our request through former ambassador
to the eastern Caribbean, Frank Ortiz. According to
Steven Kinzer of The Boston Globe, Mr. Ortiz stated,
“We cannot fund projects of this type”. Instead Mr.
Ortiz offered to give us $5,000 from his discretionary
account for other minor projects. Contempt.
82. Do they expect us to wait until they have an interest
or desire or the time or until it is expedient to help us in
building an international airport? It is impossible to fly
to Grenada directly, This is well known. Flying to Grenada involves going through Barbados or Trinidad and
Tobago. We have a small airport that was built by the
British in 1943. It has been described by pilots as a
hazard. It is impossible to fly into my country after 6
p.m. There are no night landing facilities.

“Based on my personal observations, discussions
and analyses of the new international airport under
construction in Grenada, it is my conclusion that this
project is specifically now, and has always been, for
the purpose of the economic development of Grenada
and is not intended for military use, as has been stated
by the United States. Given the facts and figures as
presented by our own military experts and by the
Grenadians as well, it is my thought that it is absurd,
patronizing and totally unwarranted for the United
States Government to charge that this airport is for
military
purposes and a threat to our national
security.

83. According to a study done by a European group a
year ago on Grenada and its tourism, which is the second
largest earner of foreign exchange and a very important
activity in the economy of our country, “Grenada is terrifically disadvantaged because it does not have an airport”, We need an airport. All we need is an airport. The
President has said that we do not need an airport because
we do not have an air force. That is precisely why we are
building a civilian airport, because we do not have an au
force. Our army is virtually a token force, an army that
could fit inside this Security Council chamber.

“Moreover, its use and allegations by the United
States as the basis for a foreign policy of confrontation towards Grenada is counter-productive.”
I could go on and on about this report from Congressman Dellums, but I crave the Council’s indulgence just
to read out a few more lines, where he says, in the same
report:

84. We need an airport, Ours is not a massive airport.
As is well known by the World Bank, it is 9,800 feet long.
It is supposed to be massive; it is supposed to represent a
threat to the United States. Barbados is a small Caribbean country about the size of Grenada. The airport in
Barbados is 11,000 feet long. CuraGao is a small Caribbean country in the Dutch Antilles; it has an airport
11,189 feet long. Antigua, smaller than Grenada, has an
international airport that is 9,000 feet long. Where is the
threat to the United States? Saint Lucia, with an area of
238 square miles and a population of 120,000, also has an
airport over 9,000 feet long. Where is the threat to the
security of the United States? Why are they fantasizing
about this airport? What is the obsession, what is the
preoccupation, with this small airport in a tiny country?
The Security Council might perhaps do us a service and
assist us in finding out exactly what preoccupies the
United States about a small airport that is supposed to be
a threat to the United States.

“It is my contention that the rhetoric around the airport is apparently used to enhance the validity of the
allegation regarding military development. Based on
my own briefings by both the Commanders of the
Atlantic Fleets and the Air Defence Command, who
emphatically assured me that the airport under construction in, Grenada is of no military consequence to
the United States, my question to my colleagues is,
then, ‘Why the continued rhetoric against Grenada?’
It seems obvious that there are far-reaching and more
underlying circumstances that surround the issue of
United States-Grenada relations than meet the eye.”
86. So the work on the airport continues, and our struggle in Grenada in fact continues. I should like to let
members of this body know that we have given all the
assurances we can that our airport is a civilian airport.
The equipment for the airport, for example, comes from
British and Finnish firms. The building of the airport in
fact involves people from various parts of the world; an
American company called Layne Dredging Company of
Florida was involved; various countries have given assistance, including Venezuela and Cuba; and the European
Development Fund has also made contributions to our
airport.

85, Congressman Dellums, in a report to the House
Committee on Armed Services on 13 April 1982, said this
about Grenada and its airport:
“Based on my own experience while in Grenada,
the most determined supporters of the airport are the
Grenadian people themselves, who have purchased
850,000 Eastern Caribbean dollars worth of airport
bonds to help finance the construction and have
formed local airport development committees to raise
funds.
9

/

87. Just a few days ago, from 7 to 12 March, 101 countries met at New Delhi for the historic Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries. In New Delhi we collectively assessed the
international situation, paying particular attention to the
so-called trouble-spots in the world, including Central
America and the Caribbean. After exhaustive debates
and a great deal of soul-searching, the Movement made
yet another passionate appeal for peace and international
co-operation and for respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of all States. Paragraph
138 of the Political Declaration [see S/Z56753 requests
the Co-ordinating Bureau “to closely moiitor the events
in the subregion” and makes an appeal for “the cessation
of all hostile acts against Nicaragua”. The Conference
“called on the Governments of the United States and
Honduras to adopt a constructive position in favour of
peace and dialogue in conformity with the principles of
international law and called on all States to avoid any act
or policy that might increase tensions in the region”.

as to seek a confrontation with the United States. All we
demand is merely the right-our primordial right--to be
able to construct new societies in order that peace might
be brought to millions who have endured four centuries
of torment and that bread and justice might be given
unto those who have been denied them.
92. Today we call for understanding, tolerance and dialogue and an end to insensitivity and arrogance. We call
for an attitude that will open our eyes to the real problems affecting Latin America and the Caribbean. We
call, not upon great armies-for we have none-but
on
the conscience of civilized men and women. As we reaffirm our unbreakable solidarity with the Government
and thi people of Nicaragua and with all those who are
fighting for national liberation and genuine independence, we rededicate ourselves to the noble search for
peace; we reiterate our undying commitment to the holding of meaningful dialogtie at any level, in any place, at
any time, with a view to promoting peace, understanding
and co-operation throughout our region.

88, But even befori: we left New Delhi, United States
warships were engaged in another round of “exercises”
in the Caribbean, in defiance of the numerous calls by
Caribbean States and regional institutions that our
region be recognized as a zone of peace, Sixty-nine
United States vessels are involved, They include 3 aircraft
carriers, 4 cruisers, 11 destroyers, 13 frigates, 4 submarines, 4 amphibious craft, 4 patro1 boats, 14 support craft
and 11 Coast Guard boats. The exercise also involves
more than 300 aircraft, the Pentagon said. This latest
exhibition of United States military muscle, code-named
“Redex ‘83”, will serve to aggravate tensions in the
region and certainly widen the lacuna existing between
the peoples and Governments of our region and the
Government of the United States.

93. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpret&n
from Chinese): Mr. President, allow me, at the outset, to express
warm congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
Your diplomatic experience and skill in organizing and
presiding over our consultations and formal meetings
have convinced me that you will surely guide the Council
to successfully accomplish its tasks for this month. I
should also like to express appreciation and gratitude to
your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky of the ‘Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for the skilful exercise of his
duties and for the work he did during his presidency of
the Council last month.

89. The threat of force and the use of force will not
solve the centuries-old problems of the region. Instead,
force will serve only to exacerbate tensions and further
polarize our fragile societies.

94. For a considerable period of time now, the situation in Central America has been rather tense and turbulent and, therefore, a focus of international attention,
Recently, the tension around Nicaragua has made a new
turn for the worse, which cannot but cause deep concern
to the Chinese Government and people.

90. The problems facing the region are as profound as
they are multifaceted. They stem from the archaic socioeconomic structures that create elites and oligarchies,
which grow fat as the masses of toilers sink deeper into a
quagmire of wretchedness. The Reagan Administration
must understand that the noble attempts of the peoples
of our region to escape oppression and exploitation and
the vicious cycle of poverty and misery do not constitute
a threat to the United States. The real danger in the
region is the persistence of oppression, the denial of land
to the tillers, the’disrortion
of the realities of the region
and the superimposition
of extraneous issues in the
strictly indigenous unheavals in the region. As the former
President of Mexico, Mr, Mpez Portillo, said, “The
danger for the United States is the risk of history’s condemnation as a result of suppressing by force the right of
other nations.”

95. Under the leadership of the Sandinist National Liberation Front, the people of Nicaragua won the victory
of overthrowing the Somoza dictatorship in 1979 after a
heroic and stubborn struggle. Since then, the Government and people of Nicaragua have made great efforts to
safeguard their national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to develop the economy and
improve livelihood, The just struggle of the Nicaraguan
people has won the sympathy and admiration
of the
people of the world and of China. The Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordiriating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Countries held at Managua from 10 to 14
January 1983 and the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at Neti
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983 both reaffirmed their
support for the just cause of the Nicaraguan Governmeflt
and people.

91. The people of Latin America and the Caribbean
abhor war; war has emaciated them. We are not so naive

96. An important cause of the present tension around
Nicaragua and, consequently, of the deteriorating aitua”
10

ti
ti1
oj
I?
id
>P
e

103. In the light of the responsibilities vested in it by the
international community, the Council can therefore not
remain unmoved until such time as an even more dangerous situation arises in this part of the world to the detriment of a country that is at present a member of the
Council.

%r in the whole of Central America lies in the intervention by a super-Power. Such intervention is firmly
Opposed by th e p eo p les of various countries of that
Q@on, including Nicaragua, which strongly demand that
the super-Powers should desist from embroiling Central
America in their rivalry. We consider that this demand is
entirely justified and should therefore be supported.

104. All peoples in the world that cherish peace, freedom and independence, including the Vietnamese, are
extremely anxious at the clear deterioration of the situation in this region in recent years because of the policy of
the United States vis-a-vis Latin America, particularly
since the people of Nicaragua, after having toppled the
Somoza dictatorship, became masters of their own destiny and buckled down seriously to national reconstruction under the guidance of the Government of National
Reconstruction of the Republic of Nicaragua.

97, The Chinese delegation is of the view that in order
t0 diminish and remove tension in Central America it is
essential that the super-Power should cease its intervention there. The independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Nicaragua and other States of Central America should be respected. Central American problems
Should be solved by the peoples of the region themselves.
98. As regards the differences and disputes between
Nicaragua and other States of the region, we hope that
they would be solved in a pe,aceful and fair manner by
Nicaragua and the countries concerned through negotiations, free from outside interference and in conformity
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly such established norms of international relations as mutual respect for independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity, non-aggression, non-interference in
each other’s internal affairs and solution of disputes by
peaceful means.

105. The deterioration
of this situation has persisted
with ever increasing severity and at a faster rate since the
coming to power of the present United States Administration, which, under the guise of a policy advocating
United States-Latin
American relations as the touchstone of American relations with the third world in
alleged opposition to communism, is endeavouring by all
means-especially
military-to
maintain or to reinstate
compliant dictatorships in order to prolong the United
States hold on that part of the world, which it considers
to-be its b%m backyard.

99. Leaders of some Latin American countries have
made considerable efforts in trying to solve the problems
of Central America. These efforts have enjoyed extensive
support from the international community. We sincerely
hope that they will continue to contribute positively to a
rationat solution of the problems of their region.

106. In regard to the young Republic of Nicaragua,
judging by the American press, it is clear that the United
States is at present continuing its attempts tb stifle that
country by means of economic blockade and is preparing
a plan for armed intervention in order to reimpose on the
people of that country a dictatorship obedient to American imperialist interests.

100. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

107. This body has heard, the representative of the
United States [ibid] say that there is no difference
between “Samozism” and “Sandinism”, because they are
all military dictators who deny human rights and political freedoms. This is a failure to respect reality and a
failure to heed the voice of the overwhelming majority of
the countries of the world. We only have to read the final
communique
of the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting
of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at Managua, and the Political Declaration of
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi, to
become aware that the international
community has
made a clear distinction between good and evil, that the
Somozas of every stripe are being ostracized and that the
cause of national independence and sovereignty for Nicaragua is being firmly supported on an increasingly large
scale by progressive mankind.

101. Mr. HOANG BICH SON (Viet Nam) (inferprelarion from French): First, I should like to thank the President and the members of the Security Council for having
given me this opportunity of speaking before this body to
set forth the point of view of the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in connection with the
important item which the Council at present haa before it
at the urgent request of the Government of National
Reconstruction of the Republic of Nicaragua.
102, I listened closely to the very clear and sincere statement [242&h meeting] made by Mr. Victor Hugo Tinoco,
the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
and to the other statements made by previous speakers.
The facts and the realities which were emphasized in
them, contrary to deliberate allegations, have in themselves brought out the full seriousness of the present
situation which is directly threatening the independence
and the sovereignty of Nicaragua on the one hand, and
which on the other is a potential danger to peace and
security in the entire Central American and Caribbean
region.

108. As far as human rights are concerned, I concur
with the statement made by the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya [242Zst meeeting’l. In order for
human rights to be enjoyed, those rights must be guaranteed through the right of peoples to independence and to
11

be masters of their own future. As long as a people is
subject to domination and exploitation, the individuals
comprising that people can never enjoy authentic human
rights. For centuries, the heroic and sustained struggle of
the peoples of Latin America, including that of Nicaragua, against dictatorships imposed by the United States
and for national independence and sovereignty has also
been a struggle to regain and to exercise human rights
among themselves.

dominating national regimes and the national liberation
movements, as well as imposing hegemony of the imperialist Powers on our peoples’ destinies. Today, the
Council is grappling with a flagrant act of aggression
perpetrated by the agents of the United States against
Nicaragua and its Sandinist People’s Revolution. The
perpetrators were made up of mercenaries and remnants
of Somoza’s dictatorship, who were incited, trained and
financed by the American Government in Latin America in general, and Central America in particular, to
interfere in the political, economic and military fields,
especially against the people of Nicaragua, as well as
against the rest of the peoples of Latin America that are
exercising their right to effect democratic and social
changes and are waging a just struggle for liberation and
the consolidation of their national independence, as well
as for their independent political, economic and social
choices.

109. The recent Seventh Conference of Heads of State
.or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries condemned
the growing threats against Nicaragua and the serious
and increasingly numerous acts of aggression against
that young republic.
The Conference particularly
denounced violations of the space and territorial waters
of Nicaragua and the utilization of foreign territory to set
up bases of aggression and to maintain. counterrevolutionary forces against Nicaragua. The Conference
also reiterated its whole-hearted support for the just
cause of the people of Nicaragua and other peoples struggling for their independence and freedom in Latin
America.

116. The victory of the Sandinist People’s Revolution
in Nicaragua, which toppled the fascist junta headed by
the dictator Somoza-a victory which was a contribution to the history of the struggle of all the peoples in
Latin America after the victory of the Cuban revolution
and the consolidation of the Government of Grenadahas intensified the virulent and inimical
campaigns
waged by the American Government with all its powers
against the national liberation movements of the peoples
of Latin America and their progressive regimes,

110. The people and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam have frequently had occasion to
condemn the warlike policy of the United States with
regard to Nicaragua and other countries in Central
America and the Caribbean, a policy which is at the root
of the current dangerous situation in that part of the
world.

117. Within the framework of the American design to
threaten the security and stability of the States and peoples of the area, Nicaragua is subjected to aggressive
campaigns in the militarpy, political
and economic
spheres, as embodied in the recruitment of mercenaries
among the agents of the Somoza regime rejected by the
people of Nicaragua, in an attempt to abort the Nicaraguan revolution and to terrorize the progressive regime
in Nicaragua, which opted for an independent course of
development after all the American attempts to blackmail the revolution of the Nicaraguan people through
economic boycott and through inimical media campaigns had failed.

111. We firmly support the cause of national defence
and reconstruction being pursued by the people and
Government of Nicaragua, as well as the struggle being
waged by other peoples in Latin America and throughout the worid for peace, national independence, democracy and social progress.
112. The delegation of Viet Nam fully supports the
position of and the proposals set forth by the representative of the Republic of Nicaragua in this body and
requests that the Security Council take an appropriate
stance commensurate with its responsibility in view of
the serious situation confronting the Republic of Nicaragua, a dangerous situation which has been caused by a
permanent member of the Council.

118. We listened with deep concern yesterday to the
statement of the representative of Nicaragua [242&h
meeting]. He disclosed many facts concerning the aggressive American policy towards Nicaragua, He provided us
with conclusive evidence confirming the involvement of
the American
Government
in aggression against
Nicaragua.

113. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
114.

Mr.

AL-ALFI
(Democratic Yemen) (interpretaAt the outset, Sir, allow me to express
warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this current month. I
also wish to express the gratitude of my representative
for the great role played by the representative of the
Soviet Union in conducting the proceedings of the Council during his term of office last month.

119. The afflictions of Latin America and the aggression to which Nicaragua has been subjected are seen
within the framework of the ferocious and escalating
imperialist onslaught led by the United States with the
intention of perpetuating and expanding its influence in
different areas of the world, using as a pretext its economic and strategic interests. This is embodied in its pursuit of aggressive policies, its increased presence and
military bases, the establishment of rapid deployment
forces, the strengthening of its war machine, its provoking of secure and stable States and their progressive

tion from Arabic):

115. The hotbeds of tension in many parts of the world
have arisen as the result of imperialist designs that aim at
i2

rCgimes, opposing the national liberation movements,
creating hotbeds of tension and sowing the seeds of dissension and dismemberment.

125. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Ecuador. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

120. In view of the comprehensiveness of the aggressive, expansionist propensity of the imperialist Power,
which is the main source of the dangers of tension and
instability
and destabilization the world over, we of
Democratic
Yemen face the dangers caused by the
increased American military presence and the increase in
the American bases in our area, which endanger the security and stability of the States and peoples of the area.
We have also witnessed American military manoeuvres
on our borders involving several types of sophisticated
and very complex American weapons.

126. Mr. ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the important
responsibilities
of the
presidency of the Security Council, Your presence here
will certainly help ensure that the Council’s deliberations are successful.
127. Among the basic principles of Ecuador’s international policies are non-intervention,
non-interference by
any State in the internal or international
affairs of
another State, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the non-use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State-principles
established in the Charter of the United Nations. That is why
the delegation of Ecuador has come to address this
forum of the world Organization in accordance with the
declaration made by a fraternal country, Nicaragua,
through its Deputy Minister for External Relations
[ibid.], affirming the need for full respect for those principles, which are the pillars of international law and of
the peaceful coexistence of peoples.

12 1, The Arab peoples too are suffering from imperialist Zionist designs against them and the unlimited support the American Administration
provides to Zionism
so that it may persist in its policy of expansion and
aggression. These designs were evident in the occupation
of Lebanon by Israel and Israel’s barbaric war engineered to eliminate the national gains achieved by the
Palestinian people under the Palestine Liberation Organization, its sole, legitimate representative, and to impose
on the Arab region a policy of capitulation
and
dependence.

128. Among the forms of aggression, all of which are
unacceptable, is the destabilization
of Governments
through actions backed or encouraged by other countries. These situations or methods must be rejected by
the international community and must yield to forms of
dialogue and negotiation in a search for viable solutions
through peaceful methods.

122. On the African continent also we see many States,
especially Angola and Mozambique,
facing constant
aggression against their territories and their sovereignty
by the racist South African regime, propped up by American imperialism.

129. At the very outset of the tensions that have
affected several countries of the Central American
region, and specifically Nicaragua, whose political independence our country has supported since the very
beginning of the present Government,
Ecuador supported the first initiative by Mexico and Venezuela to try
to find grounds for understanding between the vying
parties and to seek solutions not involving force in the
region.

123. Democratic Yemen condemns the policy of aggression, interference and pressure pursued by the United
States Government and its conspiratorial designs on Nicaragua through which it attempts to destabilize it and to
threaten its security and independence. We confirm our
solidarity with the people and Government and Nicaragua as they strive to defend their independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. My country also
condemns the regime in Honduras, which has allowed its
territory to be used for aggression against Nicaragua.
That regime has received a number of Israeli officials
whose hands are stained with the blood of the Palestinian
people as a result of their crimes and the massacres they
have perpetrated in Beirut.

130. It is indispensable for all parties directly affected
by this situation, whoever they may be, to reach a negotiated settlement that responds exclusively to the interests of the peoples of the region. Only when intervention
by foreign Powers has ceased and peoples may freely
choose the path of understanding will that be possible.

124. In conclusion, we are fully confident that the
people of Nicaragua will be able to defend the gains
made by its Sandinist People’s Revolution and to frustrate all the imperialist plots and acts of aggression to
which it is being subjected. We would also emphasize
that the United States, which has had no compunction in
committing the most hideous of crimes against peoples,
will not be able to reverse the irrevocable march of history. Inevitably the struggle of the peoples of Latin
America in El Salvador, Chile, Guatemala, Puerto Rico
and other Latin American countries against fascist dictatorships propped up by the Government of the United
’
States will be crowned with success.
13

131. Now that that initiative
has been extended
through the participation
of other fraternal countries
inspired by the same intention
to seek peaceful
solutions-that
is, Colombia and Panama-the
delegation of Ecuador cannot fail to express the hope that
those steps will be successful, that the use of force and
any foreign interference in the affairs of Nicaragua and
all of Central America will be prohibited and that the
peoples will be allowed to decide on their own destiny
free of violence and pressure of any kind. This is incumbent upon peace-loving countries that have pledged to
fulfil the obligations that flow from the Charter.

.

region. The increase in the flow of refugees, the arms
race, armed conflicts that are afflicting three countries in
the region and the serious disruption of Central American trade are all evidence that the problem of Central
America, in so far as it affects the five countries of that
region, should be considered by those countries together.

132. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica. I invite him & take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
133. Mr. ZUMBADO
JEMENEZ (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): I am pleased to associate myself
with the congratulations extended to you, Sir, bypreceding speakers on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March, I wish you
every success in the discharge of the important functions
entrusted to you.

139. My country has endeavoured to promote dialogue
and discussion at the regional level. It is essential and
fundamental that the countries that are the protagonists
in the Central American drama should be the ones to
explore solutions. Recently, on 24 February, there was a
call for a meeting of Central American foreign ministers
with the participation of other Latin American countries
that have historically demonstrated great solidarity with
out countries, in a search for detente, which is the only
course that should be followed.

134. As members of the Council are aware, Costa Rica,
ever since its birth as an independent Republic, has been
committed to peace in both its external and internal relations. Our peace-loving spirit reached its height in 1948,
when, in our Constitution, we abolished the army. That
act, as we have repeated in various international forums,
was in itself an act of confidence in regional and international peace-keeping machinery.

140, In the various peace proposals for the region that
have emerged there are areas of agreement on important
points that provide a solid basis for progress. There is
agreement, for example, on the following: first, there is a
reaffirmation of the principle of non-intervention
in the
internal affairs of other States, as well as the right of
peoples to self-determination;
secondly, there is the need
to limit the existence of weapons and security forces to
those deemed essential for the maintenance of public
order and national defence; and, thirdly, it is indicated
that the Governments of the region should promote an
atmosphere of national reconciliation and dialogue guaranteeing the adequate participation of all citizens.

135. Let there be no misinterpretation
of the Costa
Rican people’s devotion to peace. Our history also shows
how in crucial circumstances, when our security was
threatened from outside, our people defended their sovereignty. We do believe that our security rests basically
upon the strength of our democratic institutions and on
our commitment
to the principles governing international law.
136. It was in accordance with those principles that at a
meeting convened this morning by the President of Costa
Rica, Mr. Luis Albert0 Monge, and attended by the Minister for External Relations and distinguished former
Ministers of our country dating back to 1948, the President reaffirmed that one of the cardinal tenets of the
country’s foreign policy is support for the principle of
non-intervention
and the right of peoples to selfdetermination. Just as we ourselves respect those principles, we hope that they will also inspire the conduct of
other States towards Costa Rica.

141. Costa Rica wishes to promote the cause of social
justice and democracy. We deem it essential, out of
respect for the principle of non-intervention,
that there
be progress in regional dialogue in the search for organizational forms that will be increasingly democratic and
participatory. To the extent that democratic institutions
are created and strengthened, we believe that the use of
force in our region will be less and less warranted. We
also deem it essential that there be progress in the respect
for human rights, especially the right of the individual to
life and security.

137. On that basis, I reiterate before the Council that
my Government maintains and will continue to maintain
a position of strict compliance with its international commitments and a vigilant stance towards any action or
armed attack against neighbouring countries. Furthermore, as, regards our northern border, the Government
of the Republic has made and will continue, at the cost of
great economic sacrifice, to make every effort to exercise
effective vigilance and to avoid any possibility of a violation of neutrality or any breach of respect for international commitments, or any other threat to our territorial
integrity.

142. Lastly, our Government considers that there are
bases upon which to initiate a fraternal regional dialogue
and that this is the proper time for such dialogue. Aware
of our obligation to contribute to peace in the region, we
have taken the various initiatives that are already familiar to the international community.
143. Mv countrv does not wish to take sides in this
forum ii the exchange of accusations that have been
entered into by fraternal countries. Rather than recriminations, what is needed is the search for solutions. On
that basis, my country pledges once again to support any
act inspired by that intent and to work towards and promote initiatives designed to overcome definitively
the
problems of insecurity and violence that exist to varying
degrees for the peoples of Central America so that all our
endeavours may focus on promoting the levels of development of the different countries of the region.

138. My country’s Government has endeavoured to
step up its dialogue with the Nicaraguan authorities in a
search for solutions to bilateral matters on whhich some
differences still exist, and we deem it necessary to supplement these and other bilateral discussions with regional
dialogue, since it cannot be denied that a problem does
exist that transcends the borders of the countries of the
14

,-

144. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
145, Mr. MAUDAVE
(Mauritius) (interpretation from
French): At the outset of my statement may I tell you, Sir,
how gratified I am to be participating in the work of the
Council under the presidency of the representative of a
country with which we have maintained very close and
privileged ties.
146. The turn of events in one part of Latin America,
which is iocated thousands of kilometres from our
shores, cannot leave us unmoved for three main reasons.
First, there is the emotional reason, because those principally concerned are friends; secondly, there is the awareness of a world that has become so interdependent that
any conflict, wherever it may break out, can entail the
risk of becoming wider; lastly, there is the challenge that
problems of this nature present for the intellect and the
imagination.
147. We have in Mauritius been following with great
interest and sympathy the development of the Sandinist
movement which, in its revolutionary zeal, has finally
freed Nicaragua from dictatorship. We commend the
courage with which that struggle was waged. We are
aware of the sacrifices it must have cost. I should like to
inform the representatives of Nicaragua that it is our
wholehearted wish that they be able to ensure and maintain the internal security of their territory and the stability of their Administration so that they can in a peaceful
atmosphere get down to the tasks of reconstruction and
development.
148. Insecurity and fear will hardly make it easy to
effect such a transition to a democratic regime for which
some have expressed hope in their statements-a transition that I have no doubt you aspire to yourselves, since
in a letter to the Organization of American States (OAS)
that has been quoted in the Council [see 2420th meeting,
para+ 74 you have proclaimed this aloud. I am pleased to
believe that it is not the selfish and exclusive exercise of
power that prevented you from instituting elected democracy or which has prompted you to seek external support
in your struggle against dissidence but, rather, direct or
indirect intervention designed to destabilize you, both
economically and politically. As far as I know, it has not
been denied that training camps exist and that in them
your opponents are learning how to handle sophisticated
material with the active assistance of military advisers or
mercenaries. We understand the anxiety that Nicaragua,
like so many other States in that region, may feel when
trying to maintain its national independence and territorial integrity. Every country has an inalienable right to
peace and security. All the major international bodies
have referred to this. The Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at
New Delhi reaffirmed this as recently as the beginning of
this month of March. The Security Council, I am certain,
will seek ways and means of ensuring that Nicaragua can
preserve its right to peace and security.

149. The Sandinist representative reported, on Wednesday evening [24ZUrh meeting], on an intervention which is
threatening the peace and security of his country. It
would be advisable for the Council to study for a
moment the underlying reasons for that feeling of insecurity. I am personally convinced, that the root cause of
conflicts and tensions from which we suffer throughout
the world derives from the fact that certain great Powers
try through force or the threat of the use of force to
control the development of international
relations and
thus to intimidate the weaker countries so as to convert
them into satellites and to promote interests that serve
those major Powers.
150. History, or at least precedents, confirm, unfortunately, that this is a primitive reflex on the part of the
strong and privileged. To cite the celebrated dialogue
between the Athenians and the Melians in The History of
the Peloponnesian War by Thucydides, the Athenians tell
the Melians that in international relations the strong do
what they can and the weak what they are forced to do
and that any discussions of rights are meaningful only
between equals. The Melians, nevertheless, insist and
refer to law and justice. The Athenians reply that
“opportunity
is dictated by security, whereas justice and
honour can be served only with concomitant peril”. In
The History of the Peloponnesian War it was the Athenians who attacked and destroyed the Melians.
15 1. The tragedy of international politics is that at present there appears to be no generally acceptable alternative to this machiavellian kind of morality-unless
it be
this fragile recourse to the wisdom of the Security Council. This morality of “we are the stronger” and ,“they are
the weaker” has been supplemented by the idea that the
interests of the nation are ipso facto moral and that the
defence of the interests of the State is automatically just.
This form of arrogant morality is still popular in certain
countries. When reference is made to the domino theory
in a context of primitive anti-communism
and when it is
claimed that El Salvador is closer to a certain State than
even the federal capital; when intervention was carried
out in Iran in 1953, in Guatemala in 1954, in the Bay of
Pigs in 1961, in Afghanistan in 1979; when in a desire for
vengeance a certain Secretary of State supported intervention against Allende in Chile and recommended it
once again in the civil war in Nicaragua in 1979; when
certain members of the Government are tempted to
undertake operations in El Salvador and demand even
more credits for military assistance, the result, as Stanley
Hoffmann says, is at best the tyranny of alleged good
intentions justified by world responsibilities or world
revolution or, at worst, pure and simple imperialism.
152. With reference to a statement made in a Senate
committee about two weeks ago on votes cast by the developing and the non-aligned countries in the United Nations,
I also find that that is a rather Manichaean approach to
international relations. To that friendly country which systematically, resolution after resolution, finds itself “on the
wrong side of a lopsided vote” and which in a sort of
paroxysm of spleen is in the process of linking multilateral
15

diplomacy with bilateral diplomacy’ so that aid can be
dispensed on the basis of criteria which draw a distinction
between the “goodies”
who vote with them and the
“baddies” who roil the waters, I would recommend a
certain backward glance, a certain objectivity and a certain soul-searching, rather than making Pavlovian use of
the stick and the carrot, something which is to the discredit of its high aspirations and humanist traditions.

156. Our problem today is to ascertain how we can
reach a stage where a non-machiavellian ethic prevails in
international affairs in general and in relations among
-certain Central American countries in particular. The
ethic of international
relations should be based essentially on thoughtfulness and moderation. I find that this
ethic can be found in the Mexican proposal of last year,
to which reference has recently been made, to the effect
that the way to find a solution is through direct dialogue
and regional co-operation, to which the aid of friendly
countries and the moral weight of the Security Council,
politically and institutionally,
could give its sanction.

153. Reference has been made to Nicaraguan myths
and paranoia, i regard those things simply as conditioned reflexes on the part of the disinherited of the earth
who aspire to independence and a bit of material comfort
and whose dreams tend to disturb the smugness of the
wealthy and powerful. This dream, which in technical
jargon is now termed the new international economic
order or the North-South
dialogue, is made up of
extremely simple components. It is really a simple
bucolic dream of happy women, smiling children and
serene old people in the middle of poppy fields which as
yet have not been tarnished by the blood of guerrillas.
This innocent dream, unfortunately, is frequently spoken
of as something that disturbs the multinational
equations. Thus use is made of the argument of John Stuart
Mill: a people which struggles for its liberty always triumphs and, therefore, does not need any help from outside. That is to forget that the ideas of John Stuart Mill
were highly esteemed in the nineteenth century; we are
living in the twentieth century, Modern techniques of
domination
and terror have partially discredited that
idea. A number of satellite countries would long have
freed themselves from certain totalitarian Governments
and their formidable repressive power. Nicaragua, which
signed a commitment to be non-aligned, does not wish to
become a satellite.

157. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
United States has asked to speak in exercise of his right
of reply, and I now call on him.
158. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
did not want to let the occasion pass without any reflection on the extraordinary statement that we heard this
morning from the representative of Libya [242Zst meeting], and it was, indeed, an extraordinary statement. I do
not refer to the calculated assault on rationality and civility. No, what I found most striking was the very sure
sense in which the representative of Libya seemed to
grasp the very essence of the strange new “rights” to’
which Mrs. Kirkpatrick
made reference yesterday: the
alleged right to oppress one’s own people, the alleged
right to commit aggression against one’s neighbours.
And as I thought of the Libyan representative’s grasp of
those two principles, a saying popular in my country
occurred to me. As we say frequently in such situations
in the United States, “Well, it takes one to know one”.
159. Mr. ORTEZ COLINDRES
(Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): As the views of members of the
Council emerge and as we hear the statements of
members of the international
community about the
importance
of beginning what has been termed a
regional dialogue to put an end to tension in Central
America, I should like to express clearly and briefly my
country’s position.

154. In other words, the ideas before us are complex.
The delegation of Mauritius nevertheless believes that the
dignity and sense of restraint with which Nicaragua laid
this problem before the Council, and the public assurances which have been given to it by both Honduras and
the United States, are a good sign.
155. Other neighbouring States have also offei-ed their
good offices. There is therefore a willingness to undertake dialogue and co-operation to which the Council
shouId give further impetus. A year ago now, Sir
Anthony Parsons, your predecessor, Mr. President, in
the Council, under similar circumstances made the same
finding [234Zsf meeting]. I should like to quote what he
said:

160. We stated with seriousness that our country will
not serve as a base for an invasion of a fraternal country.
Despite words seeming to indicate that we could be
involved in a responsibility of that nature, I should like it
to be put out of feverish minds that a small country such
as ours, which has a Government that exercises democracy, might not fulfil its pledges.

“there is common ground amongst them, particularly
amongst those most closely involved in the problems
of the Central American region. There seems to be a
clear wish for peaceful solutions. There appears to be
a common desire for, io quote a number of speakers,
negotiation and co-operation rather than confrontation.” *

*Quoted

161. Instead of dwelling on the divergent views that we
have been hearing in some statements, we should like to
formalize what might constitute points of agreement. We
have affirmed clearly that we are prepared to undertake a
dialogue at the regional level in order to discuss the bilateral problems that we have with Nicaragua and the
regional problems that we have within the framework of
Central America. Furthermore we have stated precisely
that we take a favourable view of all the regional initiatives, even initiatives taken &y some count&s outside the

in English by the speaker.

16

Q&on, to put an end to the tension in Central America
and that we should begin in good faith to build peace.
162. We have no doubt regarding the principle established in the Charter that every people can establish the
Government
of its choice. We do not prejudge the
Government
that Nicaragua will choose. We want
people to choose. If the Nicaraguan people wish to be
communist, let them be communist. If they want to live
in socialism, let the people so choose. If they wish to be
radical, it is the business of the Nicaraguan people. We
are prepared to respect what constitutes ideological pluralism, It is not up to us to judge the type of government
chosen by any country in the world, much less a brother
country, But we believe that this forum can sincerely help
us to seek a solution. It seems to me that, with the wise
guidance of the President, we might gather together not
the differences that have been raised, but the points of
agreement, Why not proceed to a dialogue for peace? We
have not set any conditions for a dialogue for peace; we
have not wished to mention the names of countries,
although we have great esteem for the proposals made by
the Presidents of Mexico and Venezuela and for the Contadora Island proposal,’ which includes Colombia and
Panama. Precisely the fact of our having previously
shown interest in the fact that some peripheral countries,
like the five countries of the region, feel affected by this
problem of context, could thus give rise to unnecessary
difficulties, for it could develop that some of the countries may have objections as to the venue of the meeting,
as to what countries should participate, in what capacity,
if they are going to be observers, whether they can take
the initiative as negotiators, as mediators or as members
of a good-offices group.
163. Lastly, for all those who are in this forum and who
guide policy for the maintenance of world peace, it
would be very easy-if they should so wish, in good
faith-to find in the introduction to any text on political
law and in the first Articles of the Charter of the United
Nations the fundamental bases for proceeding to the
peaceful search for solutions that would guarantee
regional stability, non-intervention in the affairs of countries, putting a halt to violence, the prohibition of arms

trafficking
and the withdrawal of foreign advisers.
Undoubtedly,
those constitute points of agreement or
disagreement, sowing turbulence in the region.
164. Upon specific instructions from my Government,
I propose to the Council that we move from words to
deeds. We are prepared, if desired, after the necessary
consultations take place, to search for a place for us to
meet with the sponsorship of all the democratic countries
of the continent, if they wish. We are prepared to do that,
We could accept any forum,
165. We have international
commitments,
and the
Charter of the United Nations itself, in Chapter VIII,
clearly establishes that regional, subregional and continental organizations have the duty to help maintain and
strengthen this international system. That is why we have
kept the OAS informed of all our efforts and of all our
differences, We do not want to forsake it, because we
respect the international
commitments
we have undertaken. If we did not believe in the OAS, we would have to
denounce it legally, each people exercising its sovereign
right to participate
or not in any international
organisation.
166. In sum, I should be grateful if it could be specifically recorded that my Government intends to enter into
negotiations. I have specific instructions to tell the Council that no movement of my country’s troops will be
across the border, but, rather, will serve solely and exclusively as an act of prevention in the face of present circumstances. Therefore, no mobilisation
on our part has
aggressive purposes; we are a country in terrible upheavah
we have to respond to our own people and to history.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

NOTES

’ See O//lciaal Recorak of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings, vol. I, 33rd meeting.
2See A/38/68,

17

annex,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstoreor write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCUR.ER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences ddpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

l-IOJIYYHTb

I13AAHMR

OPl-‘AHkf3A~Wki

MsnaHwI
Opranusauue O6WWHeHHblX
Haul
II areHTeTBaX
BO Bcex paBoHax Mripa. HaaonnTe

OB’bEJ&4HEHHbIX
MO~HO

HAqMfi

Kyl’IMTb

B KHWKHbIX
Mara3wax
cnpamoi 06 siananmtx B BauIeM KHUXHOM

Mara3nne mm mimnre no anpecy: Opranwsanurt OB.beflmiennbrx Haunlt, Cercnua no
nponawe uanatiai3, Hbto-tiopx unu Xeeena,
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONXS

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casasdistribuidoras en
todaspartesdel mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

OcMoo

,502tJ5--July19w-2ba
