A /73/PV.34

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

34

th plenary meeting
Friday, 9 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ke (Cambodia),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 92
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/315)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.19)
The Acting President: Before proceeding, I wish
to advise the Assembly that the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency has informed the
President of the General Assembly that he regrets that
he is unable to attend today’s meeting to introduce the
report of the Agency for the year 2017 and deliver a
statement on the developments that have taken place
since its publication. His prepared statement has been
circulated in a letter from the President of the General
Assembly and will be issued as an official document
(see A/73/315/Add.1).
I now give the floor to the representative of Jordan
to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.19.
Mr. Ababneh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin my statement by expressing our deep
gratitude to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his briefing contained in the statement that has been
circulated regarding the main activities of the IAEA
(see A/73/315/Add.1) and for introducing the Agency’s
report for 2017 (see A/73/315).

This annual debate is a very important opportunity
for the General Assembly to assess the tasks and
principal activities of the IAEA and stress the great
importance that the entire international community
attaches to the Agency’s work and its “Atoms for Peace
and Development” mandate. That is clearly highlighted
by the report of the IAEA with regard to implementing
the safeguards system; facilitating peaceful uses
of nuclear technology; ensuring the safe use of that
technology; technical cooperation and capacitybuilding; and nuclear security and safety. The Agency
has managed to strike a successful balance between
all of those activities, thereby contributing not only to
consolidating international peace and security but also
to achieving several Sustainable Development Goals,
especially in developing countries.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, in its capacity
as the President of the IAEA Board of Governors for this
year, is pleased to introduce to the General Assembly
draft resolution A/73/L.19, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”, whose content
enjoyed consensus from the Agency’s member States
following consultations held in Vienna on 16 October.
It was also supported here in New York in the meeting
held on 25 October, to which all States Members of the
United Nations were invited.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
emanates from a basic requirement set out in the IAEA
Statute, as well as a cooperation agreement signed by
the United Nations and the IAEA in 1957. In conformity
with the traditional practice, the text of the draft
resolution takes note of the resolutions adopted and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-36857 (E)

*1836857*

A/73/PV.34

decisions taken by the Agency’s General Conference
during its sixty-second regular session and reiterates
the strong support of the Member States to the IAEA
and its continued activities.
We hope that the General Assembly will adopt
the draft resolution by consensus this year, thereby
reflecting the importance of the Agency and its role
as an international instrument and convergence
focal point.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Kritikos (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country and member of the European Economic Area
Liechtenstein; as well as the Republic of Moldova,
align themselves with this statement.
We are pleased to support the draft resolution
(A/73/L.19) on the report (see A/73/315) of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) — a
report that once again reaffirms the indispensable role
of the Agency with regard to the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons and in facilitating the development
and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful
uses, as well as in technology transfer and nuclear
verification, safety and security. We also note with
satisfaction the amount of strong support that has been
expressed for the Agency’s work.
The European Union is fully committed to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. We reiterate
our firm support for the full, complete and effective
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as the cornerstone of the
international non-proliferation regime, the essential
foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, in
accordance with article VI of the NPT, and which we
regard as vital to the further development of nuclear
energy applications for peaceful purposes. The European
Union reaffirms its full support for the establishment
of a zone in the Middle East free of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems and reiterates its
readiness to assist in the process leading to that goal.
2/26

09/11/2018

The IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental
component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and plays an indispensable role in the implementation
of the NPT. We underline the primary responsibility
of the Security Council in cases of non-compliance.
The European Union further recognizes the serious
proliferation challenges that continue to be a threat to
international security and the need to find peaceful and
diplomatic solutions to them.
The European Union is determined to work with
the international community to preserve the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), an agreement
unanimously endorsed by the Security Council in
resolution 2231 (2015). The EU deeply regrets the
withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA and
stresses that as long as Iran continues to implement
its nuclear-related commitments, as confirmed by the
IAEA, the EU will remain committed to the continued
full and effective implementation of the nuclear deal.
We call on all parties to implement all parts of the
JCPOA fully and effectively. While welcoming the
ongoing implementation, the EU reiterates the need for
Iran to continue to abide strictly by all its nuclear-related
commitments and to cooperate fully and in a timely
manner with the IAEA, including by implementing the
comprehensive safeguards agreement and its additional
protocol, as well as by providing all requested access.
In that regard, Iran’s early ratification of the additional
protocol is essential. The European Union fully
supports the IAEA’s long-term mission of verifying
and monitoring Iran’s nuclear-related commitments and
recalls the importance of ensuring the necessary means
for the Agency to carry out its role.
The recent inter-Korean high-level talks, the
Panmunjom Declaration on Peace, Prosperity and
Reunification of the Korean Peninsula and the joint
statement issued following the summit in Singapore
between the United States and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are positive steps that can contribute
to easing tensions on the Korean peninsula. While we
support those diplomatic efforts, the European Union
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
engage seriously in the follow-on negotiations and to
take concrete steps to embark on a credible path towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
and to maintain its declared suspension of testing
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. Until the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea takes those
concrete steps towards denuclearization, we will
18-36857

09/11/2018

continue to strictly enforce the existing sanctions,
and we call on all States to do the same. We urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, to return to
the NPT and the IAEA safeguards at an early date and
to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty without delay. The European Union continues
to attach the highest importance to maintaining an
essential role for the IAEA in verifying the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme and
welcomes and supports the Secretariat’s efforts to
enhance its readiness to do so.
The European Union urges Syria to cooperate
promptly and transparently with the Agency in order to
resolve all outstanding issues, including by concluding
and implementing an additional protocol as soon
as possible.
The European Union continues to call for the
universalization of the comprehensive safeguards
agreement, together with the additional protocol,
without delay. The EU strongly supports the State-level
concept, as well as the further development and
application of enhanced capabilities for analytical
services, information analysis and technologies.
Furthermore, the European Union actively supports
the Agency’s safeguards system through the European
Commission Safeguards Support Programme, the
Instrument for Nuclear Safety Cooperation and Member
State Support Programmes.
The European Union and its member States attach
the utmost importance to the worldwide implementation
and continuing improvement of nuclear safety. For
that reason, a European Union directive has set up a
European system to ensure peer reviews on specific
safety issues at least every six years. The first such peer
review, dedicated to the issue of the ageing management
of nuclear power plants and research reactors, has been
recently completed. The European Union has also
provided its expertise through so-called stress tests
in a number of neighbouring countries, with a view
to building a more robust, sustainable and transparent
nuclear-safety framework worldwide.
The European Union stresses the need to continue
to strengthen nuclear security worldwide in order to
prevent nuclear terrorism and the misuse of nuclear
and radioactive material. To that end, we highlight
the importance of States becoming party to and fully
implementing the relevant treaties, the Amendment

A/73/PV.34

to the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
and we underline the importance of Security Council
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016). In the context
of the EU strategy against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, we actively support international
initiatives that contribute to strengthening nuclear
security. For the period from 2014 to 2020, the
European Union has dedicated more than €100 million
to the regional Chemical, Biological, Radiological and
Nuclear Centres of Excellence Initiative. The European
Union will actively support the preparation of the
international conference on nuclear security to be held
in February 2020.
The European Union strongly supports the central
role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
improving the global nuclear security framework by
strengthening international cooperation, offering
advisory services and providing direct assistance to
member States. We call on IAEA member States to
ensure the availability of sufficient resources for those
services. Together with its member States, the EU is
among the biggest donors to the IAEA Nuclear Security
Fund. The European Union funding to the IAEA has
helped the Agency to assist countries in upgrading and
ensuring the physical protection of selected facilities and
in improving their national regulatory infrastructure.
The European Union remains firmly committed to
the benefits of multilateral approaches to the nuclear
fuel cycle and to ensuring that high standards of safety,
security and safeguards are implemented to protect our
collective non-proliferation interests. The European
Union has supported the IAEA low-enriched uranium
bank project with approximately €25 million and looks
forward to its full establishment in 2019.
Finally, the European Union and its member States
continue to be strong supporters of the IAEA’s Technical
Cooperation Programme. The EU is the second-largest
contributor to the Programme. We fully appreciate the
Agency’s role in promoting the responsible development
of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology, and
we take positive note of the fact that the IAEA has
continued to actively engage in the global dialogue
on the Sustainable Development Goals. The European
Union supports the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
technology, including through technical expertise and
with an average contribution of €15 million annually.
The European Union supports the peaceful uses of

18-368573/26

A/73/PV.34

nuclear energy and technology, including through
technical expertise and with an average contribution of
€15 million per year.
Ms. Fedorovich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Belarus,
I would like to thank Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for his preparation of the report of the Agency
for 2017 (see A/73/315).
A focus on sustainable development is an important
distinguishing feature of international cooperation
today. As a founder nation of the IAEA, Belarus
is pleased that the Agency is making a significant
contribution to achieving the Goals outlined in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We would like to
emphasize the IAEA’s role in facilitating the peaceful
uses of nuclear and radiological technologies. Their
development and widespread use helps to solve problems
in addressing global challenges from energy and food
security to cancer treatment and the fight against
climate change. Belarus wholeheartedly supports the
IAEA’s safeguards system, which is a fundamental part
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and plays an
irreplaceable role in the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
In our view it is particularly important to ensure that
the process of improving the safeguards mechanism
continues to be clear, objective and based on the rights
and obligations of the parties in accordance with their
safeguard agreements.
The IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme
is the mechanism through which the provisions of
article IV of the NPT are effectively implemented and
one of the most important aspects of the Agency’s
implementation of the role assigned to it with regard
to implementing the Treaty. For Belarus, the Technical
Cooperation Programme has become a concrete source
of support in solving problems of socioeconomic
development. With its help, we have been successfully
dealing with issues of sustainable development in the
areas affected by the Chernobyl disaster for almost
three decades. The IAEA’s technical cooperation has
also made a significant contribution to the achievement
of our national nuclear-medicine programmes.
Belarus shares the view that for the foreseeable
future nuclear energy will keep its position and
potential for development. We welcome the IAEA’s
steps aimed at assisting member States in making
4/26

09/11/2018

considered decisions regarding the establishment and
development of national nuclear-energy programmes.
The cooperation between Belarus and the IAEA
in this area has evolved since the early days of the
implementation of our national programme. We have
made active use of the entire range of the Agency’s
instruments, from technical cooperation projects to
expert missions and peer reviews. The nuclear accidents
at Chernobyl and Fukushima have emphasized that
issues related to ensuring nuclear safety are top
priorities, and we welcome the Agency’s increasingly
significant contribution to creating reliable nuclearsafety infrastructure all over the world. We commend
the IAEA’s work on strengthening and universalizing
the relevant conventions and in developing and
improving standards and technical documents. The
secretariat’s work in providing advisory services and
conducting independent peer reviews in interested
States is extremely important.
Belarus supports draft resolution A/73/L.19, on
the report of the IAEA, and has sponsored the draft
text in a sign of its support for the Agency’s activities
in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation thanks Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his presentation of the
report (see A/73/315) on the Agency’s work. Our
country was present at the Agency’s creation. We have
always supported it, and we value its activities during
the reporting period. We hope that the IAEA will
continue to increase its efforts in the interests of the
development of atomic energy and technologies all over
the world and the expansion of international cooperation
in those areas, while improving and strengthening the
nuclear-weapon non-proliferation regime.
The uniqueness of the IAEA verification
mechanism enables it to be highly effective in
monitoring States’ fulfilment of their non-proliferation
commitments. One of the central achievements in
that regard is the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), on the Iranian nuclear programme. To date,
Iran remains the country that has been most subject to
verification by the IAEA. The Agency has established
and maintained an exceedingly complex verification
mechanism and is dealing effectively with the tasks
involved, enabling it to monitor Tehran’s fulfilment
of its obligations under the JCPOA and of its existing
18-36857

09/11/2018

safeguards. The Director General’s reports regularly
confirm that Tehran is meeting its obligations under
the JCPOA in addition to its implementation of the
Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement. We
reaffirm our firm commitment to the JCPOA, which
represents a carefully calibrated balance of the interests
of the parties and should be strictly implemented. We
provide various forms of support to the Agency with
regard to Iran, including organizing targeted training
courses for IAEA inspectors. We emphasize that we are
deeply concerned about the irresponsible actions of the
United States regarding the JCPOA, which are aimed at
undermining this multilateral international agreement
supported by the Security Council.
We welcome the emerging positive momentum
with regard to resolving the Korean peninsula’s
nuclear problem. In the context of the IAEA, we
should point out that the Agency’s mandate does
not permit its resources to be used in verifying the
dismantling of nuclear weapons or military nuclear
infrastructure. However, we welcome the work of the
IAEA secretariat in maintaining its readiness for a
resumption of the application of safeguards throughout
the Korean peninsula.
The Russian Federation is in favour of improving
the Agency’s monitoring capabilities, including in
future by converting the additional protocols to IAEA
safeguards agreements into a universally recognized
standard for verifying non-proliferation obligations.
Whatever reforms of the Agency’s safeguards system
are undertaken, the mechanism for their application
should continue to be objective, depoliticized,
technically based, comprehensible to member States
and based on the rights and obligations of the parties
in accordance with their safeguards agreements. An
unbiased, objective approach to nuclear verification
is a key element in ensuring the stability of the IAEA
comprehensive safeguards system and of the nuclearweapon non-proliferation regime in general.
Russia actively participates in the Agency’s
activities as a financial donor, including through
voluntary contributions to the IAEA’s International
Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel
Cycles, the Technical Cooperation Fund and the
Nuclear Security Fund, as well as in support of the
implementation of Agency projects in the area of
nuclear infrastructure development. At the moment our
annual extra-budgetary contributions in support of the

A/73/PV.34

IAEA are comparable to our payments to the Agency’s
regular budget.
We wholeheartedly support the IAEA’s efforts in
the field of technical cooperation and the provision of
related assistance to developing countries, and, for our
part, we actively promote the development of atomic
energy in other countries. In 2017 and 2018 we signed
agreements on peaceful nuclear cooperation with
Bangladesh, Zambia, Kazakhstan, Cambodia, China,
Paraguay, the Sudan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. In
that regard, I would like to point out that we in Russia
have a functioning international centre for uranium
enrichment, which we invite all States developing
atomic energy and abiding by their non-proliferation
commitments to participate in. Russia is also building a
multipurpose fast research reactor at our State Research
Institute for Nuclear Reactors. We invite all interested
countries to participate in our international research
centre at the Institute.
The Russian Federation supports the work of the
Agency in the area of physical nuclear security. We
firmly believe that the responsibility for ensuring such
security on individual States’ territories belongs to the
States themselves, which should use their discretion in
determining the optimal parameters for their national
systems and measures. We stress the IAEA’s central
role in international cooperation on nuclear security
and its active participation in organizing contacts
and sharing experiences between interested States.
We deem it important to ensure the broadest possible
participation by States in the international agreements
on nuclear security, the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Russia has signed
and ratified those international agreements, and we
call on States that have not yet done so to accelerate
their internal procedures for acceding to those major
international instruments.
We emphasize the need for ensuring a cautious
approach to the IAEA on the part of its member States.
It is important to refrain from artificial involvement
in the agenda of the Agency’s governing bodies or
in its activities in general beyond the scope of its
Statute, including nuclear-disarmament issues. Given
the importance of the Agency’s work in the interests
of expanding the peaceful use of atomic power and
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime, the
Russian delegation supports draft resolution A/73/L.19,

18-368575/26

A/73/PV.34

entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency”, and is one of its sponsors.
Mr. Horne (Australia): Australia commends
Director General Amano for his report (see A/73/315)
on the activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and is pleased to continue its
co-sponsorship of draft resolution A/73/L.19.
The report outlines what has been another productive
year for the IAEA. Australia greatly values the Agency’s
work across nuclear science and technology, safety,
security, safeguards and technical cooperation. Last
year we celebrated the Agency’s sixtieth anniversary.
As we noted then, these themes are just as relevant and
important today as they were at the very beginning.
Going forward, Australia welcomes the Director
General’s commitment to championing gender equality
in particular. We will continue to strongly support and
advocate for efforts to increase the representation of
women in technical areas and in the Agency’s senior
management, particularly through the Group of Friends
for Women in Nuclear, now established in Vienna.
Australia remains a strong supporter of the
transfer of knowledge and expertise through the IAEA
Technical Cooperation Programme and is pleased
to be providing extra-budgetary contributions to the
Peaceful Uses Initiative. We are proud to be providing
those funds for the modernization of the nuclearapplication laboratories at Seibersdorf, Austria, and for
the renewal project.
Australia is firmly committed to nuclear safety
and security and this week is undergoing an Integrated
Regulatory Review Service mission, demonstrating our
sustained commitment to the international peer review
system and to continuing improvement in regulating
nuclear and radiation safety. That also follows the
successful completion of a follow-up mission of the
International Physical Protection Advisory Service held
in Australia in November 2017. The IAEA continues to
play a key coordinating role in assisting Member States
in enhancing nuclear security. The global importance
of nuclear security and of the IAEA’s role was
re-emphasized at the IAEA’s successful International
Conference on Nuclear Security in December 2016,
which attracted more than 2,100 participants from
139 member States. We look forward to the next
Conference, to be held in 2020. We also commend the
IAEA’s continued outreach on the amended Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and
6/26

09/11/2018

Nuclear Facilities and call on States to make suitable
preparations for the Review Conference of the amended
Convention in 2021.
The Australian Government remains committed
to the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of North Korea. We welcome the
ongoing dialogue between North Korea and both the
Republic of Korea and the United States. We note North
Korea’s commitment to halting nuclear testing and
allowing international inspections of the Punggye-ri
nuclear test site and the Tongchang-ri missile site.
While we see those commitments as positive, we
remain committed to maintaining pressure on North
Korea until it takes concrete steps towards complying
with the relevant Security Council resolutions on its
nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes.
Australia thanks Jordan for introducing the draft
resolution. We look forward to contributing to the
IAEA’s continued successes in the years to come.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Let me begin
by welcoming Mr. Yukiya Amano’s reappointment
as Director General at the helm of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), attesting to the trust
that member States place in his leadership.
As the annual report (see A/73/315) presented
to us today points out, it is important to recall the
Agency’s goal, as stated in article II of its Statute, to
enlarge, “the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity throughout the world”, and
call attention to its motto — “Atoms for Peace and
Development” — which represents the essential nature
of its mission in a few words.
In a turbulent world, where our States are often
dealing with a number of simultaneous and cumulative
challenges, the role of the Agency remains central. On
the one hand, it must confront security challenges such
as nuclear proliferation and ensure that State guarantees
are respected, while on the other, its programmes make
a significant contribution to development. Access to
safe, affordable and low-greenhouse-gas-emission
energy, the use of nuclear techniques in agriculture,
soil erosion and especially nuclear applications in
health care contribute directly to the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals 7, 2 and 3, respectively.
So while the general public may not always be aware
of all of the applications of nuclear technology and the
positive contribution that peaceful uses of the atom
make to daily life, the Agency plays a role as a major
18-36857

09/11/2018

guarantor of international security and an important
factor in sustainable development.
The Scientific Forum held at IAEA headquarters
in September, this year devoted to the theme “Nuclear
technology for climate: mitigation, monitoring and
adaptation”, was particularly timely given that climate
change affects all of us without exception, and certain
countries with violent intensity. The IAEA’s work can
help us reduce greenhouse-gas emissions and assess
the effects of climate change through the application
of nuclear techniques for scientific research and
climate preservation. The Assembly can rest assured
that Monaco will continue to support the Agency,
including through its Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy, whose goal is improving the effectiveness of
radiological medicine in the fight against cancer, and
which has enjoyed the support of our Government
for a decade. We also share with the Agency a deep
commitment to science and to cooperation, which
should help us to respond to States’ aspirations to
contribute to sustainable development and improve
their citizens’ quality of life.
In the area of marine scientific research, for
example, the Agency has developed new analytical
methods and conducted environmental studies aimed at
improving our understanding of the movements of toxic
contaminants — mercury, lead and so forth — and
their effects on coastal and marine ecosystems. The
cooperation between Monaco and the Agency dates
back to 1961, when the IAEA International Laboratory
of Marine Radioactivity, the first of its kind, was
established within the Musée océanographique
de Monaco. The laboratories set up in Monaco
were initially specifically dedicated to the marine
environment and carried out scientific research both
in the laboratory and on the world’s oceans and seas
with a view to assessing the impact of human activities
on marine species and gathering data. Monaco has
hosted the IAEA Environment Laboratories at their
current location, employing more than 40 people, for
the past 20 years. That anniversary was celebrated in
the Principality last month, with the Deputy Director
General of the IAEA and Head of the Department of
Nuclear Sciences and Applications present.
In 2012, the Agency also established the Ocean
Acidification International Coordination Centre within
the Environment Laboratories on the same premises.
As a direct consequence of the increase of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, ocean acidification has a

A/73/PV.34

significant and devastating impact on the many marine
species that form a shell or a calcareous skeleton, such
as crustaceans and corals.
The IAEA, its International Coordination Centre
and the Scientific Centre of Monaco organize regular
international workshops in the Principality on the
socioeconomic impacts of ocean acidification. After
assessing the situation, studying the implications for
fisheries and aquaculture and looking at the impacts
on coastal populations, the fourth such workshop, held
in October 2017, focused on the effects on coral reefs.
In conclusion, this year Monaco once again
expresses its full confidence in the International
Atomic Energy Agency and is pleased to continue to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/73/L.19.
Ms. Chuchotthavorn (Thailand): Thailand wishes
to express its sincere appreciation to Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his statement (see A/73/315/Add.1)
presenting the Agency’s report for 2017 (see A/73/315).
We also thank Jordan, in its capacity as Chair of the
Board of Governors, for facilitating draft resolution
A/73/L.19.
The IAEA has always played a crucial role
in promoting the peaceful applications of nuclear
technology. Its work to strengthen nuclear safety,
security and safeguards has contributed greatly to
global security and development. Against the current
international security background and challenges,
the IAEA continues to play an essential role in
upholding the principles of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. Thailand fully supports and
commends the Agency’s commitment to monitoring
and verification under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, as well as its readiness to verify the nuclear
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
For our part, we wish to highlight that during
2018, Thailand ratified and acceded to a number
of treaties under the auspices of the IAEA. They
include the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and its Amendment, the Convention
on Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention on the
Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management. That is clear testament
to our determination to fulfil international obligations
and commitments.

18-368577/26

A/73/PV.34

Thailand values the close relationship with the
Agency and has benefited greatly from the Agency
through technical cooperation and assistance
programmes. This year, the IAEA designated the
Thailand Institute of Nuclear Technology as an IAEA
Collaborating Centre on water resources assessment and
management. We have also hosted 19 IAEA capacitybuilding activities, which covered various areas such
as sterile insect technique, cancer control, nuclear
safety and radiation technology. Such activities and
engagement between the Agency and member States
reflect its positive contributions to the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals by all States. Thailand
looks forward to continuing that close relationship
with the Agency and stands ready to explore further
potential areas of collaboration. As a member of the
Board of Governors for the period from 2018 to 2020,
we are determined to work closely and constructively
with all parties in advancing the work of the Agency.
In conclusion, Thailand reaffirms its continued
support for the draft resolution, and we are pleased to
co-sponsor it.
Mr. Benshaban (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for the report of the IAEA for 2017 (see
A/73/315), as well as for his statement presenting the
report, which contains complementary information on
the main developments in the activities of the Agency
(see A/73/315/Add.1). My delegation attentively
took note of the report, which reflects the important
role played by the IAEA in enhancing international
cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear energy and
in continuing to provide technical assistance and the
necessary support to member States based on their
requests to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
My delegation encourages the IAEA to continue
to carry out its activities in a balanced manner that
meets the needs of member States in the area of
nuclear technology to achieve effective socioeconomic
development. We also commend the efforts of the
Agency to support member States in implementing
their development projects in line with the Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme. We call on all
Member States to continue to support the Programme
and the Agency’s other monitoring and verification
programmes. Strengthening the Agency’s safeguards
regime should not adversely affect technical cooperation
and assistance.
8/26

09/11/2018

We are concerned about the fact that some nuclearweapon States have adopted a policy of restricting the
transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes
in clear violation of article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). That
obstructs technical cooperation programmes and
undermines the basis of the NPT, particularly in terms
of denuclearization, nuclear non-proliferation and the
inalienable right of member States to the peaceful use
of nuclear energy.
At the national level, we highly commend the
valuable cooperation carried out with my country
in recent years, especially in the areas of human
health, underground water resources management and
insect pest control, which are some of the priorities
of our national programme to meet the country’s
socioeconomic needs and development requirements.
My country is committed to the Agency’s orientation
and will therefore submit fewer but more substantive
projects within the specific priorities of the national
programme. In that regard, we submitted seven
proposals pertaining to technical assistance projects
for the period from 2020 to 2021, six of which
were accepted.
In conclusion, we express our readiness to continue
to cooperate with the IAEA and Member States to ensure
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We look forward to
strengthening the Agency’s role in the verification of
nuclear denuclearization, given its technical capability,
integrity and indisputable professional competence,
as well as its legitimate mandate. The adoption of
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
2017 constituted a clear demonstration of the robust
commitment by the vast majority of the international
community to denuclearization. We hope that the IAEA
and Member States will meet such aspirations.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We welcome the
remarks made by the representative of Jordan at the
outset of today’s proceedings, which ably underscore
the importance of the General Assembly and its role
in the world today. I would also like to convey my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his statement (see
A/73/351/Add.1) presenting the IAEA’s report for 2017
(see A/73/315) and for providing valuable updates on
the Agency’s activities in 2018.
18-36857

09/11/2018

A/73/PV.34

We are pleased that the IAEA Board of Governors
continues to place greater emphasis on the development
role of the IAEA through its activities related to nuclear
science, technology and applications. Together with
other Member States, South Africa will continue to
advocate for a balanced approach to the implementation
of the IAEA mandate, in line with its motto, “Atoms for
Peace and Development”.

capacity as the Chair of the Board of Governors for
the term 2018-2019. The draft resolution, inter alia,
reaffirms the indispensable role played by the Agency
in encouraging and assisting the development and
practical application of atomic energy for peaceful
uses, in technology transfer to developing countries
and in nuclear safety, verification and security. In that
regard, we appreciate Jordan’s coordinating role.

South Africa fully supports the priorities and
work of the IAEA, including the progress achieved
by the Agency during in 2017. In that regard, South
Africa has always maintained that the Agency’s
nuclear applications in areas such as agriculture and
crop production, food security, human health, waterresource management, nuclear technology and animal
health contribute to the socioeconomic development of
developing countries — especially those in Africa — and
assist them immensely in their efforts to implement the
2030 Sustainable Development Goals.

Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Paraguay. We
appreciate the introduction of the report (see A/73/315)
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
reaffirm our confidence that the Agency will ensure
that atomic energy contributes to global peace, health
and prosperity, as prescribed by its Statute.

In that context, South Africa reiterates the support
voiced by many Member States for the IAEA to continue
assisting developing countries, particularly in Africa,
to enhance the benefits that could be derived from
the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology.
South Africa, for its part, has immensely benefitted
from IAEA scientific and technological support, not
least in the strengthening of the clinical management
of oncological, neurological and cardiovascular
diseases. The IAEA also supported South Africa in
the development of the sterile insect technique to help
control malaria.
Furthermore, South Africa wishes to underscore the
central role played by the Agency in implementing its
safeguards verification system, which plays an essential
role in verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear energy
programmes. As the only country to have voluntarily
dismantled its nuclear weapons programme, carried
out with the assistance and guidance of the IAEA,
South Africa can attest to the indispensable role of the
Agency’s safeguards system.
In addition to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
South Africa believes that nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing
processes. Therefore, progress on all the pillars of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
essential to realizing the IAEA’s object and purpose.
In conclusion, my delegation has co-sponsored
draft resolution A/73/L.19, submitted by Jordan in its

The delegation of Paraguay stresses the importance
of the nuclear security and verification activities of
the IAEA, whose assistance must not be perverted
to contribute to military ends or to undermine
international peace and security. The Republic of
Paraguay reiterates its commitment to the provisions
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
and the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
and welcomes the progress made and initiatives
undertaken by the IAEA in the fields of disarmament
and non-proliferation, particularly in the Middle East
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Our
delegation calls on all Member States to support and
facilitate the Agency’s verification and monitoring
system for the application of safeguards.
Paraguay has worked intensively to strengthen its
coordination with the IAEA to regulate and control the
peaceful and beneficial use of ionizing radiation sources
and nuclear energy. Over the past year, Paraguay has
incorporated into its national legal system the Small
Quantities Protocols Amendments to the Agreement
between the Republic of Paraguay and the IAEA for
the Application of Safeguards in connection with the
1978 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America and the Treaty, which stipulates the
need to notify the IAEA, in a timely manner, about
the possession of nuclear materials by Paraguay
and the planning of nuclear facilities in Paraguayan
jurisdiction. Paraguay has also incorporated into its
national legal system the 1997 Joint Convention on the
Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety
of Radioactive Waste Management, which regulates

18-368579/26

A/73/PV.34

aspects of the safety of spent fuel and radioactive
waste management.
We emphasize that the development of programmes
for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and their
implementation should be carried out with transparency,
under the guidance and supervision of the IAEA, taking
every possible precaution and limiting the potential
harm that the production of nuclear energy could cause
to the environment and to human health. States that
carry out such programmes on their territories should
do so on the basis of broad cross-border responsibility,
adhering to best practices in international cooperation,
risk prevention and due diligence, and responding
appropriately to possible transboundary damages.
Finally, the delegation of Paraguay underlines
the role of technical assistance and international
cooperation for developing countries such as the
Republic of Paraguay, especially in developing and
strengthening national capacities for the peaceful use
of atomic energy in the framework of efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. It therefore calls
for enhancing the multilateral debate on the peaceful
use of atomic energy and on disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation in all its aspects, within the framework
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and respect for international law.
Mr. Sun Lei (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for his presentation (see A/73/315/Add.1) of the
Agency’s report (see A/73/315).
Over the past year, the Agency has effectively
implemented the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change in accordance with its obligation under the
Agency’s statute to make progress in promoting the
development of nuclear energy and nuclear technology
by Member States, improving global nuclear security
and safety, and safeguarding nuclear non-proliferation.
China commends those efforts.
With their growing momentum and wider use,
nuclear energy and nuclear technology are playing an
increasingly important role in ensuring energy security,
helping adaptation to climate change and achieving
sustainable development. Meanwhile, the international
nuclear security and nuclear non-proliferation situation
remains grim. The risk of nuclear terrorism cannot be
ignored, and global governance in the nuclear field
10/26

09/11/2018

remains an uphill battle. China hopes that the Agency
will steadfastly adhere to the purpose of atoms for peace
and development and focus on the following tasks.
First, it must promote the development of nuclear
energy and the application of nuclear technology. The
Agency should continue to increase its contribution to
promoting international exchanges and cooperation in
nuclear energy and technology, and prioritize technical
cooperation as a channel of support and assistance to
nuclear-energy development and nuclear-technology
applications in developing countries, so that all
countries can benefit from nuclear energy.
Secondly, the IAEA must improve the safeguards
regime. The Agency should commit to safeguarding
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime,
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) as its cornerstone, and continue to
enhance the universality, effectiveness and efficiency
of the safeguards system, while ensuring objectivity
and fairness. It is hoped that the IAEA secretariat will
continue to engage closely with Member States on
national safeguards.
Thirdly, the Agency must strengthen global
nuclear-energy safety and nuclear security. China
supports the Agency’s ongoing efforts to promote the
implementation of the nuclear security plan, nuclearenergy safety standards and nuclear-security guidelines,
to assist Member States in capacity-building, to
promote international and regional cooperation and to
contribute to building a fair, cooperative and win-win
international nuclear-safety system.
Fourthly, the Agency must address regional hotspot
nuclear issues in an impartial and objective manner.
China appreciates the Agency’s efforts to facilitate
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, which is conducive to the maintenance of
the NPT, contributes to peace and security in the
Middle East and is hence in the common interest of the
international community.
China supports the fulfilment of the Agency’s
monitoring and verifications mandate. As such, it has
decided to contribute an additional ¥1.5 million to the
Agency. China welcomes the recent progress on the
Korean peninsula and supports and encourages all
relevant parties’ efforts to achieve denuclearization and
lasting peace and prosperity on the peninsula. China
also supports the Agency in the playing of its due role
18-36857

09/11/2018

in applying safeguards in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, pursuant to its mandate.
The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to the development of nuclear energy and consistently
upholds the rational, coordinated and balanced
nuclear safety concept put forward by President Xi
Jinping, adheres to the principle of safety first and
maintains a good nuclear-safety record. In January,
China promulgated and implemented a nuclear-safety
law that provides a further solid guarantee for the
safe and sustainable development of China’s nuclear
energy. China supports and actively participates in
relevant international cooperation endeavours in the
field of nuclear energy and stands ready to continue
to strengthen overall cooperation with the Agency
through the China Center of Excellence on Nuclear
Security and the China Customs Radiation Detection
Training Center. China is ready to carry out exchanges
and training programmes with all parties with a view
to making its due contribution to the promotion of the
healthy and safe development of nuclear energy in the
Asia-Pacific region and the world.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): The Government of Japan
highly commends Director General Amano’s work
in addressing and promoting the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and nuclear non-proliferation. Japan
will continue to fully support the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and invites all Member States
to do likewise.
Promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
is one of the three pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Japan supports
Atoms for Peace and Development, an initiative
undertaken by Director General Amano, as it contributes
to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Japan will serve as co-Chair of the IAEA Ministerial
Conference on Nuclear Science and Technology, which
will open on 28 November. I would like to request
the support of Member States for the success of the
upcoming Conference.
In order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, it is essential that we strengthen the existing
safeguards that ensure nuclear safety and security.
IAEA safeguards are an essential instrument for
nuclear non-proliferation. Japan therefore advocates
the universalization of the additional protocols to the
comprehensive safeguards agreement with a view
to strengthening those safeguards. Japan has been

A/73/PV.34

striving to help universalize the additional protocols
and make the safeguards more effective and efficient,
including by contributing to the success of the IAEA
Symposium on International Safeguards, which was
held in November, as well as the Asia Senior-Level
Talks on Non-Proliferation and the Asia-Pacific
Safeguards Network.
Over the past seven years, Japan has actively worked
to enhance nuclear safety, drawing on the lessons
learned from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant accident, including by fundamentally reforming
the country’s regulatory structures. Japan will continue
to share its experiences from the accident with the
international community and contribute to enhancing
nuclear safety worldwide, including by assisting in the
development of infrastructure and human resources in
countries introducing new nuclear power plants.
Nuclear security is another key area of Japan’s focus.
In view of the 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games, to
be held in Tokyo, Japan and the IAEA signed practical
arrangements on cooperation in nuclear-security
measures this year. On the basis of the arrangements,
Japan will step up collaborative efforts with the IAEA
to increase readiness to counter nuclear terrorism.
As for North Korea, at the Summit between the
United States and North Korea in June, Chairman
Kim Jong Un’s intention to completely denuclearize
the Korean peninsula was reaffirmed in the form
of a document. Japan supports this step towards the
comprehensive resolution of the outstanding issues of
concern regarding North Korea. Japan reaffirms its
strong commitment to working with the international
community to achieve the complete, verifiable and
irreversible dismantlement of all North Korea’s nuclear
weapons, existing nuclear programmes and related
facilities, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan calls on North Korea to take
concrete steps towards denuclearization.
The international community needs to come
together to support the process between the United
States and North Korea. We emphasize the critical
importance of all States fully implementing the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and we call on
them to continue working collectively to that end. The
IAEA Director General’s recent report notes that North
Korea is continuing its nuclear programme. Japan calls
for cooperation from the international community to

18-3685711/26

A/73/PV.34

assist the IAEA in playing a key role in addressing that
important issue.
Lastly, let me briefly say a word on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Japan supports
the JCPOA, which contributes to regional stability and
to strengthening the international non-proliferation
regime. Japan commends the IAEA’s essential role in
the monitoring and verification of the JCPOA.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, on behalf of
my Government, Japan’s firm commitment to further
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Ms. Chan (Singapore): Singapore thanks Director
General Yukiya Amano for the comprehensive annual
report (see A/73/315) of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We are pleased to once again
sponsor this year’s draft resolution (A/73/L.19) on the
Agency’s report.
Allow me to make several points on the work of
the IAEA.
First, Singapore has been an active member of the
IAEA since the Agency’s establishment in 1957 and has
benefited from the Agency’s expertise and knowledge.
We have been privileged to serve on the IAEA Board
of Governors for the past two years. During its tenure,
Singapore has actively contributed to discussions on
nuclear safety and security. We have advocated for the
IAEA to enhance its nuclear-safety guidance documents
and to ensure that they remain current with the latest
innovations in nuclear technology, in particular
those related to small and medium-sized or modular
reactors and transportable nuclear-power plants. We
have underscored the importance of strengthening
nuclear security and supported the IAEA’s efforts to
develop nuclear-security guidance on computer and
information security through the Nuclear Security
Guidance Committee.
Secondly, Singapore has consistently called for
the IAEA to provide sufficient technical assistance to
developing countries, in particular small States and
least developed countries, to help them achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. The IAEA Ministerial
Conference on Nuclear Science and Technology, which
will take place in Vienna later this month, will be an
opportunity for IAEA member States to discuss the
peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology and
their contribution to sustainable development.
12/26

09/11/2018

Singapore continues to make concrete contributions
through the enhanced Singapore-IAEA third-country
training programme, which was launched by Director
General Amano in Singapore in 2015. Over its past
two years as a member of the Board of Governors,
Singapore has conducted regional workshops on topics
such as emergency preparedness and response, nuclear
regulatory law and food safety.
Thirdly, we welcome the IAEA’s regional
partnerships, which play a crucial role in the
fulfilment of the IAEA motto, “Atoms for Peace and
Development”. In our region, Singapore is this year’s
chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Network of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy. In
June, the Network adopted a five-year work plan that
mapped out the details of critical work areas, such
as the establishment of a harmonized assessment
and decision-making protocol during a nuclear or
radiological emergency. The Network is also working
closely with the IAEA to finalize the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations-IAEA practical arrangements
to deepen our institutional links and cooperation with
the IAEA.
Fourthly, the IAEA has acquitted itself well over the
past year in dealing with challenging developments in
key dossiers such as the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the verification and monitoring activities
in Iran under Security Council resolution 2231 (2015).
Singapore welcomes the recent positive developments
on the Korean peninsula, including the inter-Korean
summits. We hosted the summit between President
Trump and Chairman Kim in June, which we hope will
be an important step on the journey towards lasting
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
We welcome the stated commitment of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to complete
denuclearization and its pledge to refrain from
conducting further nuclear and missile tests. We
urge all concerned parties to continue dialogue and
take concrete steps to implement the joint statement
of the Singapore summit. We call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to fulfil its international
obligations, including those under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and to return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Singapore takes
its obligations under the relevant Council resolutions
seriously and implements them fully and faithfully.
18-36857

09/11/2018

We also note that the IAEA has continued to
verify Iran’s implementation of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA plays an important role
in the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture.
We note that the remaining parties to the JCPOA have
reaffirmed their commitment to the full and effective
implementation of the agreement, as long as Iran
continues to fulfil its nuclear-related commitments. We
urge all remaining parties to continue their dialogue
through the Joint Commission and other avenues to
sustain this internationally negotiated agreement.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Singapore’s
firm commitment to the work of the IAEA. Although
Singapore has stepped down from the Board of
Governors, we will continue to play an active and
constructive role to support the IAEA’s work.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I will deliver the short
version of our statement. The complete statement will
be made available on the PaperSmart portal.
First, Indonesia would like to express its appreciation
to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Director General for the Agency’s 2017 report (see
A/73/315) and for his valuable statement (see A/73/315/
Add.1). We welcome IAEA’s efforts to provide necessary
support to Member States and encourage its secretariat
to pursue its programme of work in a balanced manner,
including to share the benefits of nuclear science and
technology for socioeconomic development.
We appreciate the Agency’s continued support
Indonesia in, among other things, the development of
Indonesia’s nuclear-energy programme; the revision
process of Act No. 10 of 1997, on nuclear energy;
the management programme of low-activity disused
sealed radioactive sources in the area of management
of radioactive waste and disused sealed radioactive
sources; the national technical cooperation bench-tobusiness pilot project on soybeans; and the nuclearsecurity measures during the 18th Asian Games and
the 2018 annual meeting of the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank Group, which was held in
Bali and attended by thousands of participants.
Furthermore, Indonesia provides ongoing support to
several IAEA programmes, such as the Indonesia-IAEA
practical arrangements, which helps the least developed
countries establish their safety infrastructure through
the Agency’s Peaceful Uses initiative. Indonesia also
hosts the annual IAEA Regional School on Nuclear

A/73/PV.34

Security for the Asia Pacific region and, in 2017 and
2018, hosted regional training courses for teachers
to introduce nuclear sciences in secondary schools.
In addition, through the regional capacity-building
initiative, my country supports IAEA programmes that
promote resource mobilization and the optimized usage
of regional resources for capacity-building.
Indonesia acknowledges and welcomes the many
important IAEA activities and programmes, including
the International Symposium on Plant Mutation
Breeding and Biotechnology, held in August; the
upcoming International Symposium on Understanding
the Double Burden of Malnutrition for Effective
Interventions, to be held in December; the Renovation
of the Nuclear Applications Laboratories project; as
well as the Site and External Events Design Review
Service and the follow-up Integrated Regulatory
Review Service.
At this juncture, we would also like to emphasize
that nuclear-security efforts must be pursued in a
comprehensive manner that goes beyond ensuring the
peaceful use of nuclear material. Furthermore, such
efforts must not hamper international cooperation in
the field of peaceful nuclear activities or undermine
the established priorities of IAEA Technical
Cooperation Programme.
Indonesia looks forward to opportunities to further
strengthen its cooperation with the IAEA in 2019 and
for many years to come, including in the area of the
marine environment through the marine radioecology
laboratory to be established in the north of Java.
Further, we would appreciate additional support from
the Agency’s Department of Nuclear Energy and
the Department of Nuclear Safety and Security to
develop capacities related to the management of highactivity sources.
Finally, we would emphasize that the purpose
of draft resolution A/73/L.19, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”, is to provide the
States Members of the United Nations the opportunity
to recognize the activities that IAEA has undertaken
during the reporting year and to lend their support to
the Agency’s continuing work. We have sponsored the
draft resolution and duly hope that it will be adopted
by consensus and contribute to promoting the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
Ms. Sealey (Jamaica): My delegation is pleased to
join in the annual debate on agenda item 92, “Report of

18-3685713/26

A/73/PV.34

09/11/2018

the International Atomic Energy Agency.” We thank the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) for his comprehensive statement and
take this opportunity to highlight a number of issues
that are of particular importance to Jamaica under
this item.

Cooperation Programme Framework for the period 20182023. New projects will be funded under the 2020-2021
cycle to tackle coastal and marine pollution, obesity in
young children, and the development and use of nuclear
cardiac imaging in the diagnosis and management of
cardiac patients with non-communicable diseases.

First, we applaud the work of the IAEA in support
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
We therefore note with great satisfaction that the Agency
now implements safeguards in more than 180 countries,
which confirms that the Agency remains indispensable
to strengthening cooperation in the nuclear field and
to promoting the safe, secure and peaceful use of
nuclear technologies.

In addition, Jamaica has hosted a number of
meetings throughout 2018, including an intermediate
coordination meeting on developing a capacity-building
programme to ensure the sustainable operation of
nuclear research reactors through personnel training,
held in January, and an IAEA regional training course
on safeguards implementation in States with small
quantities protocols in May. An IAEA national training
course on orphan source search is scheduled to be held
in Kingston from 3 to 6 December.

Secondly, we continue to be pleased with the
level support being extended by the Agency for the
implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. As we draw closer to 2030, it is fitting that our
collective efforts should be directed towards ensuring
the attainment of the Goals, in particular those related
to health, water and sanitation, as well as to sustainable
and modern energy.
Thirdly, Jamaica welcomes the fact there continues
to be such a strong focus on capacity-building through
technical cooperation. We are deeply appreciative of
the strong partnership that has been forged over the
past 50 years of being a member of the IAEA and are
pleased that it is a partnership that continues to be
deepened and strengthened. Jamaica currently has nine
active projects, four of which commenced in January,
under the 2018-2019 project cycle. Our projects with
the Agency cover a range of issues and concerns, such
as upgrading the research reactor infrastructure at the
University of the West Indies SLOWPOKE-2 facility;
organizing irrigation water management to improve
crop output and water quality control; re-establishing
nuclear-medicine capacities; and building capacity
for cancer diagnosis and treatment services related to
nuclear technologies. Given the work in which we are
currently engaged with the IAEA, we look forward to
further updates on the proposal to create a one-house
approach to cancer-related issues as part of the ongoing
review of the Agency’s Programme of Action for
Cancer Therapy.
We are honoured to have received the Deputy
Director General and Head of the Department of
Technical Cooperation of the IAEA, Mr. Dazhu
Yang, who visited Jamaica last month and signed the
14/26

Fourthly, our engagement with the Agency also
extends to the regional level, as we currently participate
in several regional and interregional projects. Therefore,
the role of the Regional Cooperation Agreement for the
Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin
America and the Caribbean remains critical.
Jamaica remains fully committed to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. As
we look to the third Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference, we hope that we as an
international community will be able to fully commit
to the obligations that have guided us for the past 48
years of the Treaty’s existence. We are pleased to note
that the non-proliferation regime was also bolstered by
the adoption last year of the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons. We are happy to have signed the
Treaty in December and look forward to working with
others to advance its objectives.
In closing, Jamaica reiterates its full support to the
Director General and his team, and assures them of our
unswerving commitment to helping the Agency fulfil
its mandate.
Mr. Bayyapu (India): We thank Director General
Yukiya Amano for the 2017 report (see A/73/315) of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
for his comprehensive statement (see A/73/315/Add.1),
which has been circulated. The Agency’s report is
an important publication for gaining an appreciation
of the essential tasks being performed by the IAEA
both in promoting and in ensuring the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
18-36857

09/11/2018

India has co-sponsored draft resolution A/73/L.19,
on the activities of the IAEA. Today’s debate is an
important occasion to reflect upon the critical role
that the IAEA has played in supporting countries in
pursuit of nuclear power in a safe and secure way and
in conducting technical cooperation activities to bring
nuclear applications to its member States.
Nuclear power remains an important option for
meeting the challenges of increased energy demands,
addressing concerns about climate change, lowering
volatile fossil-fuel prices and ensuring the security of the
energy supply. In that context, the IAEA International
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Power in the TwentyFirst Century, in Abu Dhabi, played a significant role
in bringing policy-makers, scientists, technologists and
environmentalists together to examine the prospects
of nuclear power. The Agency needs to continue its
programmes of support for member States embarking
on or expanding their nuclear-energy programmes
and, most importantly, to support member States in
enhancing their capacity to build public acceptance of
nuclear energy.
India attaches importance to the Agency’s work in
the different fields of nuclear science. We contribute
to those activities by participating in the technical
meetings and coordinated research projects. The
Agency’s programmes and achievements related to
nuclear applications in food and agriculture, health
and nutrition, water resources management, protection
of the environment and others are helpful in meeting
the needs of developing countries. India will continue
to provide its support to those Agency programmes
through the service of experts and offer training
slots in reputed institutions in India for experts from
Member States.
Advanced fission reactors, including fast reactors,
contribute to a more efficient use of nuclear fuel and
to reducing the volume of radioactive waste. India
participated actively and exchanged information on new
developments and experience in the field of fast reactors
and related technologies during the International
Conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles,
held in the Russian Federation in June 2017.
Thorium-based fuel cycles and technologies present
opportunities for enhanced passive safety features and
the utilization of the larger source of natural resources
provided by thorium and its inherent proliferation
resistance. International collaboration under the IAEA

A/73/PV.34

would help provide a much wider resource base for
future nuclear technology development in that direction.
We support the Agency’s nuclear fusion programme.
We are pleased to inform the Assembly that India hosted
the twenty-seventh IAEA Fusion Energy Conference
last month in the city of Ahmedabad. The Conference
provided a forum for the discussion of key physics and
technology issues, as well as innovative concepts of
direct relevance to the use of nuclear fusion as a source
of energy. With the participation of several international
organizations, as well as the collaboration of more
than 40 countries and several research institutes,
including those working on smaller plasma devices, the
Conference helped to identify possibilities and means
for continuous and effective international collaboration
in that area.
We also take note of the Agency’s work in improving
global safety and security. In that regard, we appreciate
the review and publication of safety standards and
security guidance that serve as an international
reference for nuclear safety and security. India remains
committed to supporting the work of the IAEA.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is taking the floor to clarify its
position with regard to the nuclear tests described
unfairly in the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (see A/73/315).
Based on our willingness to end this history of
confrontation and achieve lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula, we proactively proposed the establishment
of a peace region and the denuclearization of the
peninsula, and made sincere efforts to that end. Thanks
to the initiative and efforts of the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, an atmosphere
of dialogue and cooperation, détente and peace has
been created on the Korean peninsula, which has had
a positive influence on progress towards stability in
North-East Asia and the Asia-Pacific region as a whole.
Significant events such as the historic inter-Korean
summit meetings and the first-ever Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea-United States summit
talks have taken place and were welcomed with the
enthusiastic support of the entire world. In April,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took the
initiative to discontinue nuclear and intercontinental
ballistic-rocket testing and irreversibly dismantle the
nuclear test site. Most recently, under the observation

18-3685715/26

A/73/PV.34

of experts from interested countries, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea began to permanently shut
down the Tongchang-ri missile-engine testing and
rocket-launch facility. We also expressed our intention
to take additional measures, such as the permanent
dismantling of the nuclear facilities at Nyŏngbyŏn, if
the United States takes corresponding actions in line
with the spirit of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-United States joint statement of 12 June.
The discontinuation of nuclear tests is an
important process for global nuclear disarmament,
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
proactive measures are a significant contribution to
international efforts towards nuclear disarmament. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea maintains its
consistent position that it will faithfully implement the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-United States
joint statement.
Peace and stability on the Korean peninsula will
be guaranteed if the hostile relations that have lasted
for more than half a century are brought to an end
and if new relations between the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States are established
on the basis of mutual trust and peaceful coexistence.
Confidence-building, with the aim of removing deeprooted distrust between the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States, should be
a top priority in our efforts to achieve the complete
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The report of the IAEA, which fails to mention
the positive developments that have taken place on the
Korean peninsula this year, is fraught with prejudices
and distortions, which shows that the IAEA has lost
its impartiality as an international organization and
is being manipulated for impure political purposes.
Accordingly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea delegation categorically rejects the report of
the IAEA.
The IAEA should take a fair and impartial stance
and call upon the international community to respond
to the goodwill measures taken by the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Abbani (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for the
excellent way in which she is guiding our work.
My country has taken note of the annual report (see
A/73/315) of the International Atomic Energy Agency
16/26

09/11/2018

(IAEA), which provides an overview of the activities
and achievements of the Agency in 2017 in the main
areas of technological cooperation, nuclear technology,
nuclear safety and security, as well as the safeguards
agreements. Given the importance of the issues
addressed by the report, I would like to touch upon the
following elements.
First, Algeria welcomes the first international
conference on the IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme, held in Vienna at the end of May 2017,
which was an important opportunity to address the
technological contributions and uses of atomic energy
to achieve and implement the Sustainable Development
Goals, as well as exchange experiences in that regard. We
value the level of participation in the conference, which
proves the engagement and interest of Member States
in promoting and bolstering technological cooperation.
Secondly, in the light of the future expansion of the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, my country,
which regularly makes financial contributions to the
regular budget of the IAEA and the Technological
Cooperation Fund, calls for the allocation of secured,
adequate and predictable financial resources to allow the
Agency to fulfil its future commitments, including the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Thirdly, within the framework of our national
programme to combat cancer, my country increased its
activities related to the training of medical physicists
and qualified staff in protection from radioactivity.
This falls under the implementation of the action
plan adopted by Algeria in accordance with the
recommendations of the IAEA.
Fourthly, Algeria has developed facilities to train
personnel and maintain nuclear equipment with the
assistance of the Agency. Those facilities carry out
periodic training programmes, including programmes
targeting African States.
Fifthly, my country continues to make considerable
efforts to promote technical cooperation among African
States within the framework of the African Regional
Cooperative Agreement for Research, Development and
Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology. In
this regard, the four regional centres in Algeria affiliated
with that Agreement are working to promote protection
against nuclear radiation and improve nuclear medicine
and food safety.
18-36857

09/11/2018

A/73/PV.34

Algeria attaches paramount importance to nuclear
safety and security. We therefore value the efforts
of the IAEA to this end, given the Agency’s broad
expertise in developing the international nuclear
safety and security framework. Algeria reaffirms its
principled position that the primary responsibility for
nuclear safety and security in a given State lies with
that State. My delegation also stresses that measures for
promoting nuclear safety and security must not hinder
international cooperation in this area nor restrict the
priorities of the Technical Cooperation Programme, as
defined by the Agency.

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking Director
General Yukiya Amano for the comprehensive 2017
report (see A/73/315) submitted by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

At the national level, Algeria is working tirelessly
to promote the national infrastructure for protection
against radioactivity by developing a strict control
system in the use of atomic radioactive devices, as well
as establishing laws and regulations that ensure and
enhance protection from nuclear and radioactive risks.

It is impossible for us to think of a future of
substantive sustainability and energy sustainability
without a nuclear component as part of the global energy
mix. Argentina hopes to play a pivotal role in this
process by investing in technology for nucleo-electric
power generation. Argentina’s nuclear sector enjoys
a prominent international profile with an extensive
development of nuclear applications for peaceful and
civil use, which is of vital importance for the application
of the international safeguards system. For this reason,
we reiterate the importance of ensuring that activities
for the implementation of safeguards are efficient,
effective and based on a solid technical foundation
and guarantee their non-discriminatory nature. The
effectiveness of the verification system implemented
by the IAEA for nuclear activities is essential for
preventing nuclear proliferation and is undoubtedly the
central pillar on which the international community
has worked for decades to prevent the misuse of nuclear
materials and technologies.

Algeria considers the IAEA verification
system to be an essential element in the multilateral
denuclearization
and
non-proliferation
regime,
and stresses the universalization of the system.
Accordingly, the IAEA provides the best legal
framework for assuring non-nuclear States that nuclear
non-proliferation commitments will be kept in line with
the comprehensive safeguard agreements.
The provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons guarantee States parties the right
to develop and produce nuclear energy for peaceful
uses. This inherent right must not be prejudiced for
any reason, especially with respect to nuclear safety
and security.
As a State party to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone Treaty — also known as the Pelindaba
Treaty — Algeria reiterates its firm commitment to the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones all over
the world, given their importance to strengthening
international peace and security.
In conclusion, Algeria reiterates its concern about
obstacles to the establishment of a Middle East zone free
of nuclear weapons. In this regard, we call on all States
to support the negotiating conference to be held in 2019
for the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons
and weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Such a conference would be an extremely practical and
important step towards achieving security, stability and
peace in the region and throughout the world.

The Argentine Republic has been committed to the
work of the IAEA since its inception, and it is in this
spirit that we have co-sponsored the draft resolution
on the report (A/73/L.19). The Argentine Republic
understands that the IAEA plays a critical role in
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, a
role that should continue to be strengthened.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, Argentina considers
it vital that such verification measures not affect the
inalienable right of States to the development of nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes, as established in
article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Argentina wishes to reiterate the
need for the safeguards regime and its guarantees to
be implemented in an atmosphere of cooperation and
dialogue. In this regard, we wish to highlight once again
the quadripartite agreement that Argentina has with
its sister country, the Federative Republic of Brazil,
the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and
Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) and the IAEA,
which, since 1991 has been defining and regulating
cooperation activities for the application of nuclear
safeguards. The establishment of the ABACC was a
milestone, not only in terms of our relationship with

18-3685717/26

A/73/PV.34

Brazil, but also in confidence-building and providing
credible guarantees for the exclusively peaceful uses of
nuclear development in both countries. It also served as
a significant regional contribution because it enabled
us to consolidate the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free
Latin America.
Argentina’s commitment to the highest standards
of nuclear safety continues to be one of the pillars
of our policy in this area. Our Nuclear Regulatory
Authority is the independent technical and regulatory
body designated by law to monitor all such activities,
including the proper inspection of the construction
of reactors. We also had the honour to showcase our
commitment in this regard by presiding over the
diplomatic conference held in 2015 to examine the
proposal to amend article 18 of the Convention on
Nuclear Safety, at which the Vienna Declaration on
Nuclear Safety, which reflected the interest of many
States parties in continuing to strengthen technological
security, was adopted.
Argentina wishes to highlight the achievements of
the seventh review meeting of the contracting parties
to the Convention on Nuclear Safety in 2017 and is
committed to continuing to work on the preparatory
aspects of the eighth meeting, which will take place
in 2020. The 2017 Convention was the first time a
peer review was carried out on the implementation of
the principles of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear
Safety. I would also like to highlight the importance
of the sixth review meeting of the Joint Convention
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, in May and
June, which enjoyed the participation of nearly 1,000
representatives and 78 contracting parties.
Argentina wishes to express its recognition
and support for the work of the IAEA which respect
to physical nuclear security. In this regard, our
country has repeatedly underscored the central role
of the Agency in articulating and strengthening the
architecture for physical nuclear security, while calling
for it to exercise a more active role in this field. Our
country is involved in the preparatory work that will
lead to the IAEA International Conference on Nuclear
Security, in February 2020, and in reviewing the
implementation of the amendment to the International
Conference on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
and Nuclear Facilities, in 2021. We believe that these
initiatives reaffirm the essential responsibility and core
18/26

09/11/2018

role of the IAEA in strengthening and coordinating the
international architecture for physical nuclear security.
It is our desire that the IAEA should continue to
exercise its role as the main coordinator around other
international organizations and initiatives in this area
so that efforts on physical nuclear security and in the
fight against nuclear terrorism can converge in an
orderly and sustained manner. I would also like to
highlight the importance of supporting the work of the
IAEA, not only from a political perspective, but also
financially, given that nuclear security is clearly an
area where countries must make their actions match
their words.
We would also like to recall that aspects related
to physical nuclear security are the sovereign faculty
of each State, and that advances and improvements to
counteract terrorist threats must correspond to the real
risk that each country faces. On this basis, we reaffirm
the need to harmonize both binding and non-binding
measures in order to progress gradually, sustainably
and cooperatively.
Argentina has been an active participant in and
aspires to become a focal point for conducting training
activities in the region. In this regard, our country has
offered to host several activities related to education,
training and human resources in the field of peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, under the auspices of the IAEA.
Argentina will continue to work with the Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme, where we offer our
experience in and facilities for training and capacitybuilding, which have already benefited technical
personnel and professionals both from our region and
around the world.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the distinguished Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his report (see
A/73/315).
Today, nuclear energy is part and parcel of
the socioeconomic development of our societies.
Accordingly, all States, in particular developing
countries, must have free and indiscriminate access to
all benefits of nuclear energy. From this perspective,
Iran stresses the great importance of the full realization
of the inalienable right of any State to develop research,
production and uses of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, which includes the inherent right of each State
to develop a full national nuclear-fuel cycle for peaceful
purposes. Likewise, they have the right to participate in
18-36857

09/11/2018

the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials
and scientific and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
These inherent rights have also been reaffirmed
in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. Accordingly, developed States parties are
obliged to cooperate in the further development of
applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
especially in developing countries. In this context,
article II of the IAEA Statute mandates the Agency to
seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the
world. For this reason, Iran emphasizes the importance
of the Agency’s statutory functions and primary
responsibility in assisting Member States in research
on, and the practical application of, nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. Appreciating the related activities
of the Agency, Iran stresses the need for their further
enhancement, particularly to meet the expectations
of developing countries. It should be ensured that the
Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme remains
firm and sustainable through sufficient, assured and
predictable financial and human resources.
Iran underlines that the IAEA is the sole competent
authority responsible for the verification of the
fulfilment of safeguards obligations. Related functions
of the Agency should be carried out in full conformity
with the relevant legally binding instruments and take
into account the concerns and interests of Member
States, particularly in strict observance of the principle
of confidentiality.
Iran is determined to vigorously continue
exercising its inalienable right to nuclear energy,
including the development of a full national nuclearfuel cycle for peaceful purposes, which is essential
for its socioeconomic development. All accusations
against Iran’s nuclear programme were baseless from
the beginning; the crisis was manufactured to sustain
pressure on Iran. However, the crisis came to an end
with the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), which was the outcome of lengthy and
intensive multilateral diplomatic efforts undertaken to
resolve an artificial crisis and build trust.
Now, according to the IAEA, Iran is subject to the
most robust nuclear verification regime. Likewise, in
its 12 consecutive reports, the IAEA has confirmed
Iran’s full compliance with its commitments under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan. However, in violation

A/73/PV.34

of its international commitments, the current United
States Administration withdrew from the JCPOA
and reimposed its illegal sanctions against Iran. The
United States continues to systematically violate
its commitments under the JCPOA and Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015). It is now brazenly
forcing others to either violate resolution 2231 (2015)
or face punishment. All such illegal measures of the
United States have been rejected by the international
community, including by almost all its friends and
allies. The United States policy towards the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015) clearly indicates that, even in the
past, they did not have any genuine concern about Iran’s
nuclear programme. They openly lied in expressing
concern over this programme only to continue their
animosity towards Iran.
In a statement made on 2 November, the European
Union High Representative, Federica Mogherini, and
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Finance of France,
Germany and the United Kingdom called the JCPOA
a key element of the global nuclear non-proliferation
architecture and of multilateral diplomacy — and
crucial for the security of Europe, the region and the
entire world. Therefore, to ensure the continuity of a
document as important as the JCPOA, the international
community must remain vigilant and not allow itself
to be deceived once again by the fabrications of the
United States, which are rooted solely in its hostility
towards Iran.
Iran has been and will remain fully committed to
the JCPOA, inasmuch as all other JCPOA participants
also fulfil their related commitments in a complete
and timely manner. The JCPOA acknowledges
Iran’s discretionary right to cease performance of its
commitments under the agreement in whole or in part
if the lifted sanctions under the deal are reintroduced or
reimposed. Paragraphs 26 and 36 reflect the common
understanding at the time of negotiations that any
reimposition of sanctions gives Iran the right to respond
by wholly or partially ceasing to perform its reciprocal
measures under the agreement.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has made it very clear
on various occasions that the reimposition of sanctions
was a grave material breach of the JCPOA. Iran has
called upon the remaining participants of the JCPOA to
hold the United States accountable for the consequences
of its reckless, wrongful act, and stated that, in order to
maintain implementation of the JCPOA in its totality,
the remaining JCPOA participants needed to provide

18-3685719/26

A/73/PV.34

objective guarantees that Iran would be compensated
unconditionally through the appropriate national,
regional and global measures.
The JCPOA participants are therefore urged to
fulfil all their commitments in a genuine spirit. This
is indeed in the interest of the JCPOA participants
and the international community of States as a whole.
Therefore, current support for the full implementation
of the JCPOA by all its participants needs to be
maintained. Likewise, in line with the principles
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in
support of multilateralism, the international community
has a responsibility to preserve the JCPOA by rejecting
the illegal unilateral measures of the United States.
Mr. Trejo Blanco (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Republic of El Salvador.
At the outset, allow me to express my appreciation
to Director General Yukiya Amano for presenting
the report (see A/73/315) of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the Agency’s activities
during 2017.
The draft resolution on the report of the IAEA that
is approved by the General Assembly each year is based
on the agreement between the United Nations and the
Agency signed in 1957. The draft resolution reaffirms
the indispensable role of the Agency in aiding the
development and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, the transfer of technologies to developing
countries and in maintaining a nuclear security and
verification regime.
My delegation believes that this is a unique
opportunity to keep abreast of the activities that the
Agency has undertaken during the reporting period, as
well as to provide Member States with the opportunity
to engage in and support the Agency’s ongoing work.
We welcome the decisions adopted by the General
Conference of the IAEA at its sixty-second session,
held from 17 to 21 September.
In this context, my country recognizes the sovereign
right to exploit and make use of nuclear technologies
exclusively for peaceful purposes, as established in
article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. At the same time, we reaffirm
our obligation to work towards general and complete
disarmament as the only means of guaranteeing
international peace and stability.
20/26

09/11/2018

At the global level, our countries must continue
to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy, science
and technology for exclusively peaceful purposes and
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, which
will enable us to continue contributing to sustainable
development and world peace. My country is aware of
the benefits of nuclear technology for the peoples of
the world, not only in generating nuclear power, but
also in various areas such as health, agriculture, food
security, the environment and research, inter alia. For
this reason, El Salvador is convinced that, through joint
work, cooperation and the establishment of synergies
between countries for the proper and peaceful use of
nuclear technology, it is possible to achieve excellent
results that foster scientific development for the benefit
of our populations.
In particular, El Salvador wishes to highlight the
important role of the Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy in examining and strengthening its national
capacities for cancer control. We hope to be able to
work more closely in future with a view to improving
the efficiency of radiological medicine services as part
of an comprehensive framework for cancer control, and
in supporting the training of health professionals.
We would therefore like to reiterate that it is
indispensable for countries to join with the IAEA in
working to ensure that the use of nuclear energy is
used to increase health coverage and quality and food
production and supply, as well as promote the more
effective prevention and reduction of the negative
impacts of climate change and greater attention to
natural disasters, among other aspects of high priority
for my country that contribute to achieving true
human development.
El Salvador appreciates the constant and invaluable
support of the IAEA for the implementation and
strengthening of the uses of atomic energy in technology
and science, which has enabled my country to make
important strides in terms of its uses. It therefore hopes
to continue to deepen its bilateral cooperation relations
with the IAEA, in recognition of its important value
added as an agency.
We are currently preparing our national
programme framework for the period 2018-2023, in
order to continue strengthening cooperation between
El Salvador and the IAEA, a mechanism that facilitates
the alignment of the Agency’s work with the priorities
of the Government of El Salvador. Moreover, in order
18-36857

09/11/2018

to contribute to global efforts aimed at achieving
effective nuclear physical security and ensuring the
efficient implementation of international instruments,
my country is pleased to announce that it has joined the
Incident and Trafficking Database programme, which
is a system that has confirmed its relevance in detecting
incidents and preventing them when they are related
to illicit trafficking or the malicious use of nuclear
energy, in support of and ensuring the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our firm
commitment to continuing working hand in hand with
the Agency, and we urge Member States to continue to
support the activities of the IAEA.
Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the General Assembly’s imminent adoption
by consensus of draft resolution A/73/L.19, of which
it is a co-sponsor, on the annual report (see A/73/315)
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We commend the efforts of the Director General of
the Agency and the Jordanian delegation in drafting
the report and in preparing and submitting the draft
resolution, respectively.
As one of the founding States of the IAEA, Egypt
was one of the very first countries to use atomic energy
for peaceful purposes and is now building a nuclear
reactor. Accordingly, we attach great importance to
the Agency’s activities in the areas of the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and the promotion of international
cooperation and technical support, as well as nuclear
safeguards, verification, safety and security. We
support the efforts of the Agency and the activities of
its Secretariat in all of these areas, under the leadership
of the Director General, particularly at a time when
we are preparing to launch our first national plant to
generate electricity using nuclear energy.
Egypt calls once again for efforts to be stepped up
to provide the Agency with the financing and human
resources it needs to complete its tasks in terms of
technical cooperation and in striking a balance among
its three pillars, in line with its Statute and fulfilling
its raison d’être. Proper support for the Agency would
also ensure the continuity and stability of the Agency’s
activities in promoting all forms of peaceful use of
atomic energy, especially in developing countries,
while taking into account the fact that the peaceful use
of atomic energy in all its forms and manifestations is
an inalienable right.

A/73/PV.34

In the same vein, Egypt is striving to ensure the
success of the ministerial meeting on nuclear science
and technology to be held in Vienna in November. As
a member of the IAEA Board of Governors, Egypt is
also working to support the Agency’s activities in the
areas of technical cooperation and nuclear safety and
security, while devoting the necessary attention to the
Agency’s development role and the interests of African
States and the Group of 77 and China.
Egypt reaffirms that the IAEA is the sole entity
internationally mandated to issue verification
reports on States’ compliance with the obligations
of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons regime.
In addition, in accordance with the IAEA Statute,
the Agency also plays a vital role in galvanizing
denuclearization efforts; in verifying the dismantling
of nuclear weapons, thereby assuming an important role
in the maintenance of international peace and security;
and in implementing all obligations set forth in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), particularly article VI.
Egypt attaches great importance to the Agency’s
activities in implementing safeguards and in impartially
and independently verifying the non-diversion of
nuclear materials from exclusively peaceful uses,
pursuant to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement,
which is the legal basis for this aspect of the work of
the Agency, under the NPT. To fully achieve these
ends, the Agreement must be universally adopted. We
also stress that strengthening the Agency’s safeguards
system should not entail any commitment beyond the
contractual obligations provided for in the NPT. Indeed,
applying safeguards at the State level requires the
consent of the country concerned, not just consultations
with it.
In conclusion, Egypt looks forward to the Agency’s
implementation of the mandate provided for in the
recently adopted General Conference resolution on
applying the IAEA safeguards in the Middle East,
which would establish a Middle East zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
(GC(62)/RES/12). We also look forward to the taking
of the steps necessary to implement the resolution,
given the important developments that took place in
the First Committee at its current session, namely, the
adoption of a draft decision calling on the SecretaryGeneral to convene a conference on this topic in 2019
(A/C.1/73/L.22/Rev.1).

18-3685721/26

A/73/PV.34

Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba recognizes and supports the important work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
pursuit of sustainable peace and development, as well
as the advances made during the recent period. The
achievement of the objective of nuclear disarmament
has been and will continue to be the highest priority in
the field of disarmament.
We
recognize
the
contribution
of
the
implementation of the IAEA safeguards verification
system, which is essential to certify the peaceful nature
of nuclear-energy programmes. We also appreciate the
indispensable and significant contribution of the IAEA
in the promotion and development of the application of
nuclear technologies in such key areas for the economy
and society as human health, with special attention
to the cancer-control programme, food security,
agriculture and environmental protection.
In 2017, in the area of technical cooperation, our
country achieved an implementation rate of 96.5 per
cent in projects with the Agency and took part in 50
regional projects. We carried out 19 training courses
in the form of scholarships and scientific visits, and
participated in 55 courses and 49 technical meetings.
During the period, 90 expert missions were carried out
in different countries. Our country hosted scholarship
holders and scientific visitors from abroad, as well as
six regional events.
We will continue cooperating with developing
countries and sharing the results and experiences of our
years of technical cooperation with the IAEA. Given the
importance of continuing to support the development
and promotion of nuclear applications and technical
cooperation in developing countries and to assist in the
transfer of technology to those countries, the Agency
must redouble its efforts to increase the resources of
the Technical Cooperation Programme, with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development as its main focus.
Our country firmly supports the inalienable right
of all States to develop research, production and use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without
any discrimination or conditions. Cuba reiterates its
rejection of and demands the immediate lifting of
any kind of limitations and restrictions on exports
to developing countries of materials, equipment and
technologies for peaceful nuclear activities.
We reject the United States Government’s decision
to withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
22/26

09/11/2018

Action and to reimpose unilateral sanctions against
Iran. It is unjustified, contrary to international law, and
contravenes the norms of coexistence among States,
and, as a result, could lead to serious consequences for
stability and security, thereby distancing us from the
objective of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the Middle East.
We reaffirm our support for the establishment of
a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East. In this regard,
we deeply regret the fact that the conference planned
for this purpose has not yet been held, and we support
the initiative of the League of Arab States to hold a
conference no later than June 2019 to commence
negotiations on a legally binding treaty on the issue.
Last year, the Republic of Cuba deposited with the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency its instrument of ratification of the Convention
on Nuclear Safety and its instrument of accession
to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste
Management. That shows our country’s unquestionable
commitment to nuclear safety. The effective
management of nuclear physical security does not
admit exclusions or selectivity. The framework for the
adoption of international standards on physical security
is the IAEA, which must be the result of transparent
and inclusive multilateral negotiations, with the
participation of all States.
The entry into force of the amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material should provide greater protection for nuclear
facilities and materials; facilitate cooperation among
States parties to prevent and combat crimes involving
the use of radioactive and nuclear materials; and ratify
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The possibility of
a terrorist attack using nuclear materials cannot be
eliminated through a selective approach that is limited
to horizontal proliferation and that disregards vertical
proliferation and disarmament.
Finally, we congratulate the IAEA on its work and
outstanding contribution to issues of such importance
as climate change, combating desertification and
drought, food security and the treatment of diseases,
as well as the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.
18-36857

09/11/2018

Mr. Fadhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation
to Mr. Amano, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for presenting the
Agency’s annual report, which outlines the IAEA’s
achievements and activities in 2017 (see A/73/315). We
also express our sincere thanks to the delegation of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, in its capacity as Chair
of the IAEA Board of Governors, for facilitating the
draft resolution before us (A/73/L.19).
Iraq emphasizes the primacy of the Agency’s
activities in providing technical cooperation to
developing countries, including my own. When we use
nuclear technology in such areas as health, agriculture,
food, water resources, radioactive isotopes and radiation
technology, we are benefiting from programmes created
by the IAEA.
The Technical Cooperation Programme is one
of the Agency’s principal means for promoting and
transferring nuclear technology to achieve sustainable
socioeconomic progress in developing nations, in
accordance with its Statute. The Programme is a joint
responsibility of the Agency and its member States, and
it is implemented according to the requirements and
needs of its members. If the Programme is to succeed,
concerted efforts are necessary, as is the provision of
sufficient guaranteed resources that are proportional to
the resources allocated to the Agency’s other activities,
pursuant to the Statute.
At the national level, despite the huge challenges it
faced, my Government achieved great success when it
liberated some of the hot spots of terrorism, the most
recent of which was the Nineveh governorate, which
we rid of Da’esh terrorist gangs. Nevertheless, while
facing such challenges, Iraq ratified the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism and adopted measures needed
to implement these conventions through specialized
committees set up for that purpose.
My Government is working steadfastly to dispose
of nuclear waste and address other challenges through
direct coordination with and tailored technical
cooperation from the IAEA. These tasks are being
accomplished entirely upon Iraq’s initiative and on
national policies adopted by our Government on the
management of radioactive waste arising from the

A/73/PV.34

dismantling of previously destroyed nuclear sites, as
well as from medical, industrial and oil installations.
With regard to organizational issues around nuclear
and radioactive activity, my Government has made
important strides, including Law No. 43, enacted in
2016, which established an atomic energy commission
in Iraq. We are currently taking the steps necessary for
this commission to start its operations.
My Government believes that the establishment of
a Middle East free of nuclear weapons and weapons of
mass destruction is one of the fundamental steps that
need to be taken to ensure the security and stability
of the region. However, the sensitive and dangerous
developments taking place at the international
level in general and in the Middle East in particular
compel the international community to take collective
responsibility for the situation and require concerted
efforts aimed at the establishment of such a zone.
Accordingly, my delegation once again emphasizes
the vital role played by the United Nations and the three
depository States of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in convening a conference
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East as soon as possible, in line with the 1995 resolution
on the Middle East and the Action Plan set forth in the
Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
Furthermore, this year, the First Committee adopted
a draft decision (A/C.1/73/L.22/Rev.1), whose text
was introduced by the League of Arab States, calling
on the Secretary-General to extend an invitation to
the countries of the region, the three sponsors of the
1995 resolution on the Middle East responsible for
its implementation, and other relevant international
organizations, to participate in a conference to negotiate
a treaty to establish a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction and nuclear weapons in 2019.
Iraq believes that the Israeli entity must start its
denuclearization process and accede to the NPT as a
non-nuclear State. Its nuclear facilities must be subjected
to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement of the
IAEA, which is an urgent and extremely important step
that must be taken in order to ensure the successful
establishment of such a zone.
In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes once
again that it is the inalienable right of all States,
especially developing States, to develop peaceful
nuclear programmes. Such programmes can lead to
those States’ unhindered development, circumvent the

18-3685723/26

A/73/PV.34

monopolies of a specific group of States and avoid the
imposition of internationally binding conditions that
affect developing States’ interests.
Mr. Syrymbet (Kazakhstan): On behalf of the
delegation of Kazakhstan, I wish to express our sincere
thanks to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
for presenting the sixty-second report of the Agency,
for the calendar year 2017 (see A/73/315). The report
reflects the Agency’s balanced and effective policy in
its key mandates of nuclear safety and security and the
prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons, as well as
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Kazakhstan fully supports the Agency’s activities
in promoting the transfer and development of
technologies related to peaceful nuclear applications.
Over the past few years, our country has contributed
more than $1 million to the relevant Agency funds. We
intend to further develop our technical cooperation
with the IAEA for its ongoing programmes and new
explorations and innovations.
Kazakhstan welcomes the Agency’s activities
related to implementing safeguards. We believe that
the Agency system is the most effective instrument
for supporting the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Kazakhstan supports the preservation and further
unfailing implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). We commend the IAEA
for its continued work on the verification of the
implementation of the JCPOA.
We wholeheartedly supported the Agency’s
proposed project to establish the IAEA Low Enriched
Uranium (LEU) Bank. We are proud that last year, the
IAEA LEU Bank storage facility was inaugurated in
Kazakhstan and believe that it will make a significant
contribution to the development of peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and thereby strengthen global
nuclear security.
Having traditionally and annually co-sponsored the
draft resolution on the report of the IAEA, Kazakhstan
supports draft resolution A/73/L.19, entitled “Report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency”. With
our deep conviction and commitment, we are indeed
pleased to endorse the Agency’s important role in
fulfilling its mandate to promote the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and in further advancing the nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
24/26

09/11/2018

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh takes
note of the report (see A/73/315) of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and thanks Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General, for his able leadership of
the Agency.
During the reporting period, in our national context,
we have started construction of the Rooppur Nuclear
Power Plant, the first in Bangladesh, under bilateral
cooperation arrangements with the Russian Federation.
Following the delivery of a design and construction
licence from Bangladesh’s atomic energy regulatory
authority, the first concrete for Units 1 and 2 of the plant
was poured on 30 November 2017 and 14 July 2018,
respectively. Furthermore, following the Agency’s
guidelines, the relevant Bangladeshi authorities are
implementing the integrated work plan for national
infrastructure developed with the support of IAEA.
Work has already started for recruiting and training
personnel for the safe operation and maintenance of the
nuclear-power plant.
Bangladesh reposes its full confidence in the
guiding role of the IAEA in coordinating international
efforts to strengthen global nuclear safety, security
and safeguards when it comes to the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. Bangladesh underscores
the importance of the Agency’s ongoing efforts aimed
at supporting member States in sharing knowledge,
expertise, technology and information on all aspects
of nuclear safety. We acknowledge the Agency’s work
in maintaining, improving and promoting nuclear,
radiation, transport and waste safety, as well as
emergency preparedness and response worldwide.
We attach importance also to the Agency’s ongoing
efforts aimed at assisting member States, upon their
request, in building and developing their nuclear-security
capacity, which includes supporting the establishment
of effective, sustainable and comprehensive national
nuclear-security infrastructure. Bangladesh subscribes
to the view that the responsibility for nuclear security
within a State rests entirely with the concerned State.
We also underline that nuclear-security considerations
should not hamper the utilization of nuclear technology
for peaceful purposes, nor should it negatively affect
international cooperation in that regard.
The Agency’s work in nuclear power and nuclear
applications continues to underline the need to increase
the transfer and sharing of nuclear technology and
knowledge with developing countries. In this context,
18-36857

09/11/2018

we recall the signing of the country programme
framework for 2018-2023 with the Agency’s Department
of Technical Cooperation in September. The framework
includes, inter alia, support for a study to use nuclear
techniques in addressing riverbank erosion in
Bangladesh, which is already being accelerated owing
to climate change. We urge the IAEA to continue
to support our efforts to develop nuclear-science
education and research capacity; promote medical
research on cancer therapy and medical treatment for
certain diseases; increase food production and ensure
food safety; ameliorate the environment and develop
irradiated crop varieties.
Bangladesh actively participated in the sixtysecond session of the IAEA General Conference in
September. We support the continuation of IAEA’s
mandated work on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action on the question of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
nuclear programme. We also support the application
of the Agency’s safeguards in the Middle East,
including by pursuing the objective of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. We take note
of the adoption without a vote of the resolution on the
implementation of the Agreement between the Agency
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the
application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
In conclusion, Bangladesh thanks Jordan for
facilitating the adoption of the draft resolution on the
report of the IAEA (A/73/L.19).
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 92.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/73/L.19, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”. I now give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/73/L.19, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Algeria, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Philippines, Romania, the Russian Federation, San

A/73/PV.34

Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, the Sudan,
Sweden, Tajikistan, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, the United States of America and Uzbekistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.19?
Draft resolution A/73/L.19 was adopted (resolution
73/9).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second, and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The performance of the observer of the
European Union (EU) confirmed once again our doubts
and those felt by many Member States with regard to
resolution 65/276, which was submitted and adopted
several years ago to grant observer status to the EU and
to give it the right to speak at the United Nations. It
seems to us that the endorsement by Member States of
that resolution was a great mistake.
The States members of the EU are responsible for
two world wars that killed nearly 100 million people
and destroyed the world at that time. The EU enjoys
observer status at the United Nations, and we call on it
not to compete with the United Nations by allocating
awards and sanctions to Member States. The EU is a
mere observer here, and the representative of the EU
must learn that lesson and recognize his own limitations.
It is shameful to the General Assembly that the
representative of the EU criticizes certain States in his
statement and directs accusations against them. What
he included in his statement confirms the fact that the
EU is playing the role of devil’s advocate. Its statement
did not even criticize the Israeli entity, which represents
the real and perhaps only danger in our region and the
world owing to its possession of huge arsenals of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, as well
as their means of delivery, as they could reach beyond
our local region with no international control. There is
a clear reason why the EU has not made accusations
against Israel for possessing nuclear weapons. It is
because certain States of the EU have provided Israel
with nuclear reactors, heavy water, nuclear technology

18-3685725/26

A/73/PV.34

and submarines capable of launching nuclear weapons
as well as other means of delivery.
The EU should be the last to raise the issue of
non-proliferation, especially given that four of its
member States and one other State which seeks to join the
EU have stationed nuclear weapons on their territories,
in grave violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Many EU countries are in
violation of their own obligations under the NPT and
other conventions of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. That is because they cooperate with Israel to
bolster its military capacities, especially the capacities
of the Israeli military nuclear programme, as well as
Israel’s programmes related to other weapons of mass
destruction. Those countries also provide Israel with
expertise, material and technology, in addition to
assisting Israel in making, possessing and developing
nuclear weapons.

26/26

09/11/2018

If the EU were honest in its statement with regard
to supporting a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East, its member States would have voted in favour of the
draft decision recently adopted by the First Committee
(A/C.1/73/L.22/Rev.1) that calls for the convening of a
conference in 2019 on the establishment of a Middle
East zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction. However, the EU countries did not
support the convening of such a conference, which is
proof of the hypocritical character of the EU statement
and its clumsy policies.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 92?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

18-36857
