S/PV.7392

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7392nd meeting

Tuesday, 24 February 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shen Bo .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2015/118)

15-04997 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504997*

S/PV.7392

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2015/118)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/118, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to introduce the latest report of
the Secretary-General on South Sudan, issued on
17 February (S/2015/118). As always, I shall take this
opportunity to inform the Council on operational
developments since then.
As Council members know, the security situation
in South Sudan is very worrisome. Many violations of
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, signed more
than a year ago on 23 January 2014, have been reported
and confirmed, as have numerous clashes between
Government and opposition forces, in particular in
Unity and Upper Nile states. On 10 February in Unity
state, many bombings were reported in the region of
Madrassa, south-west of Bentiu. The Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) reported having opened fire
after observing the SPLA in Oppostion advance on
the city of Bentiu. Our force could not confirm this
development on the lines of defence around Bentiu.
On 13 February, the SPLA also captured at least five
members of the opposition army following clashes

2/7

24/02/2015

between Bentiu and Guit, and those five remain in
detention.
Similarly, in Upper Nile state, the security situation
has recently been dominated by sustained exchanges of
fire between the SPLA and the armed opposition from
8 to 17 February in the Nasir region beyond the Sobat
River. There have also been reports of new clashes in
the counties of Maban, Melut and Manyo over the past
10 days. The clashes in these states clearly indicate that
the oil fields located there remain prime targets for the
forces of the military opposition.
At the same time, both sides continue to mobilize
and deploy new recruits in preparation for further
clashes, while the ongoing dry season opens up new
lines of communication and movements of troops
and equipment. On 15 February, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) was informed that
armed men, probably belonging to a Shilluk militia
allied to the Government, had forcibly recruited at
least 89 children from camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Malakal county, Upper Nile state.
Eyewitnesses reported to UNICEF that gunmen had
surrounded the entire area and searched every house
for boys older than 12 years.
Meanwhile, in Pibor county, Jonglei state, the slow
integration of Murle forces and the lack of financial
resources pledged to the Greater Pibor Administrative
Area have the potential to destabilize the agreement
of 28 March between the Cobra faction of the South
Sudan Defence Army, led by David Yau Yau, and the
Government. General Joshua Konyi was appointed
Commander of the SPLA in the region, which has also
raised tensions because Konyi, a former commissioner
of Pibor county, had worked closely with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army against the forces of David
Yau Yau in the region. We have also received reports
that the Murle community had reached an agreement
with the Lou-Nuer — which in itself would be an
unusual development — to prevent SPLA troops to
move through their territory if they were planning to
undertake operations to regions under the control of
the armed opposition. Currently, there is a great danger
that the conflict could spread in the coming months to
Pibor and Akobo counties, in Jonglei state.
Tension also mounted in the region of Equatoria, due
to the massive influx from Jonglei and Lakes states of
heavily armed Dinka nomads, with more than 250,000
head of cattle, onto their neighbors’ arable land. These
movements reflect long-standing confrontations over
15-04997

24/02/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

grazing areas south of Lakes and Jonglei states. It is
clear that this hotspots could easily turn into war zones.
Furthermore, internal political disputes within the
coalition Government in the states of Northern and
Western Bahr el-Ghazal have resulted in the somewhat
questionable disqualification of the Acting Governor
and the President of the local legislature. These tensions
could also lead to new intercommunal conflict, even
though those two states had until recently remained
relatively peaceful despite developments elsewhere in
the country.
(spoke in English)
The volatile security environment is directly
illustrates the continued lack of political will of the
parties. The Government and opposition do not seem
to take the political negotiations seriously and appear
unwilling to make the necessary compromises. The
situation at the peace talks in Addis Ababa cannot be
described in any other way but as a serious failure on
the part of a leadership that remains focused on its
pursuit for power rather than on care of its people. The
talks are stalled over the three issues of power-sharing,
security arrangements and constitutional reforms. The
likelihood of either side softening its stance remains
low.
Council members will have noted that, on
21 January in Arusha, the parties signed an agreement
to unify the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement,
following talks facilitated by Chama Cha Mapinduzi,
which is apparently the ruling party in Tanzania. On
16 February, the parties signed another document,
including a road map matrix with specific timelines, to
implement the Arusha Agreement. But, in view of the
prevailing environment and uncompromising positions
expressed by President Kiir and Mr. Machar, the actual
implementation of the matrix is very much in doubt.
Last week, on 13 February, the Government
announced that it would postpone the general and
presidential elections by two years and propose to the
National Legislature a constitutional amendment that
would extend the terms of the Office of the President
and of the National Legislature until 9 July 2017. On
19 February, the Government presented the proposed
bill for the amendment of the 2011 Transitional
Constitution to members of both houses, who had been
recalled from recess for a special sitting. Members of
both houses now have one month to look at the proposal,
following which the bill would require passage by a

S/PV.7392

two-third majority in both houses, sitting separately.
Given the majority enjoyed by the Government in the
Legislature, this proposal is likely to be adopted. This
step is a response to what was perceived as a strategy
of the opposition to call into question the legitimacy
of the Government and the President after June this
year, and to do so officially so that it would not have
to negotiate under pressure. Of course, one can only be
concerned that this two-year timeline may become yet
another incentive to defer the reaching of compromises
necessary for a peace agreement.
Lastly, I have to underline the shrinking of political
space and freedoms. That is worrying. Journalists
have been detained and harassed for criticizing the
Government. The Nation Mirror newspaper was closed
down on 3 February, after publishing an article claiming
that Government forces had abandoned a key town near
the international border with the Sudan. On 16 February,
even the United Nations Radio Miraya was threatened
with shutdown if it continued to interview opposition
leaders. Since then, Special Representative Ellen Løj
has addressed that situation in a meeting with the
Minister of Information of South Sudan, but we remain
very concerned about the general trend of shrinking
press freedom in the country. Meanwhile, opposition
political parties also continue to be prevented from
participating in the Addis Ababa peace talks.
The humanitarian situation in South Sudan is
at high risk of deteriorating further over the coming
months. We currently host 113,000 IDPs in eight sites,
and there are an additional 1.5 million displaced across
the country as well as close to 500,000 outside it. As
fighting continues, displacement is increasing. Over
the past two months alone, about 100,000 additional
people were displaced despite the fact that it has been
a period of relative calm. The number of food-insecure
civilians is expected to rise further as we approach the
lean season. About 2.5 million people are already in
emergency and crisis levels of food insecurity — almost
twice as many as in December 2013, when the crisis
started — and an additional 3.9 million people are in
a state of stress when it comes to food security. In line
with seasonal patterns, a drastic deterioration could
occur between April and July this year, when the lean
season reaches its peak. Needless to say, conflictaffected states are most at risk because markets have
been destroyed and foods stocks have been and are
being depleted prematurely. Every effort is being made
to bring assistance to those in need. Insecurity and

15-049973/7

S/PV.7392

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

24/02/2015

harassment, especially for national humanitarian staff,
are hampering response efforts.

SOFA violations to give the Council a breakdown of all
such events that occurred in January.

As I stated in my last briefing, UNMISS continues
to take every opportunity to move from protection
by location to protection by presence. The emphasis
is increasingly on conducting dynamic, integrated
patrols to enhance the protection and reassurance
of local communities and to gather vital information
to facilitate appropriate and timely responses to new
threats. Last month alone, UNMISS conducted over
5,000 patrols through South Sudan of various natures:
short-duration, long duration, dismounted, integrated
and dynamic air patrols. The vast majority of these
missions have been focused on positive and proactive
engagement with vulnerable communities outside our
bases.

So we have a very fragile security environment
and an ongoing round of peace talks that is not very
likely to achieve more progress. I think that now more
than ever there is an urgent need to reinforce the
mediation efforts and to impose consequences on the
parties if they fail to show willingness to compromise
and continue to engage in a conflict that will result in
the further loss of innocent lives. Even more important
in that regard is the need for accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which cannot go
unpunished. Accountability is indispensable to longterm peace and reconciliation. The culture of impunity
must end, and those responsible for keeping it going
must therefore be brought to justice. Since the peace
talks have just resumed, I would urge the Council
to perhaps look at the possibility of issuing a strong
presidential statement that would call on the parties to
immediately cease all military operations and make
the compromises necessary to reach a comprehensive
peace agreement during this round of talks or else face
the consequences.

We have established temporary operating bases in
key population centres as part of this strategy. For the
time being, we are looking at options for establishing
forward-operating bases in Bentiu, Malakal and Bor,
and seeking the approval of local authorities to that
end. We have prepared contingency plans in the event
of a worsening security situation. Those plans rely on
maintaining quick-reaction forces at a high level of
readiness so they can respond swiftly and robustly. All
battalions are expected to be able to exercise flexibility
so as to act as reinforcements anywhere in the country.
We now have roughly 3,500 of the 5,500 newly
authorized troops deployed, and full deployment of the
infantry and their enablers will be completed by April,
enabling the Mission to further expand its presence in
the country. Six of nine utility helicopters have been
deployed, and we are pursuing the deployment of
tactical helicopter units from Ethiopia and Rwanda.
Deployment of a Chinese battalion and additional
troops from Kenya is currently under way, and the
balance of the troops from Ghana and a riverine unit
from Bangladesh will also be deployed in the near
future, hopefully by April.
I would have to add that we have continued to
experience violations of the status-of-forces agreement
(SOFA) such as restrictions of movement, impounding
of assets, threats to our personnel and premises, assaults,
harassment, arrests, detentions and restrictions on
imports of equipment, including, for a while, equipment
for the Chinese and Ethiopian contingents. Those seem
to be clearing, but we still have to see what will happen
on the ground. Yesterday, I circulated a fact sheet on

4/7

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Ladsous
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: Thank you for this opportunity to
address the Council, Mr. President. A couple of weeks
ago, I returned to South Sudan after a year’s absence,
visiting Government-controlled areas and those held
by the opposition. Though the scale and severity of the
conflict has recently declined, the number of displaced
persons and refugees has continued to grow, reaching
2 million, with thousands more civilians dead. Further
violations of humanitarian law and human rights have
been committed by both sides, as described in public
human-rights reports issued by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in December and
January. There are more people, now more than 110,000
and mainly women and children, seeking our protection
in our protection-of-civilian sites. Displaced people
told me they were frightened. They had nowhere to go,
and both sides seem to be re-arming and preparing for
a new military campaign.
In Juba, I met people whose entire families had
been executed, based primarily on their ethnicity,
as well as women and girls taken as sex slaves after
their husbands had been killed. In Malakal, there

15-04997

24/02/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

was a woman whose disabled husband, a doctor, was
shot dead in a teaching hospital last April, along with
hundreds of others. In Bentiu, I visited a hospital
where in April a group of civilians seeking safety were
herded into a small room and shot dead. Returning
from the hospital, I encountered child soldiers and saw
drunken soldiers at a checkpoint shouting and mocking
a group of female civilians. Women sneak out of the
United Nations protection site during the day to collect
firewood and go to the market, and then return to the
camp in the evening. Some of them, they told me, are
being harassed and raped.
Besides the conflict between the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the SPLA in Opposition,
there are many local conflicts across the country
between tribes and even within clans of the same tribe.
They involve looting and cattle raiding, but also killings
and sexual violence. There is widespread possession of
illegal arms, including AK-47s, which only adds to the
insecurity. Many Government officials told me that
the people of South Sudan fought for decades for their
dignity, independence and human rights. What I saw on
my mission was certainly not what they were fighting
for. After decades of killing and other violations, there
is a need for cultural change based on respect for
human life and human rights. While it may take two
leaders to end a war in South Sudan, it takes many
for peace to become sustainable. The ongoing peace
process and future political arrangements must include
representatives of all ethnic groups, women, elders,
religious leaders, young people and other civil-society
actors.
The conflict has not only affected civilians’ civil
and political rights; it has also had severe social and
economic effects. Millions of dollars that could have
been directed towards social development have been
wasted, first on corruption and then on fighting over the
spoils between two groups of army veterans and their
leaders. Owing to the fact that economic trade has been
suspended, millions have also been lost by neighbouring
States, and the international community has been
investing in emergency relief instead of capacitybuilding and development. Prior to the conflict, South
Sudan, a country rich in oil, had an annual per-capita
gross domestic product of $1,045. In spite of that, its
levels of illiteracy and child and maternal mortality are
among the highest in the world.
Some positive developments provide hope that
the future may be better. Talking to people, I noticed

S/PV.7392

an increasing desire for peace, justice, human rights,
social development and political participation.
Representatives of all 65 tribes met last week in
Juba expressing similar demands. They encouraged
the United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
troika of the European Commission, the European
Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund to
impose sanctions not on the country as a whole but on
parties or individuals who refuse to sign agreements
or respect peace. The Government has also undertaken
important human-rights commitments, and I welcome
the ratification of a series of international humanrights instruments. President Kiir has assured me that
the ratification instruments will be deposited with the
Secretary-General in the next few days.
Let me now turn to the issue of accountability.
There is broad acknowledgement, in and out of South
Sudan, of the need to break the cycle of impunity
with some concrete accountability measures. As a
local civil-society activist told me, peace has always
died when we ignored justice. The African Union
(AU) has undertaken an important initiative with its
establishment of a commission of inquiry into the
human-rights violations committed in South Sudan
following the outbreak of violence in December 2013. Its
report has been submitted to the AU Peace and Security
Council, but its consideration has been deferred, as that
Council put it, until the imminent conclusion of the
peace agreement. In his recent report to the Security
Council (S/2015/118), the Secretary-General requested
the African Union to urgently consider the report and
its recommendations.
I discussed the issues of command responsibility,
accountability and combating impunity with President Kiir in
Juba and with Mr. Machar in Addis. President Kiir
assured me that the results of the national investigations
into human rights violations following the outbreak of
violence, presented to him in December 2014, will be
publicly released soon — however, only after a peace
agreement is in place.
I welcome the accountability references in the
recently signed Arusha and Addis agreements that
outline the creation of a hybrid criminal court and the
establishment of transitional justice processes, including
truth and reconciliation measures and a reparations
commission. Indeed, meaningful accountability for
serious human rights violations committed during the
conflict is the only way to prevent their reoccurrence.

15-049975/7

S/PV.7392

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

But to be able to deliver in this respect, there is
a need to improve the security and justice systems.
The formal justice system, already very weak, has
completely broken down in the conflict-affected areas.
I heard from the Chief Justice that in the whole of the
country, there are fewer than 200 judges. In Eastern
Equatoria State, which is larger than many European
countries, there are only two prosecutors. The National
Chief of Police told me that 70 per cent of his police
officers are illiterate, so he can rely on just 3,000 out
of 10,000 of them to carry out law-and-order functions.
When I was visiting prisoners on death row in Juba
Central Prison, one of them complained to me that he
should be immediately released because he paid the
“blood money.” The prison director had promised to
release him if this could be confirmed.
It is of the utmost importance that the Council
remain seized of the question of accountability for past
and present violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law in South Sudan. It is important
to continue to encourage the Government to release the
findings of its own investigations and to encourage the
African Union to release the report of the Commission
of Inquiry. Together, these reports may form the basis
of an accountability process that can contribute to
ending the cycle of violence and impunity and pave the
way to reconciliation and sustainable peace.
In the meantime, for peace to be reached, a
conducive atmosphere is essential. To contribute to
that, the Council may wish to encourage human-rightscentred confidence-building measures between the
parties. These could include cooperation in tracing
missing persons; help in family reunification; and
access to and the release of all conflict-related detainees
by both sides under the principle of “all for all”.
Also, a free and inclusive dialogue is crucial for
reaching sustainable peace and building a democratic
society. Current restrictions on the freedom of
expression against civil society and local media are
in this respect quite disturbing. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous mentioned, journalists have been
detained and threatened, and newspapers have been
confiscated and closed. Most recently, threats to close it
down have even been made against the United Nations
own radio station in the country, Radio Miraya.
No effort should be spared for the peace to be
reached sooner rather than later. Those in the camps are
the 110,000 fortunate ones whom we feed and protect;

6/7

24/02/2015

the remaining almost 2 million are far worse off. There
is, for example, a group of 260 displaced persons
residing in an abandoned building in Malakal, hoping
to find a place in our overcrowded protection-ofcivilians site. After brutal attacks on them, and unable
to reach our protection site there, those displaced
persons, which included elderly people, persons with
disabilities, pregnant women and children, walked 100
kilometres from Jonglei state. They are predominantly
women, because a number of men have been killed. As
their chief, who had been detained and tortured, himself
told me, “Most of them have lost their husbands, have
been raped, or both. But they hope for a better future
for their children”.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Let me begin by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of February. Although it is
rather late in the month, I would like to assure you of
the full cooperation of our delegation.
Let me also thank you, Mr. President, and members
of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to address the Council on this issue of vital importance
to my country. I must confess that I do so with mixed
feelings.
On the one hand, we are deeply appreciative of the
crucial contribution that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) is making in our country
in critically important areas and under very trying
circumstances. UNMISS emerged out of the strong
support and solidarity that the international community
had for our new country, which had been devastated
and rendered vulnerable for half a century by war.
This initial support now extends to helping the country
respond to the crisis that broke out in mid-December
2013 and soon expanded into a full-fledged civil war.
On the other hand, the picture that the report
(S/2015/118) paints is very disturbing and a challenge
to our pride, dignity and the value of our independence
and sovereignty. This, of course, should intensify our
motivation to find a remedy with a sense of urgency,
in collaboration with our regional and international
partners. But for our Government and people, it also
gives rise to paradoxical feelings about our place in the
international community and our relations with those
15-04997

24/02/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with the goodwill to help the country and its suffering
people.
As I have repeatedly stated to the Council, painful
as the reports of violence and gross violations of
human rights in our country are, we do not want to be
defensive or in denial. Quite the contrary, as I have just
indicated, we appreciate and are grateful that all this
is a manifestation of the support that the international
community is demonstrating for our beleaguered
country and suffering people. The critical question is,
what can we do together to address this national crisis.
As I read the report of the Secretary-General and
heard the statements just made, I was struck by two
elements that may provide a basis for collaboration in
resolving the crisis. The first is the impression given
that the whole country is in turmoil. We know that while
three states are affected by the conflict, the rest of the
country, seven states, is experiencing relative peace
and harmony. Secondly, the impression conveyed by
the report is that the international community, through
UNMISS, is virtually the one managing the situation,
with the Government manifestly failing in discharging
its primary responsibility for protecting and assisting
its populations. Worse, it is made to look as though the
international community cares more about the people
of South Sudan than their own leaders. One has to
witness the pain that President Salva Kiir feels and
articulates about this senseless war and the suffering it
is inflicting on our people to appreciate how much he
cares for his country and all his people.
There is a need to bridge the discrepancy between
the primary responsibility of the State and the
complementary support of the international community,
in this case, UNMISS. Although South Sudan is
now violently divided between the Government and
the opposition, it is important to remember that the
leadership was popularly elected and represents the
legitimacy of the Government and the sovereignty of
the country. It is of course prudent to be connected to
both sides and to work on fostering national consensus,
but the United Nations should work in collaboration
with the current Government to address the practical
problems facing the country.
It is one thing to condemn the leadership of the
country and threaten the imposition of sanctions, which,
as I have had occasion to say to the Council, would
only generate an adversarial relationship and aggravate
the situation; it is quite another thing to reaffirm that

S/PV.7392

the international community went to South Sudan
in the first place to support the country, that recent
developments may indeed undermine the nature and
magnitude of that support, but that remedies can be
found to restore a constructive basis for partnership
in the stabilization and development of the country. It
would be an ironic double jeopardy to punish a country
that is already suffering from an acute crisis. I believe
it would be appropriate for UNMISS and the country
team to meet with the country’s relevant authorities
in the Government to discuss and strategize the
most constructive way of addressing these crises and
concurrently use their mutual strategic understanding
as a basis for reaching out to the armed opposition.
What the report does not cover, or even allude to,
presumably because of its complexity and sensitivity,
is the interconnection between the conflicts within the
Sudan and South Sudan that spill over their borders
and paradoxically bind them together. Each country
accuses the other of supporting its rebels, although they
both deny those allegations. But, unless these internal
conflicts are addressed to promote a comprehensive
regional peace, the two countries will not be at peace
internally or between themselves. I realize that this is
probably asking too much of the Council and the two
countries, but it is a perspective that should not be
overlooked.
Needless to say, I am not expecting any miracles
in the search for solutions to these challenges. What
I am proposing is to bridge the impression that the
United Nations is virtually running the country,
that the Government is delinquent in discharging
its primary responsibility for the protection of its
population and that there are no national policies, plans
or programmes for addressing the crisis the country is
going through. I also believe that it is necessary to put
the crisis in the regional context to promote broader
regional cooperation, specifically between the Sudan
and South Sudan. To develop common ground towards
that admittedly ambitious vision, it is in our mutual
interests to improve communication, cooperation and
complementarity in addressing the challenges within
South Sudan and its relationship with the Sudan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

15-049977/7
