S/PV.9324

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9324th meeting

Thursday, 18 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Boateng
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2631
(2022) (S/2023/340)
Thirty-seventh report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2023/341)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14036 (E)
*2314036*

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2631 (2022)
(S/2023/340)
Thirty-seventh report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2023/341)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq; and Ms. Khanim Latif,
Founder and Director of Asuda for Combating Violence
Against Women.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/340, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2631 (2022), and document S/2023/341,
which contains the thirty-seventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: With the next mandate
renewal for the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) around the corner, I would like to
take the opportunity to reflect, just a bit, and more
importantly, to look ahead.
In the past months, numerous people and entities
have analysed the events that shook Iraq 20 years ago,
as well as the developments since. Few would deny that
it has been a very rough road, a road that has seen not
only the compounding of existing fragilities, inherited
2/19

18/05/2023

from previous decades, but also the exposure of new
weaknesses. While many acknowledged that Iraq,
throughout its history, has overcome some very dark
times, they also argued that the drivers of instability
in the country’s more recent past remained, for the
most part, the same — drivers such as corruption, weak
governance, the presence of armed non-State actors,
impunity, factional politics, poor service delivery,
inequality, unemployment and an overreliance on oil.
Having said that, Iraq’s enormous potential was also
widely highlighted, as was the view that the moment to
act is now, thereby reaffirming that the confirmation
of Iraq’s Government last October opened a crucial
window of opportunity. So the question is: where do
things stand now?
As I mentioned in my most recent briefing to the
Council in February (see S/PV.9253), the Government
has shown its resolve to tackle a number of the pressing
issues I just mentioned, and that still holds true. It
is focusing on its core priorities and trying to avoid
distractions that could threaten to upend prevailing
political stability.
That said, of course, it is early days, and we do not
have a crystal ball to predict the unknowns, which could
include the rise of potential disrupters. As I keep on
emphasizing: what we do know is that any government
in this position needs time, and that, in itself, is already
a challenge. Amid low or no tolerance for a return to
the status quo that existed before October 2022, the
harsh reality is that there is no time to lose. Hence, I
can only emphasize the need for relentless commitment
from a wide range of actors, the significance of placing
the national interest over that of any individual or
party, the critical role of independent State institutions
and the need for an active, empowered and protected
civic space.
The Government programme is leading the way,
signed off on by all coalition parties united in the State
administration alliance. That does not mean that there
are no disagreements or quarrels, as is the case in other
countries governed by a coalition. To bridge differences
and to follow up on implementation in priority areas,
regular meetings between government and coalition
members take place. It is quite simple: the balancing
of multiple differing opinions and interests requires
constant compromise.
Does this mean that dynamics, trends, opinions and
perceptions from outside the coalition are not relevant?
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Of course not — they are very relevant, I would say.
In other words, the healthy interplay of opposition
and coalition must be allowed to function, including
through public exchanges between decision-makers,
political leaders, authority figures and broader civil
society. Also, and given the delicate balance needed to
succeed in tackling core priorities, it is important to
take into account the potential wider impact of a new
law, action or proposal, whether initiated in Parliament,
by the Government or elsewhere. Will it consolidate or
potentially conflict with key objectives? Will it bridge
or widen divisions between groups and communities?
Will it unite or rather estrange people? In other words,
to break with the cycles of recurring crises, what must
the priorities be? The fact is that Iraq has a full “todo” list, and narrow or partisan actions will not help in
checking it off.
The resources needed to turn certain government
goals into realities, such as adequate public service
delivery, should be unlocked with the passage of a
federal budget. That has yet to happen and, these
days, all eyes are on Iraq’s Council of Representatives.
Needless to say, agreement on a functioning budget,
sooner rather than later, is critical, including for the
timely organization of the long-awaited provincial
council elections, now announced for no later than
20 December this year.
Meanwhile, Iraq continues to rely on oil, and the
public sector remains the biggest employer. Those
phenomena are, of course, nothing new, but, as I
have said so many times, neither can last indefinitely.
Economic diversification and major structural reforms
remain urgent. And yes, there is no denying it: this will
prove to be challenging for various reasons, including
public expectations. After all, rather than developing
an employment-generating private sector, successive
Governments opted for the easy way out — that is, the
creation of public sector jobs to “hush” civil unrest.
This has led to a wage bill no country could afford.
In saying that, let me also and once again emphasize
that much-needed reforms will not take root if choked
by the weeds of patronage and graft. Also, as I already
mentioned, independent State institutions are critical.
No training, capacity-building or technical assistance
programme can combat the ill effects of political
interference. The good news is that the Government
has taken an express stance against the adverse effects
of corruption, which have resulted from the system
constructed over the past two decades. And yes, vested

S/PV.9324

interests will undoubtedly make the required systemic
reform an uphill struggle, but it must be done. Speaking
of reforms, I would like to acknowledge the efforts of
the Government to push Iraq closer to a state of energy
independence. Again, that will not happen overnight.
But from the issuing of new licensing rounds to efforts
to reduce energy waste, including a clampdown on
gas-flaring, that ambitious goal is increasingly close to
being reached.
Turning to Kurdistan, disagreements between the
two ruling parties in recent months drove the region
close to the brink. Many had good reason to describe
the political situation as increasingly reckless and
irresponsible. While it is our firm belief that the
outstanding fiscal, administrative, security and electoral
disagreements could have been addressed months ago,
the will to compromise was glaringly absent for far
too long. That said, the repeated efforts by the region’s
President, as well as others, to get the parties to return
to the negotiation table, and the recent meeting between
the region’s Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister,
have at last led to some good news. After more than six
months, the Kurdistan region’s Cabinet met in full on
Sunday. At this stage, I can only express hope that the
parties will now step up, bridge differences and work
in the interests of all peoples. One glance at the history
and geography of the Kurdistan region reinforces just
how urgent the need is for sustainable solutions.
The region’s parliamentary elections, originally
scheduled for October 2022, are also long overdue.
After consultations with all the parties, the region’s
President has now set an election day of 18 November
of this year. Let me take this opportunity to remind the
parties that time is of the essence. Ensuring agreement
on the outstanding electoral issues is urgent. Another
postponement would be detrimental to public trust.
With regard to the relations between Baghdad and
Erbil, I note that the dynamics are still being described
as good but complicated. The political infighting in
the Kurdistan region has clearly not helped, as it has
also affected the relationship with partners in Baghdad.
On 4 April, following a ruling by the Paris-based
International Court of Arbitration, and in the absence
of the long-awaited hydrocarbon law, Baghdad and
Erbil announced that they had reached a temporary
agreement to enable a resumption of oil exports through
the Turkish port of Ceyhan. On 10 May, the Government
of Iraq asked Türkiye to restart the exports, but so far
they have not been resumed. Since the taps were turned

23-140363/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

off on 25 March, it is likely that hundreds of millions
of dollars of revenue have been lost. Here I want to
once again underline the importance of anticipatory
governance with a view to achieving the structural
institutionalization of relations between Baghdad
and Erbil. Whether in the context of the budget,
questions surrounding hydrocarbon resources, disputed
territories, the implementation of the Sinjar Agreement
or any other outstanding issue, it remains essential for
both to move beyond ad hoc engagements.
Zooming in on Sinjar, we can only express
disappointment that little to no progress has been made
in the implementation of the 2020 Sinjar Agreement,
despite the repeated declarations of commitment to it. To
state the obvious, such stagnation creates further space
for spoilers of various backgrounds and affiliations
to exploit the situation for their own ends, and blocks
thousands of displaced Sinjaris from returning to their
areas of origin. Sadly, a recent rise in tensions between
communities in Sinjar was in large part further fuelled by
online disinformation targeting the Yazidi community.
Local leaders on all sides have worked collectively
to dispel that spike in tensions. But the challenges to
reconciliation will persist until meaningful steps are
taken, including towards a unified administration,
stable security structures and reconstruction. Now,
with the inclusion of the 2020 Sinjar Agreement as an
explicit priority in the Government programme, it is
high time to get things done.
Iraq’s commendable commitment to ensuring
the return of its citizens from north-eastern Syria
continues to serve as an example. While new rounds
of returns are expected, work is ongoing to reintegrate
previous returnees into their areas of origin, or to
pursue accountability aligned with the applicable laws,
where relevant. As we all know, the Iraqi caseload is
overwhelming, and I can only emphasize how critical it
is to continue providing support to Iraq in that regard,
as well as for every country with nationals in northeast Syria to follow suit by repatriating its citizens.
More generally, finding durable solutions for returnees
from north-east Syria and all other internally displaced
persons remains essential, something particularly
relevant following the sudden closure in April of a
camp in Ninewa governorate. Secondary displacement
is difficult to control and creates new risks.
I want to turn now to another issue, water, which
represents the most critical climate emergency for Iraq.
It is estimated that by 2035 Iraq will have the capacity
4/19

18/05/2023

to meet only 15 per cent of its water demands. Ninety
per cent of Iraq’s rivers are polluted, and 7 million
people are currently suffering from reduced access
to water. That has become a significant multiplier of
the threats to Iraq’s stability, and the priority that the
Government has placed on the issue of water security is
therefore most welcome. Plans for extensively updating
Iraq’s water-management systems are said to be under
way. That will be vital in meeting the demands driven
by population growth and urbanization. And the fair
sharing of resources among Iraq’s neighbours is
equally important. If water is a competition, everyone
loses. Bold domestic action and close regional
cooperation offer the only winning solution. On that
note, I also want to draw attention to a simple fact,
which is that regional security, economic and political
developments are impacting Iraq and will continue to
do so. I therefore cannot overstate the importance of the
Government’s efforts to scale up diplomacy with and
among its neighbours in a number of areas, from border
security and trade to water-sharing and climate issues.
Of course, regional stability will also hinge on respect
for the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity
and good-neighbourliness.
I would now like to turn to the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. The Iraqi
authorities, assisted by the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the Tripartite Commission, have
continued their efforts to locate witnesses and possible
burial sites for Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.
It goes without saying that we welcome the Prime
Minister’s decision to establish a committee made
up of members of security agencies, chaired by the
Human Rights Directorate of the Ministry of Defence
and mandated to support activities in that regard. We
continue to await progress on the retrieval of missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.
For my last point, let me revisit something I
mentioned at the start of my briefing, which is the need
for an active, empowered and protected civic space.
Facilitating and allowing a plethora of different voices to
be heard, including those that disagree with or critique
prevailing decisions, is both healthy and essential. I
would therefore like to express our sincere hope that
Iraq’s leaders and authorities will publicly embrace
civic engagement, as well as freedom of expression,
in order to prevent a resurgence of a sense of isolation
and disillusion among Iraqis, particularly the younger
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

generation and women. To be clear, accountability, the
rule of law and respect for human rights are equally
essential to preventing recurring cycles of crises.
In conclusion, and as we have spelled out so
often, Iraq has tremendous potential. And through the
Government’s ambitious plans — provided that they are
fully implemented — many of the drivers of instability
can be addressed. Of course, all of that can be easily
spoiled, whether through unchecked corruption,
interference from within, intrusion from the outside,
a groundswell of disillusion or political horse-trading
against the common good. What I am essentially saying
is that now is not the time to be complacent or take it for
granted that Iraq has turned a corner. I sincerely hope
that all will remain committed.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Latif.
Ms. Latif (spoke in Arabic): I am grateful for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council this morning
on the situation of women and civil society in Iraq.
I am Khanim Latif, representative of Asuda
for Combating Violence against Women, an Iraqi
non-profit organization that strives to achieve gender
equality, eliminate gender-based discrimination and
end all forms of violence against women. In 2002, our
organization established the first independent shelter
for survivors of gender-based violence in Iraq.
The current situation in Iraq is characterized
by widespread violence against women in all fields,
including the targeting of women human rights
defenders. In recent months, we have witnessed
campaigns against them in the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq simply for having used the term “gender.” The
precarious situation of Iraqi women, coupled with
social and economic inequality and the alarming and
inadequate representation of women in decision-making
processes, means that the space for women to fully and
freely exercise their rights is highly restricted.
The current situation of women and girls in Iraq
should deeply concern us all. My statement today
will focus on how the international community can
effectively address four key issues: first, legal protection
from violence against women; secondly, women’s
political participation; and thirdly, the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI).

S/PV.9324

With regard to legal protection from violence
against women, discrimination and violence against
women in Iraq are now widespread. Hardly a day does
go by without reports of women being killed, maimed
or targeted by their own family members, simply
because of their gender. Gender-based violence has
increased by 125 per cent to over 22,000 cases between
2020 and 2021, and more than 75 per cent of those at
risk of such violence are women and girls. The crime
rate is very high, and the brutal nature of these crimes
is of grave concern. “Honour killings” of women for
transgressing social norms, early and forced marriage
and incest are also widespread across the country. This
sharp increase in gender-based violence is occurring
against a backdrop of impunity for perpetrators and
lack of access to services, legal protection and justice
for survivors of gender-based violence.
Without protection from violence and freedom
from discrimination, women cannot engage fully
or equally on a political, social or economic level.
The prevalence of gender-based violence violates not
only women’s basic human rights, as guaranteed by
international standards outlined in the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women, ratified by Iraq, but also Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security, which,
for more than 20 years, have emphasized the important
linkages between protection and participation. For
women to have their due status in all decision-making
processes across the country, the violence must end.
I therefore urge the Security Council to call on
the Iraqi Government to take all necessary measures
to protect girls and women from all forms of genderbased violence and to support access to justice for
survivors. That requires adopting the long-overdue
draft anti-domestic-violence law, amending the
penal code and preventing the interpretation of the
personal status law on sectarian grounds. Adopting the
anti-domestic-violence law could provide an important
solution for the thousands of Iraqi girls and women who
are increasingly exposed to gender-based violence on
daily basis.
I also urge the Council to call on the Government
of Iraq to provide gender-based violence survivors
with robust access to shelters, including shelters
operated by non-governmental organizations. That
includes ensuring survivors’ access to psychosocial
support, justice and legal services, as well as economic
empowerment and opportunities for a safe future.

23-140365/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

18/05/2023

Finally, we call on the Iraqi Government to
implement the Yazidi female survivors law, approved
in March 2021, and to allocate a budget for it.

security issues in all upcoming briefings and reports
to the Security Council, pursuant to resolutions 2122
(2013) and 2242 (2015).

As for women’s political participation, today 29 per
cent of the members of the Iraqi Parliament are women,
and the Cabinet includes three women ministers,
including the Minister of Finance. While that is a
positive first step, political parties lack the genuine
political will to ensure the meaningful participation
of women in all processes. It is not enough to only
increase the number of women in decision-making
positions — they must also have meaningful influence
over the outcomes of such processes and negotiations.
Simply put, without women at the table, political
decisions will remain the preserve of men and fail to
meaningfully reflect women’s rights and needs.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Iraq is
currently in the process of being built. I call on the
Security Council, instead of sending troops, to assist
Iraqis in rebuilding their homeland, to send experts
and to train young Iraqi men and women to contribute
to fighting corruption and building a sound State. The
Security Council should urge Iraq to ensure women’s
participation in political decision-making and their
place at the negotiation table.

I therefore call on the Security Council to pressure
the Iraqi Government to establish a national mechanism
for women, whether it is a council or a ministry, with
competent human resources, and to allocate a budget
that can adequately implement the second national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
On the renewal of UNAMI’s mandate, the United
Nations has a vital role to play in supporting and
advocating for the protection and advancement of
women’s human rights and gender equality and their
full, safe, equal and meaningful participation in peace
and political processes within Iraq.
As the mandate for UNAMI is renewed, it is essential
to strengthen its role in advancing any issues related to
the women and peace and security agenda. I strongly
encourage the Security Council to be explicit in calling
on the Mission to support women’s participation in all
political and decision-making processes by monitoring
and reporting any violations or retaliation against
women human rights defenders or other women leaders.
UNAMI should also prioritize regularly engaging with
Iraqi civil society so as to ensure that its views inform
the Mission’s work throughout the country. UNAMI
must provide the necessary support to the Government
of Iraq to enable it to carry out judicial and legal reforms,
protect women’s rights, support women’s organizations
and prevent all forms of gender-based violence, in
line with all relevant Security Council resolutions.
Finally, the Security Council should urge the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNAMI
to provide detailed analyses on women and peace and
6/19

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Latif
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for
her comprehensive briefing, and I thank Ms. Latif for
her briefing on the situation of women and girls.
The United States welcomed Prime Minister
Mohammed Shia’ Al Sudani’s participation in the
March Summit for Democracy, where he declared
that the Government of Iraq strives to meet the
demands and aspirations of the Iraqi people and
that combating corruption was at the top of the
Government’s list of priorities. We also took positive
note of the Prime Minister’s focus on promoting and
safeguarding democracy, human rights, the rule of law
and sustainable development and were particularly
encouraged by his emphasis on empowering women
politically and socially.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to maintain
its commitment to those essential reforms. Since the
formation of the Government, we have witnessed great
strides in stability and prosperity. But the appetite for
change is immense among Iraq’s dynamic youth — men
and women, who deserve economic opportunity and
effective governance as a foundation for achieving
their aspirations.
We encourage Iraq to work with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in securing
these reforms. UNAMI is well positioned to provide
assistance across the spectrum of social and economic
challenges, including on elections, promoting and
safeguarding human rights, combating climate change
and governance reform.
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

We also encourage Iraq and UNAMI to continue
collective efforts to support the members of Iraq’s
religious and ethnic minority communities. We are
pleased to see Iraq take steps to implement the Yazidi
female survivors law, and we encourage UNAMI
and Iraq to support full implementation of the Sinjar
Agreement as well as ensure that victims of ISIL
brutality can access the compensation they deserve
without burdensome evidentiary standards.
We encourage Iraq’s neighbours to positively
contribute to Iraq’s stability and prosperity. The
United States regards Iraq as a keystone in the arch
of security and stability for the Middle East, and its
sovereignty must be respected. Regional integration
and cooperation on energy, water, the environment and
trade will enhance security for all and will also create
new opportunities for economic growth.
The United States will stand side by side with all
Iraqis as they continue their effort, which has come at
great sacrifice to ensuring an enduring defeat of ISIL.
The United States and the Global Coalition to Defeat
ISIL will continue to provide support for this critical
effort at the invitation of the Iraqi Government.
An essential element of the defeat of ISIL is the
dismantling of its networks for recruitment and
radicalization to violence, particularly those that
prey on children in displacement camps in Syria. We
commend Iraq for its efforts to bring home Iraqis,
overwhelmingly women and children from Al-Hol
camp, and we call on all States Members of the United
Nations to repatriate, rehabilitate, reintegrate and,
where appropriate, prosecute their nationals in Iraq
and Syria.
In conclusion, let me say that we are eager to
see the UNAMI mandate renewed this month so that
the Mission can continue to provide Iraq meaningful
support as the country builds momentum in its
transition from conflict to peace and prosperity. As the
UNAMI penholder, we have circulated a first draft of
the mandate and look forward to working with Council
members in constructive negotiations.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I too would like to thank the Special
Representative for her extremely comprehensive
briefing and also thank Ms. Latif for her briefing. I
welcome the presence of the representative of Iraq in
the Chamber today.

S/PV.9324

I have three messages today. First of all, France
welcomes the positive role played by Iraq at the
regional level. Iraq’s good offices have made it possible
to facilitate rapprochement between two key States in
the region, Saudi Arabia and Iran. France is in favour
of any initiative that can contribute in a concrete way
to the de-escalation of tensions and the strengthening
of regional security and stability. The need to promote
dialogue in the region is, in this respect, at the heart of
the establishment of the Baghdad format.
As we know, a regional dialogue is an essential
first step towards the implementation of joint projects
that will promote the economic integration of the region
and, in particular, make it possible to respond to the
climate and environmental challenges facing the States
of the region. France also reiterates the importance of
close cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue
of missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals. We
encourage the two States to continue their dialogue on
this subject.
France strongly condemns all violations of Iraqi
sovereignty. Iraq is not a place for settling scores
between the countries of the region. We call on the
actors concerned to cease all interference in Iraq’s
internal affairs.
Secondly, France welcomes the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to carry out the reforms expected by the
Iraqi people and calls for them to be continued. These
efforts are important in the economic arena, but also
in the fight against corruption and impunity. Iraq’s
partners have a responsibility to support the country
in implementing the necessary reforms. For this, the
adoption of a federal budget is essential.
We also welcome the initiatives that have been
taken by Iraq to combat the effects of climate change.
The climate conference in Basra on 13 March
illustrated Prime Minister Al Sudani’s commitment to
the magnitude of the climate challenges facing Iraq.
On 24 March, Iraq became the first country in the
Middle East to join the Helsinki Water Convention.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue these
efforts. We call on the international community to
support them. Given the impact of climate change on
international peace and security, it is our collective
responsibility to help Iraq anticipate the consequences
of climate change.
France also encourages Iraq to pursue a constructive
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil, particularly with

23-140367/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

regard to security and the sharing of oil revenues. The
revival of cooperation between the federal authorities
and the autonomous region is absolutely essential, and
we are willing to facilitate these exchanges.
Thirdly, on behalf of France, I would like to express
our solidarity and support on the occasion of the funerals
that were recently held for dozens of victims of Da’esh,
a terrorist organization against which Iraq continues
to wage a courageous battle. In this regard, France
would like to commend the work of United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) and recall that the fight against
impunity for crimes committed by Da’esh requires
effective cooperation between UNITAD and the Iraqi
Government. In conjunction with the partners of the
Global Coalition against Da’esh, France will continue
to stand with Iraq in its fight against terrorism, while
fully respecting the country’s sovereignty, for as long
as necessary and as long as Iraq requests it.
Finally, as the Security Council prepares to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, I would like to express France’s full support
for the Mission’s action and for the remarkable work of
its Special Representative and her entire team.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Representative Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing and thank Ms. Latif for her
briefing. We welcome the Permanent Representative of
Iraq to today’s meeting,
During the reporting period, the Iraqi Government
has carried out active and effective governance, taking
practical measures to fight corruption, create jobs
and ensure governance and public services, thereby
achieving positive results, which China commends. We
support all Iraqi factions that are strengthening solidarity
and cooperation, making continued efforts to improve
people’s livelihoods and well-being and maintaining
peace stability. We hope that the federal Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government will keep
stepping up dialogue and consultation on outstanding
issues in pursuit of sustainable solutions.
For some period of time, the remnants of Da’esh
have continued to make waves in Iraq. The international
community should remain steadfast in its support for
Iraq’s counter-terrorism efforts.
8/19

18/05/2023

Thanks to its strategic location and ethnic
and religious diversity, Iraq is uniquely positioned
in regional cooperation and has recently made
considerable efforts to improve relations with countries
in the region, enhance solidarity and cooperation and
jointly respond to challenges. We appreciate this effort
and hope that the international community will, on the
basis of respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, continue to provide constructive assistance to
the country.
Secretary-General Guterres visited Iraq in March
this year and had extensive and in-depth exchanges
with all parties in the country, demonstrating the
unwavering support of the United Nations for the
Iraqi people. China welcomes this and supports the
continued assistance to the Iraqi people provided
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). Meanwhile, given the steady improvement
of the situation and the growing capacity of the Iraqi
Government, it is our hope that there be carried out
an independent strategic review of UNAMI that fully
complies with the views of the Iraqi Government and
accurately take the pulse of the situation on the ground,
systematically assess the work of UNAMI and come
up with recommendations on how to streamline and
optimize the Mission’s mandate and rationalize the
allocation of resources so that it can better carry out
its work and play its role on the basis of local dynamics
and the needs of the Iraqi people.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) for her briefing on developments in Iraq.
We recognize Ms. Khanim Latif, Founder and Director
of Asuda for Combating Violence Against Women,
and we thank her for her important testimony. We also
wish to recognize the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq in today’s meeting.
The A3 is encouraged by the commitment of
the Government of Prime Minister Mohammed
Shia’ Al Sudani in implementing the reform agenda,
including efforts to fight corruption, create jobs and
improve the delivery of public services. We also take
note of the approval by the Council of Ministers of a
draft federal budget bill for the period from 2023 to
2025 and its ongoing consideration by the Council
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

of Representatives. We express optimism that the
Council of Representatives will soon be able to agree
on the budget, which will be instrumental for the
implementation of the Government’s priorities. In a
similar vein, we commend the Government’s decision
to hold provincial council elections by December
2023. We consider that measure an important sign
of the continued strength and resilience of Iraq’s
democratic journey.
In that context, we urge productive consultations
between the Council of Ministers and the Independent
High Electoral Commission. The A3 further encourages
the active participation of all segments of Iraqi society,
including women, young people and representatives of
civil society and religious leaders. That is essential to
build consensus and legitimize the electoral process
and its outcome.
The continued path to Iraq’s stability is also a
function of addressing the outstanding issues between
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government. The A3 therefore welcomes the progress
made in the consultations between Baghdad and Erbil
in resolving disputes related to revenue sharing and
hydrocarbon management, which led to the temporary
agreement on 4 April on the resumption of oil exports.
We urge both parties to seize the positive atmosphere
that is created to secure a more permanent accord. We
applaud those political and economic developments as
tangible and concrete benefits resulting from efforts
by the Government of Iraq towards a stable political
environment in which Iraqis can thrive, prosper and
benefit from the peace dividend.
With regard to the security situation, Gabon, Ghana
and Mozambique note the indication in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/340) of an overall decline
in attacks attributed to Da’esh in the first quarter of
2023 compared to the same period in 2022. However,
we remain seriously concerned by the persistent threat
from Da’esh and other terrorist and violent extremist
groups in Iraq. Coupled with the proliferation of
weapons in the region, Da’esh and other extremist
outfits continue to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. The A3 therefore supports the Iraqi
security forces’ efforts to ensure the lasting defeat of
Da’esh and emphasizes the importance of combating
terrorism, while respecting the sovereignty, national
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.

S/PV.9324

At the regional level, we welcome the Iraqi
Government’s diplomatic efforts to promote a
foreign policy aimed at strengthening bilateral ties
and promoting economic cooperation. We note with
satisfaction the various visits and meetings held by
the Government during the reporting period with
neighbouring countries, regional and international
actors, including the Secretary-General. That is, in
our view, an unequivocal expression of willingness to
advance a foreign policy agenda focused on achieving
peace and stability in Iraq and in the entire region.
The A3 joins the international public praise of Iraq’s
Government for its role in the conclusion of the
Beijing agreement between Iran and Saudi Arabia, a
diplomatic effort with important ramifications towards
regional détente in the Middle East and beyond. While
regional dialogue in itself cannot overcome the decades
of polarization and antagonisms that led to conflict
and destruction in Iraq, it is certainly an important
starting point in lowering tensions and promoting an
environment conducive to peace and tolerance to the
benefit of the wider Middle East.
The A3 recognizes the vital role played by UNAMI
in supporting Iraq in overcoming its myriad political,
humanitarian and development challenges. We welcome
the continued electoral assistance provided by UNAMI
to Iraq’s federal and regional authorities, officials
from electoral institutions, representatives of political
parties and civil society organizations on issues related
to elections. That is an essential task for the longterm political stability and democratic viability of the
Iraqi State.
On the humanitarian front, the A3 acknowledges
the overall improvement in the humanitarian situation
in Iraq, although returns to areas of origin remain,
in our judgement, slow. While noting the continued
challenges in the settlement of internally displaced
persons in Iraq, we look forward to hearing more in
future reports on the results of the integration and
the relocation measures of the national plan of the
Government of Iraq, as well as the Secretary-General’s
Action Agenda on Internal Displacement, of which Iraq
is a pilot country.
The A3 joins other countries in expressing
concerns over Iraq’s growing vulnerability to climate
change. The reporting period witnessed events of
severe flooding affecting several parts of the country,
including the Kurdistan region and the capital,
Baghdad, as well as the worsening of desertification

23-140369/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

and the rapid disappearance of arable land. In
that context, the A3 encourages UNAMI and the
United Nations country team to continue innovative
experiments related to water resources The increased
frequency of climate-related crises constitutes a serious
threat multiplier, as it increases the risk of poverty,
food insecurity, biodiversity loss, displacement, forced
migration and related instability. That is the argument
put forward by the A3 in favour of raising the Council’s
profile in addressing climate, peace and security.
In conclusion, we, the A3, reiterate our strong
support for UNAMI’s efforts in the implementation of
its mandate, including the commitment to support the
Government and the people of Iraq.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Special
Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her detailed
briefing and Ms. Latif for bringing her important
perspectives and valuable insights to the table. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
this meeting.
Malta is encouraged by the Government of
Iraq’s commitment to building a peaceful, stable
and prosperous country. We strongly support the
Government’s reform agenda, which seeks to tackle
corruption, improve public services, diversify the
economy and address the needs of vulnerable groups.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for the expeditious
adoption of the federal budget to ensure that the
Government can implement its ambitious programme.
Inclusive political oversight and electoral processes
are vital elements for a peaceful and stable democratic
environment. The efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to promote the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all
levels of the judiciary, as well as in provincial council
elections, are critical. In addition, while we commend
the first payments made to Yazidi female survivors,
we urge that the additional requirements imposed on
survivors to submit criminal complaints be revoked.
On the political front, we welcome the recent steps
taken by the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to address several outstanding
issues, including the Kurdistan Regional Government’s
commitment to holding regional parliamentary
elections in November. We also welcome the federal
Government’s plans to hold provincial council elections
before the end of 2023. It is essential to ensure that the
Independent High Electoral Commission retains its
10/19

18/05/2023

independence and is provided with an adequate budget
and time frame to organize the elections.
We commend the positive role played by Iraq in the
region. In particular, we welcome its diplomatic efforts
to advance stability, including through its engagement
and facilitation of dialogue with regional partners. We
call on all States, particularly neighbouring countries,
to respect and support Iraq’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and democratic political process. Respect
for those principles is essential to enhancing regional
stability. We also stress the need to fight terrorism and
recurring Da’esh attacks in accordance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and we express our steadfast support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. Malta emphasizes the importance of
respecting human rights and democratic principles. We
welcome the commencement of the selection process
for a new Board of Commissioners for the Iraqi High
Commission for Human Rights Law. We also welcome
the Government’s signing of an action plan to prevent
the recruitment and use of children by the Popular
Mobilization Forces. Nevertheless, we are deeply
concerned about the 22 grave violations committed
against children, the 61 civilian casualties documented
by UNAMI and the high incidence of those casualties
that were caused by explosive remnants of war.
Malta stresses the importance of addressing climate
change and security in Iraq — the country that is the
fifth most-affected by climate change. We recognize
the Government’s efforts to mitigate its negative effects
and echo the Secretary-General’s call for increased
international and regional efforts to address water
scarcity and its gender dimensions. While we welcome
the improvement of the overall humanitarian situation,
we take note of the recent update on the activities of
the United Nations humanitarian country team (see
S/2023/340), which states that nearly 1 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and returnees remain in
acute need of humanitarian assistance. The voluntary
return of IDPs to their areas of origin remains slow,
owing to the lack of basic services, limited livelihood
opportunities and safety concerns. Despite that, we
continue to see the unilateral closure of IDP camps by
the Government, which entails negative humanitarian
consequences. We reiterate our call that the return of
internally displaced persons must be safe, voluntary,
dignified and consensual. We also note with concern
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

the challenges that food security poses in Iraq and urge
regional and international partners to ensure that the
World Food Programme remains equipped to continue
its support in the country.
In conclusion, we highlight once again our steadfast
support for the efforts of the Government of Iraq and
UNAMI to promote stability, peace and prosperity for
the future of all Iraqis. We look forward to engaging
constructively in the coming days to ensure the smooth
renewal of the UNAMI mandate.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert for her
briefing and Ms. Latif for her insights on the situation
of women in Iraq.
It has been seven months since the formation of
the new Iraqi Government, and we acknowledge Iraq’s
steadfast commitment to ensuring a peaceful, secure
and prosperous future for all its citizens. However, as
we heard, challenges remain, and they require robust
actions through inclusive leadership. We strongly
support the Government’s reform agenda in combating
corruption, improving public services, diversifying the
economy to reduce the heavy dependency on oil revenues
and caring for the most vulnerable, especially returning
Iraqis and internally displaced people. The successful
implementation of those policies requires the resolve
and cooperation of all political leaders and relevant
stakeholders for the common good and overcoming
factional interests and politics. The adoption of the
draft budget is a welcome and vital step towards
realizing those reforms, and we urge the Council of
Representatives to reach a budget agreement as soon as
possible, while fulfilling its oversight responsibilities.
Human rights must continue to be at the heart of
the reform efforts, and we appreciate the Government’s
commitment to ensure the full, meaningful and equal
participation of women in decision-making processes,
in the workforce and across society. But commitments
are not enough — they need to be fully implemented to
be meaningful. The establishment of a dedicated women
judges association in Iraq is a positive step towards
establishing gender equality in the Iraqi judiciary.
We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue its
work on compensating survivors that are eligible for
compensation under the Yazidi female survivors law.
Iraq needs a meaningful and powerful civic space for a
healthy democratic society.

S/PV.9324

We appreciate and support the ongoing dialogue
between the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to address outstanding issues,
including the electoral framework for the elections to
be held in November. As the Iraq experience has shown,
we believe that regular, institutionalized and structured
dialogue is the only path to reach lasting agreements
in line with the Constitution. Close cooperation
between Bagdad and Erbil is crucial to achieving
political stability and security in Iraq. We remain
concerned about the ongoing attacks, including those
perpetrated by Da’esh. We commend and support the
Prime Minister for taking a strong stance in reclaiming
State authority over armed militias. Albania firmly
supports Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and unequivocally condemns all attempts to destabilize
its political independence and stability. We commend
Iraq’s engagement with its neighbours in pursuit of
friendly relations in the region and beyond.
More than 1 million internally displaced persons
require humanitarian assistance and dedicated efforts
for their full reintegration within society. Climate
change is no longer a looming threat. In Iraq, as in
other places, its consequences have become a reality.
The number of days with temperatures of more than
50°C is increasing and droughts are becoming longer
and more intense, bringing severe water scarcity. We
welcome the Government’s new package of climate and
biodiversity protection measures, announced in March.
Its ratification of the United Nations Water Convention
is an important positive step in the efforts to mitigate
the consequences of climate change.
In conclusion, Albania reiterates its appreciation
and support for the valuable work done by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and looks
forward to constructive discussions on renewing and
strengthening its mandate to address Iraq’s needs.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
informative briefing. I welcome the Iraqi delegation to
today’s meeting and thank the representative of civil
society for her briefing.
Twenty years ago, the Council convened at the
request of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
to discuss the situation in Iraq in the aftermath of
the invasion. That was a meeting in which Brazil
participated. On that occasion, the Brazilian delegation
deplored the fact that a peaceful solution to the situation

23-1403611/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

in Iraq had not been given a chance (see S/PV.4726).
We also warned about the risks to the Council’s
authority caused by a departure from the rules of our
United Nations collective security system. We rightly
pointed out that the situation had acquired a dimension
that would go beyond the conflict itself and could have
adverse and long-standing effects on the work of the
United Nations. And so it has — with all its profound
legal and political implications. It is worth noting that
it happened at a time when the international community
was filled with hope and trust in a new order, with a
strong and vibrant United Nations. But in fact, 2003 will
go down as a very low point in our collective history.
The situation in Iraq was such that the United
Nations could not avoid going into the country to provide
assistance to the population and help organize elections
in the shortest possible time frame. Unfortunately,
by doing that, the United Nations was perceived as
supporting the military operation and itself became a
target. A mere five months after the invasion, we lost
Sérgio Vieira de Mello and 21 members of his team in a
heinous bomb attack on United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad. For the past 20 years, to the best of its ability,
the United Nations presence in Iraq has attempted to
restore peace and stability there in the wake of the
collapse of the country’s institutions brought about in
2003. We believe it is now time for a realistic assessment
of what still has to be accomplished.
In the negotiations on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), we should not lose sight of the fact that
an indispensable condition for our ability to provide
support to Iraq is a request from the host country. And
on top of that, it provides the answers for the needs and
priorities that the United Nations should be supporting,
as identified by the requesting State. Ultimately, in
keeping with the Council’s authority under the Charter
of the United Nations, the continuing presence of the
United Nations in Iraq should be aimed at ensuring
the complete devolution to Iraqis of control over all
aspects of their country’s life. That will bring Iraq
closer to realizing its full potential as a sovereign and
independent nation. In our view, that objective is better
served by a focus on measures that can actively support
political dialogue, national reconciliation and securitysector reform, as well as the Iraqi people’s ownership
of their political system and institutions. We take a
positive view of the proposal for an assessment of the
12/19

18/05/2023

current threats to Iraq’s peace and security, which can
provide recommendations for UNAMI’s mandate.
Achieving stability and sustainable peace in Iraq
will be possible only if the root causes of violence,
including violent extremism, are addressed. The
promotion of the economic development and welfare
of the people in Iraq should be emphasized as a key
instrument in countering terrorism. The threat posed
by Da’esh in Iraq cannot be eradicated through
sanctions and individual accountability mechanisms
alone. Socioeconomic factors, including the sentiments
of injustice felt by marginalized populations, must be
taken into account. Countering terrorism in Iraq also
requires cooperation among States. Brazil reiterates
that there can be no legitimate right to self-defence
exercised against the territory of any State unless it is
in response to an actual armed attack attributable to
that State.
Finally, as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
most recent report on the implementation of resolution
2631 (2022) (S/2023/340), Brazil commends the
governmental efforts to resolve outstanding issues in
the relations between the federal Government and the
Government of the Kurdistan region, including regarding
the management of oil revenues. We underscore the
importance of mutual understanding and cooperation
among governmental entities, bearing in mind Iraq’s
right to development and the permanent sovereignty of
the Iraqi people over their natural resources.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her thorough briefing. We welcome the participation
of the representative of Iraq in this meeting. We also
listened closely to Ms. Khanim Latif’s briefing.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s visit to Iraq in
March, which demonstrated the continued support of
the United Nations for this country and its people. We
stress the importance of the international community’s
continued engagement with Iraq, especially at this
stage, when the Government is working to overcome the
challenges of the past decades and making the reforms
needed to meet the needs of the Iraqi people. In that
context, we welcome the recent positive developments
in Iraq, including the agreement between Baghdad and
Erbil on resuming oil exports. We hope that the next
stage will see progress made towards addressing all
the unresolved and outstanding issues between the two
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

parties, including the adoption of a federal hydrocarbon
law in a manner that will support the oil and economic
sectors in Iraq. It will also be important to complete the
necessary steps for approving the federal budget law,
which is closely linked to the country’s development.
Regarding the anticipated parliamentary elections
in the Kurdistan region and the provincial elections, we
urge that they be held in accordance with the specified
timeline and promote the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women.
With regard to the security situation, we commend
the unwavering efforts to combat terrorism, which
contributed to an unprecedented drop in the frequency
of attacks by Da’esh in Iraq in the first quarter of this
year. We emphasize the importance of continuing
those efforts, especially as Da’esh has persisted in its
attacks in several regions of Iraq and against Iraqi
security forces.
Turning to the issue of climate change, its
repercussions constitute a major challenge for Iraq,
especially considering the threat it represents to the
country’s long-term security and stability, as well as to
other aspects of life. We commend the Government’s
leading role in addressing the impact of climate
change and the water crisis, in particular its initiative
to host a climate conference and the recent third
Baghdad International Water Conference. We call for
intensifying the bilateral cooperation between Iraq and
various States in that regard, as well as for continuing
work with the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq to address environmental concerns in Iraq.
We believe that Iraq’s continuing endeavours
to restore its positive role in its Arab and wider
regional environment through good-neighbourly
relations are among the important efforts that will
enhance engagement and dialogue and build bridges
to support stability in the region. We also value Iraq’s
broad participation in several regional frameworks
and mechanisms aimed at supporting the search for
solutions to issues in the region.
Separately, we hope that progress will be made
on the issue of the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals, as well as the Kuwaiti archives. We welcome
the decree issued by the Prime Minister of Iraq to
establish a committee to support activities aimed at
locating missing persons. We appreciate those ongoing
efforts and stress the importance of maintaining the
ongoing cooperation between the two countries on that

S/PV.9324

critical file until it is resolved in accordance with the
resolutions of the Security Council. In the context of the
upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, we affirm that the United
Arab Emirates is eager to work with the members of
the Council and to coordinate with Iraq to ensure that
an agreed text is concluded that provides the adequate
support necessary to respond to Iraq’s current needs.
In conclusion, we renew our support for Iraq’s
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, as well
as our rejection of any interference in the country’s
internal affairs. We reaffirm our solidarity with the
brotherly Iraqi people in their quest for recovery and
in their aspirations to build a better future filled with
peace and prosperity.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and Ms. Khanim Latif for
their briefings.
In Iraq, we have witnessed steady political progress
and a significant improvement in the security situation
since last October, when the current Government
was formed. In particular, the Government of Iraq’s
expeditious planning and implementation of economic
and fiscal reforms and anti-corruption commitments are
commendable. The Security Council should encourage
the Government of Iraq to make every effort to ensure
that those initiatives benefit all people in Iraq, including
women, young people and internally displaced people.
With regard to the provincial council elections,
we join the Secretary-General in welcoming the
Government’s intent to hold them before the end of 2023,
and we echo his view that transparency and inclusivity
in the electoral process are critical. It is encouraging to
see Iraq’s proactive engagement with its neighbouring
countries and the international community at all levels.
Concerning the issue of climate-related water scarcity,
for example, Iraq’s hosting of the third Baghdad
International Water Conference and its participation
in the United Nations 2023 Water Conference are
illustrations of its willingness to utilize dialogue in
order to explore solutions on that critical and sensitive
cross-regional challenge. That continued engagement
should be backed up by the Security Council.
Japan also welcomes the close cooperation between
Iraq and Kuwait on missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, as the Special

23-1403613/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

Representative mentioned in her update. Furthermore,
Iraq’s constructive role in building regional confidence
continues to be an anchor for peace and stability in
the region. In that regard, we recall with appreciation
the mediation efforts by Iraq, along with other actors,
that helped lay the groundwork for the agreement to
normalize relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
No attack against the territory of Iraq, including in the
Kurdistan region, should occur. A prerequisite for peace
and stability in Iraq, as well as for good neighbourliness
in the region, is to ensure full respect for its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Lastly, UNAMI has demonstrated an unwavering
commitment to supporting Iraq over the past 20 years.
UNAMI’s efforts to promote national and regional
dialogue have contributed significantly to the stability of
Iraq and the region. Even two decades after its mandate
was given, UNAMI’s role is still essential. We, the
Security Council, should have continuing discussions
on that matter and seek the best approach for UNAMI
and the United Nations entities in supporting the
Government and the people of Iraq to realize stability
and prosperity. Japan will continue to provide its full
support for UNAMI’s work.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert for the
information she provided us and Ms. Khanim Latif
for her briefing. I also welcome the presence in the
Chamber of the Permanent Representative of Iraq.
Ecuador supports the work carried out by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and welcomes the outcomes of the actions taken by
the Special Representative to promote peace, national
reconciliation and security in Iraq. We agree with the
principles that the Government of Iraq’s reform agenda
aims to pursue, with a focus on combating corruption,
creating jobs, diversifying the economy and improving
the provision of public services. We also encourage the
Iraqi authorities to continue the discussion process with
a view to adopting new legal frameworks on priority
issues through a participatory and multi-stakeholder
approach at both the national and local levels.
In accordance with resolution 2631 (2022),
effective governance based on the implementation
of national objectives, as well as political stability
and the promotion of conditions conducive to wellbeing and development, are indispensable factors for
14/19

18/05/2023

ensuring progress in peacebuilding. We encourage the
continuation and deepening of efforts to strengthen the
rule of law and institutions in Iraq through transparent
accountability processes that ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, consistent with
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). Iraq must
strengthen its channels of cooperation at the local and
regional levels in order to address challenges such as
the devaluation of the national currency, the effects
of climate change, especially water scarcity, and the
dependence on humanitarian assistance, as well as the
challenges in promoting the return and reintegration of
displaced persons and in creating effective institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights.
We condemn the continuing attacks attributed to
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which — as we
heard earlier — continue to threaten the lives and safety
of civilians despite their decrease in number compared
to the previous year. We deplore the civilian casualties
caused by improvised explosive devices and remnants
of war. The action plan to prevent the recruitment and
use of children by the Popular Mobilization Forces
is a tool, the implementation of which can contribute
to a sustained reduction of human rights violations
and abuses against minors. The Council must reject
violence and defend the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country. Peace in Iraq is
conducive to peace in the region.
Ecuador will support the renewal of UNAMI’s
mandate for an additional year. We also hope that there
will be a possibility to carry out an independent strategic
review of the mandate, in close consultation with the
Government of Iraq and all stakeholders, with a genderinclusive approach. In that process of consolidation, it
is imperative that we support the Government of Iraq
in the application of strategies that promote social and
economic development and governance.
Finally, UNAMI assistance will also be essential
in building institutional capacities to promote the
participation of all social and political sectors,
particularly of women and youth and minority, ethnic
and religious representatives.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I, too, thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
detailed briefing on the situation in the Republic of
Iraq. We also listened very closely to Ms. Khanim Latif,
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

and we welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq in today’s meeting.
We are closely following the positive trends in the
internal political situation in the friendly country of
Iraq against the backdrop of the continuing difficult
socioeconomic situation.
In that regard, we welcome and support the efforts
of the Cabinet of Ministers, led by Mr. Mohammed Shia’
Al Sudani, to improve the sociopolitical situation in the
country, ensuring stability, security and law and order
and conducting socioeconomic reforms. We expect that
all Iraqi political forces will continue to act responsibly
and will strive to resolve existing differences only
through constructive dialogue and in the interests of
all ethnic and religious communities and social groups.
In that context, we support the continuation of
substantive negotiations between the federal authorities
of Baghdad and the Kurdish Autonomous Region of
Iraq on all outstanding disputed issues, primarily in the
oil and gas industry. We are convinced that resolving
such issues will help to effectively realize the economic
potential of the country, for the benefit of the Kurds and
the Iraqi people, as a whole.
According to the Secretary-General’s most
recent report (S/2023/340), various provinces of the
Republic continue to be targeted by attacks by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant fighters, who are thus
destabilizing the already precarious regional security.
We are concerned about the military activity in the
northern parts of the country, including in the Kurdish
Autonomous Region. In that context, we would like to
emphasize once again that the remaining challenges
and threats can be effectively countered only through
the broadest possible coordination of counter-terrorism
efforts. At the same time, we continue to maintain that
all parties involved in the fight against terrorism in
Iraq must respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and
coordinate their actions with the official authorities.
We note that sustainable normalization in Iraq
continues to be hampered by some countries’ attempts
to capitalize on intra-Iraqi disagreements. It is
unacceptable to transform the country into an arena for
settling political scores and for regional confrontation.
We highly appreciate Baghdad’s efforts to build good
neighbourly relations and call on the international
community to support Iraq’s steps to stabilize the
overall regional situation.

S/PV.9324

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and stability of Iraq and our unflagging support for
the various activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, which will turn 20 in August. We
support the extension of its mandate, which expires on
31 May.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Special Representative for her very clear
briefing and Ms. Latif for her words about protecting
the rights of women and girls.
At the outset, I would like to commend the continued
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and thank the team for its efforts. Over
the past 20 years, the Mission has played a vital role
in supporting Iraq and the Iraqi people. We strongly
support the renewal of UNAMI’s mandate and welcome
the opportunity for an independent strategic review to
ensure that the Mission is aligned to the current peace
and security threats facing Iraq.
The United Kingdom remains committed
to supporting the Iraqi Government and the
implementation of its ambitious reform agenda. In
particular, approving a budget will be a crucial step
in delivering the Government’s priorities, including
on economic reform and energy diversification. We
welcome the steps already taken to tackle corruption,
strengthen economic infrastructure and begin the green
energy transition.
We also commend the steps taken by the Iraqi
Government to find durable solutions to address the
displacement crisis in Iraq, to provide essential services
and to support survivors of conflict, including those
from minority communities. We continue to encourage
further implementation of the Yazidi female survivors
law, including through the timely distribution of
reparations to survivors. And the United Kingdom will
continue to work with the Iraqi Government to support
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence,
including so that the horrific crimes perpetrated by
Da’esh are addressed and prosecuted effectively.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her update on the Kurdistan
region and we urge the Kurdistan Regional Parliament
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to take all
necessary steps to ensure that the planned elections
are able to take place in November, without further
postponement. It is incumbent on all parties to ensure an

23-1403615/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

electoral process that adheres to international standards
and upholds the rights of all citizens, including women
and minorities, to participate in the democratic process.
We welcome the Special Representative’s update on
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property.
We commend Iraq’s focus on its regional relations
and welcome the Special Representative’s role in
supporting regional dialogue. As we continue to see
the adverse impacts of climate change, the Special
Representative’s engagement on transboundary
environmental issues is particularly valuable.
Once again, I would like to renew the United
Kingdom’s commitment to the stability and security of
Iraq and to the Mission’s essential supporting role. We
look forward to participating in further discussions on
the renewal of the mandate in the coming days.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Switzerland.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq and Ms. Khanim Latif
for their briefings. Switzerland commends the work of
the Special Representative and of all the staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
during almost 20 years, and we welcome the presence
among us of the representative of Iraq.
Switzerland welcomes the Iraqi Government’s
reform programme, which includes fighting corruption,
providing basic social services, combating climate
change and protecting human rights. We encourage the
Government to take concrete steps to implement those
reforms and thus meet the legitimate aspirations of the
Iraqi people.
In that connection, we would like to highlight three
particularly important points.
First, we welcome the representation of women
in the Parliament and the Government and encourage
Iraq to build on this to strengthen women’s full, equal,
meaningful and safe participation in all aspects of
life. As Ms. Latif just stated, the approval of the law
against domestic violence would be an important step
in that regard. In addition, efforts to protect the rights
to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly and, more generally, to protect the space
for civil society must continue. Those responsible for
human rights violations must be held accountable. In
16/19

18/05/2023

that regard, we welcome UNAMI’s activities to assist
the Government in those areas.
Secondly, the protection of minorities and the most
vulnerable is essential for social cohesion and national
reconciliation. In that regard, Switzerland welcomes
Iraq’s efforts to find durable solutions for internally
displaced Iraqis. Providing them with the necessary
civil documentation to access basic social services,
including education for children, is fundamental. We
recognize the progress made by the Iraqi Government
in implementing the Yazidi female survivors law by
distributing the first payments. In addition, the issue
of the inclusion of children born as a result of conflictrelated sexual violence deserves to be addressed, in
particular by tackling the administrative obstacles
faced in reporting such cases.
Thirdly, Switzerland welcomes Iraq’s accession
to the 1992 Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes.
We welcome the holding of the conferences on water
and climate change, in Baghdad and Basra, respectively.
Indeed, climate change is a destabilizing factor in Iraq,
as it contributes to droughts and water scarcity, with
serious consequences for agriculture and livelihoods,
thereby reinforcing threats of social unrest and internal
displacement. Every measure aimed at mitigating the
effects of climate change also serves a preventive
purpose. For this reason, Switzerland believes that
aspects related to climate change should be maintained
and strengthened in the UNAMI mandate.
With regard to missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals, we welcome the ongoing efforts to make
progress on this issue, including the question of missing
Kuwaiti property, in particular the national archives.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
commitment to Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and thank Iraq for its efforts to bring greater
stability to the region by facilitating dialogue. The
Security Council has a duty to support Iraq as it
continues its journey towards a stable and prosperous
future. To this end, Switzerland will engage in the
negotiations for the renewal of UNAMI’s mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to congratulate Her Excellency Ambassador
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Pascale
Baeriswyl,
Permanent
Representative
of Switzerland, for presiding over the Security
Council this month. I would like also to thank His
Excellency Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for presiding
over the Council in April. I would like also to thank
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) for her
briefing. I take note of Ms. Khanim Latif’s briefing.
The Government of Iraq perseveres within the
national partnership framework to achieve its ambitious
Government reform programme, including diversifying
the economy, building more robust democratic and
security institutions, combating unchecked weapons,
strengthening accountability, consolidating the security
and stability of the country, promoting human rights and
women’s empowerment, finalizing the refugee dossier
and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
for all Iraqis. The Government is sparing no effort to
address the challenges facing the country, including
combating administrative and financial corruption
and inflation.
The Government is also focused on instituting
radical reforms of the banking and fiscal system, so
that they can work in tandem with the global system.
It is also addressing the electricity crisis, implementing
strategic projects, improving delivery of public services
and creating job opportunities for all Iraqis, especially
young people. The Government is also focused on
safeguarding Iraq’s share of water resources and on
improving and increasing agricultural production.
Efforts are under way to prepare for the third Baghdad
Conference for Cooperation and Partnership in the last
quarter of this year, where we will focus on economic
topics, which are the priority of the current Iraqi
Government in line with its stated programme.
Allow me to brief the Security Council on the
most important key developments in Iraq over the
last four months. With respect to the relationship
between the federal Government in Baghdad and the
Kurdistan Regional Government, there has been a sort
of rapprochement, especially since the parties came to
understandings in relation to the Kurdistan Region’s
share of the national fiscal budget and to the temporary
agreement on oil exports from the Region, pending
the adoption by the Iraqi parliament of a permanent
oil and gas law. These will contribute to the success
of the parties’ efforts to improve their relationship and

S/PV.9324

address a number of outstanding issues, including the
modification of relevant articles of the Constitution and
the matter of disputed territories.
With respect to security, and notwithstanding the
diminished presence of terrorist groups on the ground,
Iraq continues its cooperation with the international
community, the United Nations and ad hoc agencies
to combat radical ideologies or uproot them altogether,
in addition to cooperating with the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. Iraq continues its cooperation with
the NATO mission in Iraq, whose representatives are
training Iraqi security forces and providing military
advice in cooperation with the Ministry of Defence
and the National Security Council, which is one of the
outcomes of the visit of the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs to Brussels last month,
including his meeting with the Secretary General
of NATO.
Iraq reiterates its call for respect for its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and it underscores
the importance of upholding the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, especially sovereign
equality and the principles of good-neighbourliness.
As for supporting liberated regions and refugees,
Al-Hol camp hosts some 60,000 persons, half of whom
are Iraqis, and the Government is sparing no effort
in repatriating 150 Iraqi families every month and
transporting them to Al-Jada’a camp for their security
and psychological rehabilitation. In addition, the
Government is committed to the full implementation of
the Sinjar Agreement and allowing the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of Yazidis to their homes.
Iraq calls upon other countries and the international
community to shoulder their responsibilities, intensify
efforts, take all necessary measures and procedures
towards facilitating repatriation of their nationals
from Al-Hol camp and other locations by making use
of the Global Framework for United Nations Support
on Syria/Iraq Third Country National Returnees, and
creating an environment conducive to serving the best
interests of children, in accordance international law,
given that the majority of the refugees in Al-Hol camp
are less than 12 years of age and are without any means
of extracting themselves from this desperate situation
and its attendant deprivation. Iraq also reiterates how
important it is for the international community to

23-1403617/19

S/PV.9324

The situation concerning Iraq

shoulder its responsibility with regard to the extradition
of terrorists and to stopping the financing of terrorism.
As for the economic sector, the Iraqi Government
is currently focusing its investments on new
infrastructure to diversify and develop a number of
productive sectors, including reconstruction, industry,
agriculture, renewable energy and information and
communication technology. To achieve this objective,
the Government is focused on building a multifaceted
connectivity infrastructure system comprised of ports,
airports, highways and railway lines to connect Iraq to
neighbouring countries and countries of the Gulf, such
as the United Arab Emirates, Oman and Qatar. Iraq
stands ready to cooperate with all countries in terms
of economic partnerships, and we have committees
that are working on economic projects that involve
productive partnerships between Iraq and fraternal
countries in the Arab region, as well as countries from
around the world.
The Government of Iraq attaches special
importance to investment in natural gas sector, which
is vital for global energy market. It conducts monthly
reviews of the investment environment in Iraq and
is working on improving it through legislation. The
Economic Ministerial Council is focusing on engaging
private sector. At the same time, the Government
is currently addressing the issue of the public sector
as an exclusive employer, and the Iraqi parliament is
about to look into voting on a unified retirement law
that would serve as an important structural reform
because it will also support the private sector. With
regard to women’s empowerment, Iraq is committed to
upholding international conventions on women and the
family in terms of the participation of women at the
political, legislative and executive levels. We have 96
female members of parliament, as well as 116 female
judges and 3 female ministers, which demonstrates our
commitment to ensuring the participation of women.
The Government of Iraq is currently also promoting all
institutions and committees related to improving the
participation of women in decision-making, including
political decision-making.
In terms of human rights, Iraq is preparing to host, in
September, the fifty-second session of the Arab Human
Rights Committee. That Committee was adopted by the
League of Arab States at the ministerial level.
Iraq and the United Nations signed, on 30 March,
an action plan on the prevention of the use and
18/19

18/05/2023

recruitment of children by armed forces as a critical
step towards improving the situation of children. The
Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights continues to
carry out its responsibilities and its mandate, including
by documenting the various demands by protesters and
making sure that security forces are present to protect
them, as well as addressing the needs of prisoners and
residents of elderly homes and orphanages.
There is significant cooperation with the United
Nations Development Programme regarding the
repatriation and the return of IDPs, especially in the
districts of Hawija and Riyadh, and the residents of
Debaga camp, as well as following up on services related
to their education and health. We have also participated
in the first meeting of the ad hoc committee on the
implementation of the provisions of the law on human
trafficking, and we are discussing specific mechanisms
and procedures to address a number of issues, including
begging and foreign workers, as well as suspicious
cases of digital extortion and other negative cases.
In relation to combating desertification and
addressing climate change, Iraq participated with a highlevel delegation in the United Nations Conference on the
Midterm Comprehensive Review of the Implementation
of the Objectives of the International Decade for Action,
“Water for Sustainable Development”, and contributed
with very important statements in the side events that
were held under the presidency of the President of
the Republic.
Iraq was the first Arab State and the forty-ninth
country in the world to join the Convention on the
Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes, which attests to its
seriousness regarding cooperating and negotiating
with neighbouring States on that issue, and ownership
in protecting the Tigris and the Euphrates. It also
reiterates the success of Iraq in water diplomacy
with a view to securing the legitimate right of Iraqis
to their share of water; implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development; addressing the negative
impacts of the drought at the economic, social and
cultural levels and its wide-reaching repercussions on
the environment, including scorching temperatures
and relentless desertification, as they also affect
food security, health and transportation and cause
displacement, demographic changes and upheaval.
Moreover, they threaten biodiversity and historical
sites listed on the World Heritage List, as well as the
23-14036

18/05/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

wetlands classified by the Ramsar Convention. In that
connection, Iraq stresses its commitment to supporting
international efforts aimed at resolving the water
crisis, reducing water waste and addressing increased
salinity through transboundary water management that
ensures an equitable distribution of water to combat
water scarcity, which has led to dwindling water levels
in rivers, marshes and lakes. We must also focus on
cooperating with neighbouring countries to reach
equitable and integrated management of transboundary
water resources.
Turning to its relations with the fraternal State of
Kuwait, Iraq is keen to preserve its bilateral relations
with Kuwait. It promotes and maintains those relations
at the political, economic and cultural levels with
a view to ensuring the prosperity of the peoples of
both countries. We are continuing our dialogue on
all technical and legal aspects of the finalization of
the demarcation of the marine and maritime borders
between the countries beyond point 162. Moreover,
Baghdad hosted, on 19 February, the fifth round of the
Iraqi-Kuwaiti joint technical committee, and recently,
the sixth round, hosted by Kuwait, was held.
Iraq expresses its appreciation for the efforts
undertaken by the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as Chair of the Tripartite Commission, which
monitors the dossier of the prisoners of war and missing
Kuwaitis and third-country nationals. We pledge to
continue cooperating in that effort.

S/PV.9324

In conclusion, I would like to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres, for
the firm position of the United Nations in supporting
Iraq and upholding its sovereignty, its territorial
integrity, as reiterated by him during his visit to Iraq,
accompanied by Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, from
1 to 2 February. I would like to thank the international
community for its continued support for our efforts
to promote the prosperity and stability of the Iraqi
people. In that regard, I would like to express my
gratitude for the efforts undertaken by UNAMI. We
call for renewing the mandate of the UNAMI for
another year. In the meantime, it is essential that an
independent review of the future activities of UNAMI
be carried out, which could result in a limited mandate
for the Mission, in accordance with the demands of
the Iraqi Government. We also would like to thank the
country team representing a number of United Nations
specialized agencies and funds for their provision of
basic humanitarian assistance.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-1403619/19
