S/PRST/2000/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 June 2000
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4167th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 June 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitments to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, consistent with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, bearing in mind respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia. It reiterates
that full responsibility for achieving national reconciliation and peace rests
with the Somali people themselves.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts exerted by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) to find a political
solution to the crisis in Somalia. It welcomes and fully supports the initiative
of the President of Djibouti aimed at restoring peace and stability in Somalia
and urges States and international organizations, in a position to do so, to give
these efforts political support and to provide financial and technical assistance
to the Government of Djibouti to this end.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the ongoing abuse of
human rights and grave deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
which has led to death, displacement and the outbreak of diseases among the
civilian population, particularly children and other vulnerable groups. It
expresses appreciation to the efforts of all United Nations agencies, other
organizations and individuals carrying out humanitarian activities in Somalia.
The Council strongly condemns attacks by armed groups on innocent civilians
and all humanitarian personnel. It strongly urges the Somali factions to respect
international humanitarian and human rights law, to ensure the safety and
freedom of movement of all humanitarian personnel and to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian relief to all those in need.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of the widest
participation of the representatives of all parts of Somali society in an effort to
rehabilitate Somalia. The Council strongly urges representatives of all social
and political forces of Somali society to participate actively and in a
constructive spirit in the work of the Somali National Peace and Reconciliation
Conference in Djibouti. In this regard, it urges the warlords and faction leaders
to desist from obstructing and undermining efforts to achieve peace. The

00-51081 (E) 290600
`````````

S/PRST/2000/22

Council expresses its readiness to consider taking appropriate steps regarding
the warlords and faction leaders who engage in such activities. It also urges all
States to stop providing these individuals with the means to carry on their
destructive activities.
“The Security Council reminds all States of their obligation to comply
with the measures imposed by resolution 733 (1992) and urges them to take all
necessary steps to ensure full implementation and enforcement of the arms
embargo. The Security Council further urges all States, the United Nations and
other international organizations and entities to report to the Committee
established by resolution 751 (1992) information on possible violations of the
arms embargo.
“The Security Council remains seized of the matter.”

2
