S/2017/328

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 17 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Following the outbreak of hostilities in Juba from 8 to 11 July 2016 and the
resulting violence perpetrated against civilians, on 23 August 2016, my predecessor,
Ban Ki-moon, ordered an independent special investigation, led by Major General
(retired) Patrick Cammaert, to examine the actions of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) in response to the attacks on civilians that occurred,
notably within or in the vicinity of the UNMISS compounds in Juba, including the
Terrain Hotel and the adjacent protection of civilians sites. On 1 November 2016, an
executive summary of the report, including recommendations of the independent
special investigation, was shared with the members of the Security Council, as well
as publicly released. The recommendations targeted issues unique to UNMISS, as
well as those more systemic in nature.
The United Nations employed a two-track approach to take forward those
recommendations. First, a Headquarters task force was established to implement the
recommendations on systemic and strategic issues under the chairmanship of the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. Second, UNMISS
devised an action plan to implement the Mission-specific recommendations and
provided regular updates to the task force. To keep the Security Council informed
about the progress of implementation, a letter was transmitted to the Council on
23 December 2016, followed by a briefing by the Assistant Secretary -General for
Peacekeeping Operations during the Council consultations on South Sudan on
23 February 2017.
The update below is intended to summarize the overall achievements of
UNMISS and of the Secretariat in implementing the recommendations of the
independent special investigation.
From 12 to 19 March 2017, an independent follow-up mission led by Major
General (retired) Cammaert returned to Juba to assess the progress made with
regard to the UNMISS-specific recommendations. At the request of my Special
Representative, the team also travelled to Malakal to review the status of the
implementation of the recommendations contained in the board of inquiry report on
the attack on that protection of civilians site in February 2016. The assessment
concluded that UNMISS had made a commendable effort to enhance its ability to
protect civilians, to better plan and prepare its response to crisis situations and to
increase staff safety and security. Importantly, the assessment concluded that the
modus operandi and the posture of the military and police components had
improved as a result of the corrective actions taken by UNMISS. The main
achievements, as documented by the assessment team, are set out below.

17-05835 (E)

180417

*1705835*

S/2017/328

Protection of civilians
UNMISS force headquarters is actively providing leadership and guidance on
the effective implementation of the Mission’s protection of civilians mandate. In
August 2016, a series of Force Commander directives were issued to military
contingents, requiring that regular scenario-based training and rehearsals be
conducted on mandate implementation, use of rules o f engagement and directives on
the use of force; dynamic and robust patrolling aimed at preventing human rights
violations and the abuse of civilians; integrated contingency planning, including
evacuation and extraction exercises, with key actors to facili tate preparedness for
worst-case and the most dangerous scenarios; and division of responsibilities
between the military, police and United Nations security personnel. UNMISS force
headquarters also issues monthly orders on freedom of movement that reinfor ce the
Force Commander’s directive on freedom of movement. These stress the imperative
for all commanders to understand the provisions of the status -of-forces agreement
and require them to assert their right to unrestricted freedom of movement, using all
means necessary to do so, in line with the mandate and the rules of engagement. The
orders also reinforce pre-existing instructions to stand ground for 48 hours at
checkpoints when freedom of movement is denied.
While the operational context in South Sudan remains extremely challenging
and the restrictions and bureaucratic impediments imposed by the Government and,
in some cases, other warring factions continue to hamper UNMISS freedom of
movement, the efforts aimed at improving the troop posture and minds et have
improved UNMISS access to key hotspots in the past few months. Since January
2017, UNMISS has, on multiple occasions, successfully deployed long -duration
patrols to key locations, prioritizing the Greater Equatoria region owing to increased
insecurity, population displacement and human rights abuses in the area. Despite
obstacles and delays, patrols have reached Yei (three deployments), Kajo Kaji (three
deployments), Lainya (two deployments) and Magwe (two deployments). The
integrated patrols have been positively received by the population in the respective
locations, as well as by many of the local administrations, which have requested that
UNMISS extend its visit. The deployments have enabled UNMISS to conduct
human rights monitoring and reporting, as well as outreach to local authorities and
civil society. UNMISS is currently planning to extend the period of the long duration patrols from the current average of one week to up to one month in order to
capitalize on the presence of Mission personnel in hard-to-reach areas.
The posture of troops with regard to the protection of civilians at risk of
physical violence has also improved, as demonstrated by recent examples of robust
intervention by UNMISS uniformed personnel. In Bentiu, peacekeepers succe ssfully
confronted and stopped armed actors who had harassed, beaten and attempted to
abduct four groups of up to 50 internally displaced persons outside the protection of
civilians site, using the appropriate escalation of force in line with the rules of
engagement. In Pibor, peacekeepers assumed a robust posture and deployed troops
and combat vehicles to manage and protect a sudden influx of more than 800
civilians into the protection site following rumours of an impending attack on the
town. Meanwhile, in Yei, UNMISS troops intervened to extract United Nations
personnel and Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism personnel stranded at compounds caught in the crossfire during heavy
clashes between the Government and opposition forces.
In Juba, the establishment of a weapons-free zone with a 200-m radius around
protection of civilians sites and the United Nations House has resulted in a dramatic
drop in reported crime and violence, including incidents of sexual and gender -based
violence. UNMISS peacekeepers are conducting dismounted patrols within the area

2/8

17-05835

S/2017/328

throughout the day and night, as well as cordon-and-search operations within the
protection of civilians sites, to disrupt arms trafficking. Such operations include
searches of individuals entering the sites; daily searches of zones of up to 30
shelters; targeted searches of specific shelters based on intelligence; and monthly
full-scale cordon-and-search operations of the entire site. Between July 2016 and
March 2017, 20 full-scale cordon-and-search operations were conducted. Moving
forward, UNMISS formed police units will be expected to increase patrols both
inside and outside protection of civilians sites, particularly the weapons -free zones,
in line with the concept of operations of the United Nations police and in close
coordination with the UNMISS military component. The weapons -free zone has
been well received by all stakeholders, including the Government, especially given
the marked reduction in criminal activity since its implementation. During the
month leading up to the establishment of the weapons-free zone, UNMISS recorded
48 serious incidents in the immediate vicinity of the United Nations House,
including murder, armed robbery, violent assault, kidnapping and rape. In the six
months since its establishment, a total of 12 serious incidents have been reported in
the weapons-free zone, amounting to 2 incidents per month. UNMISS is in the
process of establishing similar zones in Wau, Bentiu and Malakal.
Contingency planning and preparedness
To address shortcomings regarding crisis response and preparedness, UNMISS
has established a mission planning group consisting of all UNMISS components and
sections, as well as, on a case-by-case basis, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, in order to ensure that all contingency plans are coordinated,
integrated, complementary and responsive to the current security analysis and threat
assessment. Since July 2016, all infantry battalions inducted into the Missio n have
undergone scenario-based and integrated response training. In January 2017, the
force headquarters began a training-of-trainers course to enable military contingents
to conduct rules of engagement training and scenario -based response training for
their troops on a regular basis. All scenarios are based on actual incidents that have
taken place in a given area of operation and are intended to clearly establish troop
responsibilities. Formed police units have also rehearsed their security plans for
United Nations compounds and protection of civilians sites. The Mission’s Juba
security contingency plans were updated and rehearsed during three tabletop
exercises and three field training exercises conducted between October 2016 and
January 2017. Similarly, since February 2017, a total of nine tabletop exercises have
been conducted to validate contingency plans in the field offices, and a training plan
for the rest of the year is in place.
To improve the coordination and crisis response capabilities of the Mission in
Juba, integrated operations centres comprising the military, police, United Nations
security and civilian components have been established at the United Nations House
and at Tomping. The tactical military and police command centres are united i n the
integrated operations centres and operate separately but in close proximity to the
UNMISS Joint Operations Centre, which at present is co -located with the Security
Operations Centre. The integrated operations centres are responsible for
coordinating responses to incidents, both internal and external, at the United
Nations House, Tomping and the protection of civilians sites.
Staff safety and security
UNMISS has made significant improvements to the security infrastructure of
the UNMISS compound and the protection of civilians site in Juba. In particular, to
protect the United Nations House and the protection of civilians sites from indirect
or direct fire, the Mission established a 200-m belt around the compound and the
17-05835

3/8

S/2017/328

protection of civilians site to create the weapons -free zone mentioned previously.
The 4-km perimeter around the United Nations House is also being reinforced with
a Mifram defence wall, with more than half of it already completed and the
remaining sections to be completed by November 2017. Breaches of the internal
perimeter fencing are reported and repaired, either by force patrols on the spot or by
mission support, within resources. Observation posts along the perimeter of the
United Nations House have been reinforced, and firing positions on the ground have
been built. The construction of additional observation posts around protection of
civilians sites 1 and 3 is under way.
Four bunkers (“safe havens”) for staff in both the residential and office areas
of the United Nations House and of Tomping are also nearing completion. A total of
4,000 ballistic blankets have been procured and distributed to staff residing in
prefabricated buildings in Juba and in field locations. An integrated security system
feasibility study has been completed, and new technologies to enhance situational
awareness (perimeter intrusion detection, infrared sensors, closed -circuit television,
electronic access control systems, turnstiles, etc.) are being tested in the United
Nations House and in Tomping. A “live where you work” policy is also under
implementation, with a phased plan in place to complete the transfer of personnel to
the United Nations House or to Tomping by the end of May 2017. In Juba, United
Nations security has restricted all residences for United Nations personnel to zone 1
(close to the Juba International Airport), in order to reduce the area in which
security and UNMISS force support are provided, given the limited capacity.
Since July 2016, United Nations security has made considerable efforts to
ensure that the security needs of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and of international non-governmental organizations are appropriately prioritized in
line with the security management framework and the Saving Lives Together
framework, respectively. The Security Management Team (in Juba) and the area
security management teams (in field locations), which comprise Mission and
agency, fund and programme representatives, continue to meet regularly and
approve all security assessments and security plans in South Sudan. United Nations
security shares security information with all agencies, funds and programmes in a
timely manner, using such tools as daily and flash reports, mobile text messages and
radio and e-mail broadcasts. Two security officers are embedded in the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in addition to one security officer
assigned to support all agencies, funds and programmes without professional
security officers.
With regard to international non-governmental organizations and the Saving
Lives Together framework, the international non-governmental organizations forum
security focal point is a member of the security cell, which meets once each week.
Security information shared with the agencies, funds and programmes is shared with
the forum. A United Nations security fact sheet covering alert state, relocation and
evacuation procedures, concentration points in Juba, designated safe havens,
relocation air routes, key security tools, access control procedures and the plan in
response to protection of civilians incidents, among other things, has also been
disseminated. In mid-April 2017, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Safety and Security, along with an international
non-governmental organization member of the Saving Lives Together framework
oversight committee, will hold a joint teleconference with members of the security
cell in Juba to further clarify roles and responsibilities under the Saving Lives
Together framework and to ensure that all parties have a more realistic and focused
approach and are better prepared to respond to crisis situations. In follow -up,
incoming security focal points of the international non-governmental organizations

4/8

17-05835

S/2017/328

forum will be briefed upon their arrival on the implementation of the Saving Lives
Together framework in South Sudan.
Medical response
To improve on-site medical response capacity, a surgical team and support
staff have been installed at the United Nations House to provide trauma care. The
United Nations House clinic has been upgraded to a “level I plus” facility and at
present has a new operating theatre, upgraded X-ray and laboratory facilities and
on-site blood supply to handle emergencies, including kinetic incidents, and to
stabilize casualties, pending evacuation to a higher -level medical facility.
Malakal
UNMISS has also made significant efforts to implement the recomm endations
of the Malakal board of inquiry, which include the reinforcement of perimeter
security (layers of fencing, deepened ditch, elevated berm and buffer zone). Six
high-rise watchtowers and a total of 27 (24 hours a day/7 days a week) observation
and sentry posts are in place and firing positions have been constructed along the
perimeter to enable more peacekeepers to actively guard it. The Mission has also
widened the internal and external perimeter patrolling routes. With respect to robust,
proactive security activities, troops are engaged in regular patrolling around the
perimeter of the protection of civilians site and UNMISS base, and there is
increased troop presence at the access gates to assist United Nations police when
necessary. United Nations police and formed police unit personnel are also
diligently patrolling within the protection of civilians sites. Cordon -and-search
operations have also increased and are currently being conducted on a daily, weekly
or monthly basis, either by section or of the camp in its entirety. A culture of robust
action through regular training and rehearsals of the rules of engagement and use of
force is being instilled.

To implement the recommendations on systemic and strategic issues, the
Secretariat task force began its work by circulating the recommendations of the
independent special investigation to all 16 peacekeeping operations and sought
feedback on the systemic challenges identified in the recommendations. The task
force devised and discussed concrete action points to provide a way forward to
address the systemic and strategic shortcomings identified in the report, so that in
the event of a similar crisis, United Nations peacekeeping missions are better
prepared to protect civilians and United Nations personnel. The main action points
and achievements are as follows:
• Performance accountability: the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
undertook a comprehensive mapping of existing policies and best practices on
performance and accountability for both civilian and uniformed personnel. A
framework of accountability for performance in implementing the protection
of civilians mandate is currently under development. The framework seeks to
consolidate and clarify existing policies and mechanisms, with a focus on
senior leadership and a view to recognizing and promoting good performance.
The Office of Military Affairs also worked with Member States to explore
ways to ensure the accountability of uniformed personnel for failure to protect
civilians. In January 2017, the Working Group on Contingent-Owned
Equipment recommended that the relevant statement of unit requirements
indicating the operational capabilities and expected tasks of uniformed
personnel be attached to the memorandum of understanding. The
memorandum of understanding is a binding document for troop -contributing
17-05835

5/8

S/2017/328

countries, establishing accountability for the agreed tasks. If approved by the
General Assembly at its second resumed session, the Secretariat intends to
attach statements of unit requirements to all current and future memorandums
of understanding with troop- and police-contributing countries.
• Guidance and readiness: the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
undertook a comprehensive review of the direction provided to senior mission
leaders on effective mandate implementation, including the protection of
civilians. A protection of civilians crisis management tabletop exercise for
civilian heads of mission was developed and piloted in January 2017 and will
henceforth be included in all mission leadership induction programmes. A
similar exercise for Force Commanders and Deputy Force Commanders is
being developed and is due to be rolled out during the upcoming intensive
orientation course in May 2017. The Office of Military Affairs also reviewe d
the guidance given to incoming Force Commanders. Instead of updating the
generic Force Commanders directive, mission-specific guidance is currently
issued during the induction of all new Force Commanders. The guidance
complements the existing Force Headquarters Handbook, which covers in
detail the more generic aspects of a Force Commander’s duties and
responsibilities. The Police Division is also reviewing the final draft of the
guidelines for United Nations police in implementing the protection of
civilians, intended to ensure, among other tasks, that all United Nations police
capacity-building supports the establishment of a protective environment and
that formed police units respond appropriately to physical threats against
civilians. Upon mandate renewal, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will ensure the timely issuance of guidance on mandate implementation to
peacekeeping operations, including on the protection of civilians, where
relevant. With regard to readiness, all peacekeeping operations have been
requested to share their integrated crisis response contingency plans for
validation by United Nations Headquarters. The conduct of regular scenario based exercises to validate, refine and rehearse those plans, including the
command and control of their implementation, is being streamlined. Troop and police-contributing countries have also been reminded of the importance
of compliance with the requirements concerning language proficiency, which
is necessary to enable military and police personnel deployed in the missions
to work effectively together in the implementation of United Nations
mandates. In addition, as agreed in the memorandums of understanding,
relevant personnel who fail the language proficiency test are repatriated. As an
immediate measure to address the readiness of uniformed personnel serving in
UNMISS, all troop- and police-contributing countries were requested, through
a note verbale sent in December 2016, to confirm in writing to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations the willingness of their personnel to conduct
dismounted patrols, including standing patrols by day and by night outside the
perimeter of United Nations compounds and protection of civilians sites in
South Sudan, among other things. Almost all of the infantry tro op-contributing
countries have responded in the affirmative.
• Training: the Secretariat validates the predeployment training programmes of
all troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure that the curriculum
includes scenario-based training for commanders on the rules of engagement,
mandate implementation and use of force in support of protection of civilians
activities. Training programmes within missions have been reinforced to
include scenario training on the protection of civilians and, increasingly, the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. An assessment of in-mission
training needs with regard to the protection of civilians is also under way. The
Secretariat is also strongly encouraging police-contributing countries to
6/8

17-05835

S/2017/328

increase the deployment of qualified women police officers to support key
protection tasks, including community-oriented policing and addressing sexual
and gender-based violence. As at April 2017, women made up 18 per cent of
the police officers deployed.
• Staff morale and welfare: the Secretariat initiated various measures to increase
psychosocial support, resilience and trauma counselling in field missions, as
well as for staff morale and welfare. Some of the programmes include
expanded individual in-person and telecounselling across the Mission to
include deep field locations, additional training for emergency and crisis
management and self-care and expanded options for staff welfare, including
enhancement of accommodation and office and recreational facilities. In
addition, internal staff rotation policies are under review to allow staff in the
most difficult duty stations to be rotated within the Mission to ensure that
stress and trauma are managed.
Significant work has been undertaken over the past five months to enhance the
ability of UNMISS to protect civilians, to better plan and prepare its response to
crisis situations and to increase staff safety and security, as well as to address the
systemic issues plaguing peacekeeping operations in general. The Secretari at task
force established to address the systemic issues and implement the
recommendations of the independent special investigation was set up for a limited
period of time; however, some of the identified action points will require a longer
time frame for implementation. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and United Nations partners will continue to work on
these issues in order to strengthen the military, police and civilian capabilities of
peacekeeping operations, including through guidance, training and accountability to
effectively deliver on mandates, including the protection of civilians, through a
regular workflow. The Secretariat will also continue to provide updates, as
appropriate, through existing reporting mechanisms.
With regard to UNMISS, both the Mission and the Secretariat concur that,
while much has been achieved, more needs to be done to further raise the
performance bar. UNMISS, in coordination with the Secretariat, is already
reviewing and revising its overall mission concept and strategy (including force
laydown) to more effectively deliver on mandated tasks. The process is informed by
the lessons learned from the multiple crises experienced in 2016 and the paramount
expectation that all Mission components employ an outward-looking and more
assertive posture and approach in delivering mandated activities. The UNMISS
senior leadership team has set the tone for the effective delivery of the protection of
civilians mandate. I expect the newly appointed UNMISS Force Commander to play
an equally pivotal role in this ongoing endeavour.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support will also work closely with UNMISS to sustain the achievements made to
date on the protection of civilians and crisis response and preparedness. This will
include a continued dialogue with Member States to uphold performance standards
for all peacekeepers deploying to UNMISS and a strategy to institutionalize and
standardize the approach to the protection of civilians through the deployment of
mobile training teams to the Mission to deliver context-specific training for
uniformed and civilian personnel.
These efforts notwithstanding, effective mandate implementation will hinge on
an enabling political, security and operational environment. I urge the Security
Council to make a concerted effort to ensure that the Transitional Government of
National Unity cooperates fully with UNMISS to ensure freedom of movement and
that it assumes its primary responsibility to protect civilians, including taking
17-05835

7/8

S/2017/328

proactive measures to reduce ethnic tensions and holding accountable those who
perpetrate egregious acts against civilians, protection of civilians sites and United
Nations and humanitarian personnel and premises. Finally, if UNMISS is to be an
effective tool in the achievement of a sustainable peace for South Sudan, the
Security Council, in coordination with the region, must immediately pursue a
collective strategy to facilitate a cessation of hostilities and ensure inclusivity in the
national dialogue and in the implementation of the peace agreement. Without such a
political strategy, the demands on UNMISS will continue to increase while its
operating environment becomes further constrained.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

17-05835
