S/PV.8708

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8708

th meeting
Wednesday, 29 January 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Baati
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-02284 (E)
*2002284*

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Khawla
Matar, Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Matar.
Ms. Matar: It is an honour for me to brief the
Security Council today. The Special Envoy is in
Damascus, where he is seeking to de-escalate the
situation in the north-west and to renew progress in
the United Nations-facilitated political process. Let me
update the Council on where we currently stand.
First, on the political track, the Special Envoy
continues to engage the Syrian parties and key
international stakeholders to unblock progress on the
difficult path out of the Syrian conflict and towards the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). One aspect
of that effort is the Constitutional Committee, which
has been established and has been convened twice in
Geneva. It comprises representatives nominated by the
Government of Syria, representatives nominated by the
Syrian Negotiations Commission and a middle third of
civil society. As per the Special Envoy’s briefing to the
Council last month (see S/PV. 8696), disputes between
the co-Chairs over the agenda prevented the meeting of
the small body during the second round.
The Special Envoy and the Syrian Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Al-Moualem, agreed in Damascus today on the
importance of strict observance of the agreed terms of
reference and rules of procedure. They also discussed
all issues related to the overall political process. After
communications with the co-Chair nominated by the
Syrian Negotiations Commission in late December and
talks today in Damascus with the co-Chair nominated
2/16

29/01/2020

by the Government of Syria, the Special Envoy is
working to narrow the differences and hopes to be in
a position to convene the Constitutional Committee
shortly. He hopes that the Constitutional Committee’s
sessions will continue with a steady rhythm in the
months ahead. There is a need to build trust and
confidence, which can contribute to opening the door
to a broader political process.
Meanwhile, I am pleased to officially inform the
Security Council that, for the first time, the working
group on the release of detainees/abductees, the
handover of bodies and the identification of missing
persons — made up of Iran, Russia, Turkey and the
United Nations — will convene, as part of an ongoing
rotation, in Geneva later in February. We realize
that progress on that file is not easy, but it would be
of enormous significance to many Syrians to see the
pace and scale of releases increase. Special Envoy
Pedersen underlined the importance of that issue in his
consultations today with the Government of Syria.
Let us recall, however, that there is a grave, and
in many ways worsening, situation on the ground. The
alarming scale of military operations in the north-west
has resulted in devastating humanitarian consequences
for the 3 million people in the Idlib area, including
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, reported
airstrikes, including on civilian infrastructure, mutual
shelling and civilian deaths in and around the northwest. We reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for an
immediate ceasefire and continue to press all parties
for a sustained de-escalation in the entire north-west,
along with all other areas of Syria, as well as reminding
all parties of their obligations to protect civilians.
Countering Security Council-listed terrorist groups
is imperative. It is true that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and
other proscribed groups, including foreign fighters,
are a major force in Idlib. As the Special Envoy has
stressed, countering such groups must be done through
an approach that ensures the protection of civilians
and fully respects international humanitarian law and
human rights law, and it is likely to be effective only
with genuine cooperation among the relevant players.
In the north-east, the various ceasefires and
understandings that were reached continue to provide
relative calm. However, the situation remains turbulent,
with some impact on civilians. In recent weeks,
armed activity has continued, as have other tensions,
including between international actors. A sustainable
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

arrangement inclusive of all actors that respects
Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity remains imperative. Protracted tensions in
southern Syria also remain a source of concern. The
de-escalation of violence leading to a cessation of
hostilities across all of Syria is more critical than ever,
and the presence of five foreign armies operating in
the country is a reminder of the continuing dangers the
crisis presents to international peace and security and of
the challenges to the restoration of Syria’s sovereignty.
The Council is aware of the serious humanitarian
challenges in Syria. Let me also stress that the economic
situation of all Syrians, in all areas, has continued to
sharply decline, with a number of factors combining to
increase the economic hardship facing the population.
That was impressed upon us by the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board, which convened in Geneva last month.
They shared frustrations and first-hand experiences
of the daily suffering of Syrians living with severe
shortages of basic commodities. The Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board spoke of the suffering of Syrian
women in that context, many of whom are now primary
breadwinners and face hate and risks of violence and
exploitation. We believe a broader process must deliver
in that regard too.
In all his international engagement this month,
including valuable consultations with senior European,
United States, Arab and Turkish officials in Rome
and in Davos and recent wide-ranging positive talks
in Moscow with the foreign and defence ministers
of Russia, the Special Envoy has continued to stress
the importance of their working together to support
a broader process. Indeed, it is apparent from all his
consultations that the Constitutional Committee is not
sufficient to address the real concerns of all parties.
There is a need for a broader process that builds trust
and confidence step by step. It could develop with
reciprocal and mutually reinforcing actions by Syrians
and outsiders alike, delivering tangible improvements
for Syrians with a view to establishing a safe, calm and
neutral environment. Such an environment would also
help give confidence to refugees about the possibility
of a safe, voluntary and dignified return and to those
who wish to support the reconstruction of the wartorn country. The Special Envoy believes that there are
modest openings to further pursue that work, and he will
be doing so with deliberation and care. Nevertheless, it
still requires genuine dialogue among key international
players to deepen.

S/PV. 8708

We continue to prioritize accommodating the full
range of Syrian voices in the process. Last week, we had
the honour to welcome Syrians from inside and outside
Syria to consultations of the Syrian Civil Society
Support Room in Geneva. They raised humanitarian,
socioeconomic and political concerns and stressed the
need for maximum transparency and inclusivity in the
political process. For our part, as the United Nations,
we will continue to consult widely and build bridges
wherever we can. The Special Envoy will continue
to press for an end to the violence and work towards
a resumption of the Constitutional Committee and
further detainee releases. He will also continue to seek
to unlock the kind of comprehensive political process
that would result in a lasting political settlement that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
and respects and restores Syria’s sovereignty, unity,
territorial integrity and independence in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I thank Ms. Matar for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I very much thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar for
her briefing and updates today. We continue to extend
our full support to her and to Special Envoy Pedersen.
Monthly briefings to the Security Council remain
crucial to guiding our efforts to end the conflict;
therefore, we appreciate her availability today.
Every facet of the United Nations-led political
process to implement resolution 2254 (2015) is
paralysed, and we need to be honest and clear about
why. The simple truth is that the Al-Assad regime is
determined to pursue a military, rather than a political,
end to the conflict. For proof we need to look no further
than the more than 350,000 people displaced by the
regime and Russia’s indiscriminate attacks against
civilians in Idlib since December 2019. While Damascus
and Moscow deliberately stall the United Nationsfacilitated political process and deprive millions of
humanitarian assistance, they pursue an illusory
military solution in Syria — one that will undoubtedly
fail to bring about a lasting resolution of the conflict.
The assault on Idlib that is under way represents the
largest violation of resolution 2254 (2015) to date,
with humanitarian consequences that will prove both
devastating and lasting. Attacks on the people of northwest Syria by forces of the Syrian regime, Russia, Iran

20-022843/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

and Hizbullah are unjustifiable and will directly lead to
life-threatening shortages of food, medicine and other
basic necessities.
In the light of those grave developments, our
message today is that the Council must be united in
telling the Syrian authorities and Russia that we will
not abide by their pursuit of a military solution. We
must demand Syria and Russia’s full, irreversible and
verifiable implementation of all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015). The United States will maintain economic
and diplomatic pressure until the day the regime and
its sponsors accept such a reform. Actors who obstruct,
disrupt or prevent a ceasefire in northern Syria will be
further subjected to United States sanctions, and those
who work to intimidate or prevent displaced persons
from voluntarily returning to places of residence in
Syria will not be allowed to do so with impunity.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
the escalation of Syrian and Russian military attacks
in Idlib, for humanitarian reasons and because of the
inextricable link between the security of Idlib province
and the fate of the Constitutional Committee. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies must end their offensive
in north-west Syria immediately because of the grave
impact it is having on the United Nations-facilitated
political process. To those allies of the regime
participating in the assault on Idlib, the United States
is fully prepared to level sanctions, in accordance with
the recently signed Caesar Syria Civilian Protection
Act, against foreign military contractors, mercenaries
or paramilitary forces that are knowingly operating in
a military capacity inside Syria for the Governments
of Syria, Russia or Iran. The United Nations and the
Council must work towards the implementation of
a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). We must also reject the regime
and Russia’s tactical announcement of the so-called
pauses and ceasefires in north-west Syria to cast
themselves as peacemakers. They are ceasefires in
name only and are repeatedly followed by deadly attacks
on civilians and fresh efforts by the regime to stall the
work of the Constitutional Committee. The delays of
the Committee are directed by the Al-Assad regime and
are accompanied by a military push by the regime and
its allies into north-west Syria, killing hundreds and
further displacing close to 1 million Syrians.
Moreover, the Russian Federation has publicly
threatened to end the United Nations vital life-saving
cross-border aid to the very part of Syria under assault
4/16

29/01/2020

by Syrian and Russian forces by July, when resolution
2504 (2020) expires. Those threats serve to spread even
more fear among Syrian civilians and compel the Syrian
political opposition to surrender. Instead of spending
its dwindling financial resources on a costly and brutal
military campaign against its own people, the Al-Assad
regime should be spending to provide its people with
sustenance and essential services.
While the Al-Assad regime uses massive amounts
of fuel in its military attacks against the people of Idlib,
Syrian civilians cannot afford fuel to heat their homes
or cook their children’s food. While the Al-Assad
regime forces its people to go without electricity, it
spends millions of dollars on expensive rockets and
missiles that kill Syrian civilians. And, while soaring
prices have put basic goods out of reach for the vast
majority of Syrians, Al-Assad-regime elites continue to
live lives of luxury.
Critically, the Al-Assad regime and Russia fail
to recognize that the military solution will never
resolve the underlying reasons for the Syrian conflict.
Therefore, if they continue to pursue this solution,
instability, insurgency and violent extremism will
not abate. Absent a political solution to the conflict
facilitated by the United Nations Special Envoy and
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), the United States
will continue to withhold reconstruction funding from
the regime, as should the United Nations in keeping
with its stated principles and parameters to withhold
reconstruction funding until the political process in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) is complete.
The Al-Assad regime will not be legitimate in the
eyes of the Syrian people until the regime allows for
the basic demands of its citizens to be heard through
freedom of assembly and elections; until the regime
delivers on basic necessities, such as food and water;
and until the regime ensures accountability for years
of atrocities, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions
and torture
The only way to begin bridging those divides is for
the Al-Assad regime and its leaders to move forward
with the steps outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The
culture of the regime’s institutions must change if it is
ever to regain the trust of the Syrian people. The United
States will maintain forceful economic and diplomatic
pressure until the day the regime and its sponsors
accept such reform.
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): First of all, let me thank
Deputy Special Envoy Matar for her briefing, which,
among other things, also mentioned the concerns about
military operations in Idlib province in the north-west
of Syria. As we said this morning (see S/PV.8707),
Estonia joins those countries calling for an immediate
ceasefire in Idlib and across Syria. In looking at the
Constitutional Committee, it is clear that challenges
surrounding its work are growing. Little — not to
say no progress — has been made since last month’s
briefing in this Chamber (see S/PV.8696).
We are four months into the Committee’s meetings,
but even a proper agenda is yet to be agreed on. Is that
really progress that would satisfy the Syrian people
or the Security Council? The apparent deadlock is a
direct result of the Syrian authorities’ unwillingness to
commit themselves fully to the political process, as set
out in resolution 2254 (2015). Instead, Damascus has
gradually distanced itself from the provisions of the
Council, despite the continuous efforts of the Special
Envoy, who was in Syria just today.
There are those who insist on not setting artificial
deadlines to the work of the Constitutional Committee.
However, let us be absolutely clear: no deadlines
should not mean no results. No deadlines cannot mean
no results. We use this opportunity to ask our Syrian
colleagues: What can be done to bring Damascus to
the negotiations table to actually seek a comprehensive
solution? If undermining the work of Constitutional
Committee continues, then we must be ready to look
at other pending issues. Fortunately, resolution 2254
(2015) is rich in means to enhance the political process.
In that regard, we also want to underline the crucial
role of confidence-building measures that can give the
political process more substance. Ordinary Syrians,
as well as Ms. Matar, have highlighted the issue of
arbitrarily detained and missing people. Syrians, both
within the country and abroad, want to know the fate
of their friends and relatives and are demanding the
release of those who have been arrested without any
just cause whatsoever.
We recognize the Astana format working group
for its efforts in the mutual release of detainees, and
we welcome the announcement of a joint committee
with the United Nations. However, equal exchanges
are not sufficient, owing to the disparity in the number
of detainees. The Syrian Government holds eight

S/PV. 8708

times more prisoners than other groups and parties
combined — eight times more.
In that light, it is clear that equal prisoner
exchanges are not sustainable for the long-term. What
is instead required is a unilateral release of arbitrarily
detained people, especially political prisoners, women
and minors. Such an act of unilateral release would
help to restore the trust of Syrians in State institutions,
send a positive message to Syrians abroad and support
the political process, as well as the work of the
Constitutional Committee.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Deputy Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Ms. Khawla Matar, for her
briefing. This morning we had an opportunity to discuss
the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8707). We
can only reiterate our call on Western donors to reject
the practice of double standards with regard to whether
to the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Despite the trend marked by the stabilization of
the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, much work
remains to be done on a number of fronts. The political
process requires the most attention. Russia remains
committed to the principle of reaching a peaceful
settlement to the Syrian crisis through political and
diplomatic means. In the interests of advancing that
process, the Constitutional Committee was established
under the auspices of the United Nations and began its
work in Geneva on 30 October 2019. Its establishment
was made possible through the critical help of the
Astana format.
We value Special Envoy Pedersen and his team’s
approach to creating the necessary conditions for
the negotiators to develop a culture of dialogue and
mutual trust, which is an important and indispensable
component for achieving success. Constructive and
useful meetings among the Special Envoy, Minister for
Foreign Affairs Lavrov and Minister of Defence Shoygu
took place in Moscow on 24 January. Discussions
focused on how to step up joint work both in Geneva and
through the Astana format, in which Russia, Turkey and
Iran are successfully working together. We expressed
our full support for Mr. Pedersen’s efforts. The visit
by Mr. Pedersen currently under way in Damascus also
seems very important to us, as there he will have an
opportunity to discuss the prospects for another round
of Constitutional Committee consultations.

20-022845/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

29/01/2020

Like the Special Envoy, we are not dramatizing the
fact that just a couple of months after the establishment
of that body, no momentous results have been
achieved. That is absolutely natural. We believe that
it is counterproductive to dramatize the situation and
designate the guilty parties. We will do all we can to
help create the conditions necessary to enable progress
at the next session of the drafting commission, to be
held at the earliest opportunity.

will not go into details, as the document requires
further review and warrants separate discussion in the
future. However, we cannot fail to note that the maps
contained in the plan show the Golan Heights as Israeli
territory. In that connection, we would like to remind
the geographers who crafted the map that neither we
nor resolution 497 (1981) recognize Israeli sovereignty
over the Golan Heights. The Golan Heights is illegally
occupied Syrian territory.

Combating terrorism in Syria is also a priority, and
Idlib remains one of terrorism’s last strongholds in the
country, with civilians being held hostage there. The
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters and their subordinates
are not honouring the ceasefire agreements. In early
January, a ceasefire was announced upon the proposal
of Russia and Turkey. However, terrorists violate
it daily. They attack and shell the Syrian army and
civilian facilities, as well as the Russian air base in
Khmeimim. Naturally, such armed provocations cannot
go unanswered.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to thank
the Special Envoy and the Deputy Special Envoy, who
is here today, for their work and the report.

We have long pointed out the need to expeditiously
separate members of the armed opposition, if any
remain in Idlib, from the terrorists. At the same time,
we are concerned about the spread of terrorists from
Idlib into other parts of Syria and their infiltration into
other countries, such as Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya.
We would also like to draw attention to the note of
the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations, as well as media reports, regarding
the plans of terrorists to organize yet another round of
provocations and to use chemical weapons in Syria.
We find those signals very disturbing, since we know
full well how such actions are used for military and
political purposes.
Another very important area of work in Syria
that affects both the political process and efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation is the cooperation
between Moscow and Ankara on the implementation
of the 22 October memorandum in order to prevent
armed clashes in the north-east of the country. Russia
continues to assist in establishing contacts between
the Kurds and Damascus and mitigating the damage
caused by the illegal occupation of the area and the
dangerous experiment in demographic engineering that
was staged there.
In conclusion, I would like to briefly touch upon
the following story. Yesterday, Washington, D.C.,
published its vision for a Middle East settlement. I
6/16

I would like to begin my statement where the
Deputy Special Envoy began — with the Constitutional
Committee. For us, it is no surprise that, starting with
the second round of talks, the Syrian regime decided to
obstruct and delay its work. We must recognize that no
agreement has been reached. I am not as complacent
as my Russian colleague, who said that this was to
be expected. I disagree; this should not have been
expected. The conflict should have a political rather
than a military solution. I have said before that if our
Russian friends would stop providing military support
to the Syrian regime for only two or three weeks, the
Syrians would run to the Constitutional Committee, be
constructive and come to a political solution. The real
reason is that there is still the belief that peace, security,
stability and the well-being of the people in Syria can
be achieved by military means. That is why we see the
military advance by the Syrian and Russian forces in
the north-west of the country, where the city of Maarat
Al-Numan was taken — very triumphantly, we hear.
What does that mean in practice? It means
that since the conflict in Idlib started, more than
1,500 civilians — including 430 women and 290
children — have died. Over the past two months, an
additional 400,000 have been displaced. The head of
the International Committee of the Red Cross said
that we are just taking this for granted and that the
international community no longer raises its voice in
protest. We must look at the fate of the Syrian children,
who have suffered immeasurably. The latest report of
the Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
shows that their lives have been cut short by bombs
and torture. They have suffered the consequences
of detention and schools have been destroyed. Some
children in Syria have never had any formal education.
An entire generation threatens to be lost. At this very
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

moment, children in Idlib are dying and being displaced
and, in some cases, recruited to join armed groups.
The Russian Ambassador just spoke about
provocations from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which may
be true, but that does not warrant the indiscriminate
attacks that we have been witnessing. A look at the
area shows hospitals attacked and destroyed, markets
destroyed and many civilians killed. That is why, in our
view, the only solution is a political solution. We need
to focus on one aspect that my colleague from Estonia
just mentioned — the question of detainees. The Syrian
regime has arbitrarily detained tens of thousands of
innocent Syrians merely because they dared to make
use of their freedom of expression. It has tortured
thousands of innocent Syrians to death — and we have
seen horrible pictures — merely because they dared
to ask for political reforms and freedom in Syria. The
Syrian regime has called ordinary citizens terrorists in
order to create a pretext for their arrest and torture.
Since last August, when we dedicated a Council
meeting to the issue of detainees and missing persons
(see S/PV.8593), there has, unfortunately, been no
progress on ending those gravest of human rights
violations. To the contrary, those violations continue
throughout Syria, even in so-called reconciled areas.
We must therefore push the Syrian regime to release the
prisoners and ensure that families are informed of the
fate of the tens of thousands of missing persons and that
the United Nations or the International Committee of
the Red Cross has unconditional access to all detention
facilities under the control of the regime.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate a point that I make here
regularly and one which it still does not seem that
our Russian friends understand. If we want to have
lasting peace and reconciliation in the country, we need
accountability. We need to establish responsibilities for
the horrendous crimes that have been committed and
we need accountability. Only that can serve as a basis
for reconciliation in Syria.
By the way, with regard to allegations of Germany
applying double standards on the humanitarian front,
my country is among the largest humanitarian aid
donors to Syria. All efforts related to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011 and the Commission of Inquiry have

S/PV. 8708

to be supported to ensure that none of the crimes
and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict
goes unpunished and that all perpetrators are held
accountable. That is what we need if we are to achieve
national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
would like to thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar for
her briefing this afternoon.
It has been said many times before in this Chamber
that there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria.
The only solution is through a Syrian-owned, Syrianled, credible, balanced and inclusive political process.
We reiterate those sentiments again today.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines appreciates the
efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen as he continues to
work assiduously to support the wider political process.
We must also applaud the commitment to ensuring
the full engagement of all segments of society in the
Constitutional Committee and that the representation
of women who are involved remains at the minimum
threshold of 30 per cent. It is our sincere hope that the
next session of the small body of the Constitutional
Committee will be convened soon and will yield
positive results, and we encourage all parties to remain
committed to working together in a spirit of mutual
respect and compromise.
The security situation in the country is vital to
the progress and the eventual success of a wider and
meaningful political process, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). We remain concerned about
the most recent reports of violence in the north-west.
Without lasting and sustained peace, the political
process will be severely hampered and the humanitarian
situation will continue to deteriorate. We therefore
implore all parties to abide by the ceasefire agreements
in place and we remind them of their obligations
under international law. We cannot stress enough that
civilians must be protected and civilian infrastructure,
particularly health services, must be preserved.
On that point, I must note that accountability for
acts committed should remain a high priority. Atrocities
cannot be ignored and impunity cannot be encouraged.
As such, we welcome the board of inquiry established
by the Secretary-General to investigate a series of
incidents that have occurred in north-west Syria.
Confidence-building measures are a critical
element for the success of a wider political process. We

20-022847/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

therefore urge the Syrian Government to address the
issue of missing and detained persons. Furthermore,
conditions must be created for the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. Such expressions of goodwill will undoubtedly
help the parties to develop trust and promote active
participation in the political process.
The political situation cannot be discussed
independently of the current humanitarian crisis.
While work on the political process is ongoing, we
must ensure that the immediate humanitarian needs
of the Syrian people are met. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines supported the renewal of the cross-border
mechanism earlier this month (see S/PV.8700) and
we will support optimal access arrangements going
forward. The suffering of one person is too many and we
emphasize the need for safe, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access in all areas of the country.
Syria is undoubtedly one of the greatest
humanitarian crises of our time and it is the Syrian
people who continue to pay the highest price. The
Council cannot be an onlooker while a dark cloud of
despair settles over the country. That said, we must
remain mindful that our actions should respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. We
must take into consideration the perspectives of the
Syrian Government, as it is for the Syrian people to
determine their own future.
Without a political solution, the suffering of the
Syrian people will continue and, without commitment
and dialogue, the wider political process will no doubt
fail. The Council has a responsibility to ensure that the
Constitutional Committee and the wider process are
adequately supported so that the goals may be realized.
Reconciliation within Syria, the protection of civilians
and the overall stability of the region are dependent
on that.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Matar
for her briefing. As always, we reiterate the Dominican
Republic’s support for the collective efforts to strengthen
the long-standing political process in the Syrian Arab
Republic — one that opens the door to lasting peace.
This year, 2020, is the fifth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015). Its full
implementation remains pending. As the guarantor of
that resolution, the Council bears the sole responsibility
8/16

29/01/2020

for the implementation of all its provisions through
facilitation, mediation and inclusive dialogue.
In that regard, we regret the lack of progress in
the dialogue between the Syrian Government, the
opposition and civil society within the framework of
the Constitutional Committee, which was seen as the
first major step in opening the way for a broad political
process. Only a real and meaningful dialogue between
the parties, with a negotiated political solution as the
outcome, will lay the basis for meeting the aspirations
of the Syrian people, inside and outside the country,
to live in peace and to move forward in building their
own future.
The continued and meaningful participation of
women in all aspects of the political process is not only
conducive to achieving sustainable peace but vital. The
needs of and solutions regarding displaced and refugee
women must be at the centre of that process if we are to
call it a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process.
However, that dialogue, like any political solution,
is threatened every time there are attempts to resolve
the conflict through military means. It is at risk every
time there are indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population and every time hundreds of thousands
of people have to flee in search of protection and
security. There is no military solution that can bring
about a future reconciliation in Syria. The basis for
reconciliation is trust, mutual respect and the political
will of the parties to comply with international law and
respect the human rights of the entire population.
We ask ourselves if the military approach creates
or destroys trust. That is why the situation in the northwest of the country fills us with concern. The ongoing
violations of international humanitarian law, resulting
in the suffering of the civilian population, are simply
unacceptable and require a response by the Council. In
that regard, we would like to say the following.
It is essential to achieve a lasting ceasefire.
Humanitarian access to vulnerable populations must be
ensured on a safe, sustained and unimpeded basis, not
only in the north-west of the country but throughout
Syria, wherever there are needs to be addressed. That
is the least that the parties should do to protect those
who have been so devastated and traumatized by nearly
a decade of conflict.
We reiterate that today, more than ever, any
international effort to end this terrible conflict must
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

be accompanied by measures on the ground that will
build confidence not only in the process but among the
parties and the population. The Dominican Republic
would like to see more progress with regard to the
release of detainees, secure access to basic services,
the facilitation of civil documentation and, not least,
the provision of credible information to the families of
missing persons.
Similarly, we wish to reiterate that any movement
or return of displaced persons and refugees must be
safe, dignified and respectful of people’s willingness to
return to their places of origin, or wherever they decide.
We call on all the parties concerned to focus every
effort on a negotiated political solution, facilitated by
the United Nations and in line with resolution 2254
(2015). We urge all members of the Council in a position
to do so to honour the commitments undertaken in the
resolution. Let us match our actions with words.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Deputy Special Envoy Matar for her briefing. The first
meeting of the large body of Syria’s Constitutional
Committee and the 45-member small body in October
last year marked a good start for the Syrian political
process. Yesterday Special Envoy Pedersen arrived in
Damascus to engage in talks with Syrian Government
officials on issues relating to the Constitutional
Committee. China applauds the good offices of the
Special Envoy and the constructive participation of the
Syrian parties. We support the Special Envoy in stepping
up communication with the Syrian Government with a
view to listening to its legitimate requests.
The United Nations should continue to advance the
Syrian political process in accordance with the Syrianled and Syrian-owned principle and resolution 2254
(2015). It is important to maintain the independence
of the Constitutional Committee’s work, so as to
create the conditions to bridge differences and build
consensus among the Syrian parties. The protracted
Syrian conflict means that the parties inevitably have
some differences when it comes to the work of the
Constitutional Committee, which will require time to
be resolved. It is up to the Syrian people themselves
to find a way out. The process should not be subjected
to any external interference or arbitrary timelines. We
hope that the parties will maintain political dialogue
through the Constitutional Committee to deepen mutual
understanding and trust. Syria should not be divided or
fragmented. Members of the Constitutional Committee
should demonstrate political will, commit to the spirit

S/PV. 8708

of compromise, stay actively engaged in talks and
jointly safeguard Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity.
Since Syria’s political, security and humanitarian
situations are intertwined, I wish to reiterate China’s
position on Syria’s counter-terrorism and humanitarian
issues. Idlib has turned into a breeding ground for
terrorism. The issue of foreign terrorist fighters
within Syria is significant and has resulted in serious
spillover effects. All countries must combat all forms
of terrorism, with uniform standards, in accordance
with the relevant Council resolutions and international
law. Otherwise, Syria, as well as the regions of Western
Asia and North Africa, will enjoy no peace.
The international community should both move
forward the political process and help improve Syria’s
economic and humanitarian situations. It is essential to
secure the conditions of survival for the Syrian people,
lift unilateral sanctions and support post-conflict
reconstruction. Civilians are directly and negatively
impacted by such unilateral sanctions. Reconstruction
is an important step to provide better social services
for the people. The provision of humanitarian supplies
by relevant parties should not come with any political
preconditions. China stands ready to play a constructive
role in the early restoration of peace, stability and
development in Syria.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar for her
briefing on the political situation in Syria.
South Africa is encouraged to hear that Special
Envoy Pedersen is continuing his efforts towards
finding a political solution to the situation in Syria. His
ongoing engagements with all the parties are welcome,
particularly during these uncertain times. My delegation
also supports the Special Envoy and his Office in his
work to promote confidence-building measures to build
trust among the parties. Such measures will go a long
way in showing the commitment of the various parties
to the work and the purpose of the Constitutional
Committee, which is an essential component of the
Syrian political process. In that regard, South Africa
urges all segments and groups of the Constitutional
Committee to recommit to making a constructive
contribution to the constitution-building process.
In addition, South Africa calls on the various parties
to make every effort to work together, with the support
of the Special Envoy, to find agreement on an agenda

20-022849/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

before the start of the next round of talks, to guide
the work of the Committee. South Africa encourages
members of the Constitutional Committee to be
flexible in agreeing on an agenda, given that all issues
will ultimately be on the table as discussions advance.
The work of the Constitutional Committee is but
one aspect of the larger process in Syria, as laid out in
resolution 2254 (2015). As has been stated many times
in the Council, the situation in Syria cannot be resolved
through military means. The only sustainable solution
to the current crisis is through the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), which calls for an inclusive
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned dialogue that reflects the
will and voice of the Syrian people. In that regard, we
welcome the participation and representation of women,
as well as the different religious groups, at the various
levels of the talks in order to ensure the widest possible
representation in the process.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to welcome the Deputy Special Envoy for Syria,
Ms. Khawla Matar, to the Chamber and thanks her for
her briefing.
Indonesia remains committed to the full
implementation of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process in order to end the conflict in Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). However, the
unfortunate reality on the ground is of grave concern.
The continued hostilities in north-west Syria have
worsened the humanitarian conditions, with more than
350,000 people displaced. We urge all the relevant
parties to respect the ceasefire agreements. We also
remind them of their obligations to protect civilians
under international humanitarian law. I wish to focus
on three main points.
First, my delegation believes that the number
one priority must always be the Syrian people. The
foundation of the whole political process in Syria
needs to be based on the interests and aspirations of
the Syrians. In that regard, Indonesia reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In the context of sovereignty, Indonesia also wishes to
reiterate its position in recognizing the occupied Syrian
Golan, occupied by Israel in 1967, as an inalienable
part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
strongly reject the recognition of the occupied Syrian
Golan as part of Israel. Israel’s decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied
10/16

29/01/2020

Syrian Golan is null and void and without international
legal effect.
Secondly, on the work of the Constitutional
Committee, we are hopeful that the third round of
negotiations will soon materialize in Geneva, facilitated
by the United Nations. Indeed, a lot of work has been
put into that process. We encourage the Syrian parties
to display genuine and concrete efforts to advance the
work of the Constitutional Committee. Flexibility and
strong commitment are needed in order to be able to move
forward. Indonesia is also of the view that the work of
the Constitutional Committee must be administered by
consensus and constructive engagement. A substantive
discussion is necessary to achieve positive outcomes
that will serve the aspirations of all the Syrian people.
Any gaps or divergences among the Syrian parties must
be addressed through continuous dialogue, without
external interference.
That leads me to my third point — the urgent need
to prevent further escalation, which would disrupt the
efforts to reach a political settlement. Indonesia appeals
to all parties involved to cease hostilities and create an
environment conducive to the successful conduct of
political talks. We cannot move the process forward
with hostilities as the background. The international
community needs to fully support that.
Indonesia strongly supports the work of the United
Nations, in particular the mandate of Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen, in facilitating the process. We appreciate
Special Envoy Pedersen’s intensive coordination with
all relevant parties and encourage those parties to
continue to support his work.
In conclusion, my delegation urges the international
community to be fully supportive of the genuine efforts
to reach a political settlement in Syria and to avoid
provocative rhetoric and actions that would undermine
the ongoing work of the Constitutional Committee,
facilitated by the United Nations.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Ms. Khawla Matar for her briefing.
I would like to address three points.
First of all, I would like to return to the issue of
the tragedy taking place in Idlib, which we addressed
earlier today (see S/PV.8707). It is a humanitarian
disaster affecting 3 million civilians in north-western
Syria, who are exposed to daily attacks by the regime
and its allies. They endure hunger and cold. Nearly
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

400,000 of them have fled since early December in
an attempt to find refuge near the Turkish border. The
relentless and brutal war is at odds with the goal of the
ceasefire and the quest for a political solution.
As I said earlier today, France strongly condemns
the intense and indiscriminate bombing by the regime
and its allies, which target, inter alia, populated areas,
medical facilities and camps for displaced persons, in
deliberate violation of international humanitarian law.
France reiterates its call for a cessation of hostilities.
As the majority of Council members reiterated earlier
today, ending the deadly offensive must now be the
main priority.
As we have said time and again since the start of the
conflict, the fight against terrorism cannot be used as a
pretext for an outbreak of violence. Ongoing hostilities
on the ground serve only to strengthen terrorist
organizations and threaten the gains made by the
international community against such organizations, at
the cost of heavy sacrifice over the past five years. In
that regard, the efforts of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh must continue in order to end the threat once
and for all.
My second point pertains to the political process,
which remains indispensable to efforts to stabilize Syria
over the long term. It is essential that the Constitutional
Committee finally begins its work, as the SecretaryGeneral recalled last week. However, after nine
years of conflict, Bashar Al-Assad is maintaining his
systematic obstruction. That is unacceptable and serves
only to exacerbate the situation. We expect those who
support the regime to encourage the Syrian leaders to
see reason. We expect the United Nations to give an
accurate account of the obstacles in the process and
clearly identify those responsible for them.
It is obvious, but must be recalled, that the political
process goes above and beyond the Constitutional
Committee. France calls on the Special Envoy to move
the process forward in parallel with the implementation
of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015). The Special
Envoy has our full support with regard to developing
confidence-building measures that would create the
safe and neutral environment called for in the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). That includes two
elements in particular: first, achieving results on the
issues of detainees who must be released and missing
persons; and secondly, making progress on the reform

S/PV. 8708

of property rights, which is one obstacle to the return of
displaced persons and refugees to their homes.
A safe environment, in which Syrians must no
longer live in fear of bombs and arbitrary arrests, is
essential to the holding of credible elections. To be
fully legitimate, elections must be held under United
Nations supervision and allow for the participation
of all Syrians, including refugees and internally
displaced persons.
Thirdly and lastly, I would like to conclude by
reiterating the consistent position held by France and
its close partners with regard to the issues of refugees
and reconstruction. The return of refugees must be
conducted in strict compliance with international
law — in a safe, dignified and, above all, voluntary
manner. Only a credible political solution, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015), will allow, when the time
comes, for a mass voluntary return of displaced persons
and refugees.
In conclusion, France and its European partners
will not fund reconstruction until a political settlement
is firmly in place. The same applies to the lifting of
sanctions. In that regard, we call on Russia, which has
the means to exert effective influence, to work with
the Council and all international partners to achieve a
credible political solution in Syria. Damascus’s ongoing
quest for confrontation is a dead end whose costs will
not be assumed by us. France, for its part, will pursue
its efforts to find a way out of the violence and onto the
path to peace. If such peace is to be genuine, it must be
just and inclusive.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Deputy Special Envoy
Matar for being here and for her briefing. Ms. Matar
and Mr. Pedersen enjoy our full support.
We all know that a political settlement is the
only solution to the conflict. Without the political
commitment of the Syrian authorities, the cycle of
violence will continue unabated and instability will
persist in the region. The Constitutional Committee,
established in September, raised cautious hopes for
a new dynamic. Those hopes are in danger of being
dashed. We call on Damascus to re-engage in the
political process and not to obstruct agreement on
the Committee’s agenda. We also call for the holding
of the next session of the Committee. To that end, we
encourage all Member States with influence on the
parties to exercise that influence. The good faith of the

20-0228411/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian authorities will be assessed on the basis of the
outcome of the process. We take this opportunity to
support the Special Envoy and his team in their work
and commitment. We also reaffirm that Belgium, in
line with European policy, will not participate in the
reconstruction process without a political solution that
is firmly in place.
Let us not forget that the political process is not
limited to the Constitutional Committee. Nearly a year
ago, in his first briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8475),
the Special Envoy prioritized the release of those who
were arbitrarily detained and abductees. We echo his
call for an increase in the number of releases. That is
of utmost humanitarian importance and an essential
element of confidence-building. We encourage the
Special Envoy to intensify his contacts with the parties
on the issue. Greater significant progress must be made.
Detainees must be released. Families must again be able
to embrace their loved ones or, at the very least, receive
information on their whereabouts and their well-being.
That is their right. It is a right that is enshrined in
international humanitarian law. The behaviour of the
Syrian authorities in the matter is unacceptable.
Lastly, the situation on the ground is worrisome.
Earlier today, Belgium provided details about
the humanitarian situation in the north-west (see
S/PV.8707). We are deeply concerned about the military
escalation. We call on the Syrian authorities and those
who provide them with military support to establish, as
a matter of urgency, a ceasefire in the north-west.
I will conclude by saying that, for Belgium, the
Syrian conflict can be resolved only through a negotiated
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). Resolution 2254 (2015) contains all the
elements for a political solution: a nationwide ceasefire,
a political process, the drafting of a new constitution
and free and credible elections, with the participation
of the Syrian diaspora, in an environment that protects
the rights of Syrians.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Deputy Special Envoy
for her briefing on the political situation in Syria. I
also commend the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy that led to the establishment of the
Constitutional Committee.
We support the Special Envoy in his efforts to
facilitate dialogue between the parties. The creation
12/16

29/01/2020

of a secure climate, through the signing of a ceasefire
to put an end to the spiral of violence, will help to
establish the conditions necessary for the political
dialogue we eagerly await. I urge the parties to support
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), including
through the return of refugees, the release of detainees
and clarification on the fate of missing persons. No
effort must be spared to secure the de-escalation and
thawing of the political climate. The involvement of
women and young people in the process should also be
strongly encouraged.
In considering the situation in Syria, it is essential,
in our view, to take into account all aspects of the
challenges that the country is currently facing. Whether
it is the political aspect that we are addressing this
afternoon or the humanitarian aspect that we discussed
this morning (see S/PV.8707), a solution to the crisis
must be inspired by the Syrians themselves, from all
segments of society. The international community and
the Security Council, for their part, must encourage
and support the process by closing the gap between
divergent analyses and interpretations and instead
taking into exclusive account of Syrian interests in their
decisions. The Syrian people have given the world so
much and yet they continue to wait, during this difficult
time in their history, for the help they need to recover.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The Security
Council has met month after month for over four years
to support the efforts of the Special Envoy to find a
political solution pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).
The success of that process depends on the genuine
will of all parties to find a solution, as well as efforts to
make progress on all aspects of the process in tandem.
Yesterday, the United Kingdom hosted envoys from
the Syria small group, alongside Mr. Nasser Al-Hariri.
We were all in agreement that a genuine political
settlement remains the only solution to the Syrian
conflict, but it is clear to the United Kingdom that the
key ingredient to such a solution — the genuine will of
the Syrian regime — is missing. After years of hard work
by the United Nations Special Envoy to negotiate the
composition and rules of the Constitutional Committee,
in November we all welcomed the announcement that
an agreement had been reached and that the Committee
would convene in Geneva. It was a historic moment that
would open the door to the entire political process, and
yet it is with deep disappointment — despite the best
efforts of the Special Envoy — that, after two meetings,
the regime is yet again refusing to engage.
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

On other aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), there
has been a similar lack of engagement. Despite the
Security Council meeting in August to highlight the
specific issue of detainees (see S/PV.8593), no progress
has been made. At that meeting in August, we set out
the immediate steps that the Syrian authorities could
take to make an important gesture of reconciliation. We
would remind the Syrian authorities of our call for them
to immediately release all those arbitrarily detained, to
provide lists of detainees and their location to the United
Nations, and to grant the International Committee of
the Red Cross access to detention facilities.
Speaking of humanitarian issues, I found the earlier
comments about Western double standards to be rather
strange. The United Kingdom has given over $4 billion
in humanitarian aid since 2012 and the United Kingdom,
the United States and Germany fund over 60 per cent of
the United Nations humanitarian response plan across
all of Syria, including regime-held areas. Instead, I
would suggest that a double standard is when one says
that they are concerned about humanitarian issues
while bombing the country.
The Syrian authorities, emboldened by the support
of the Russian Federation, have refused to pursue any
course of action other than a military one. They have
used the fight against terrorism to justify continued,
disproportionate attacks against areas heavily populated
by civilians and to justify attacks against civilian
objects such as schools, hospitals and marketplaces — a
practice of which the Council demanded the immediate
cessation in resolution 2254 (2015). Right now, despite
the announcement of various ceasefires, air strikes
continue in Idlib where, according to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
more than 358,000 people have been displaced since
December. It is outrageous that we continue to talk
about attacks against civilian targets in the north-west,
despite the repeated concerns expressed by the United
Nations, members of the Council and the ongoing
investigation of the Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic. The United Kingdom reiterates
that all parties, including those around this table, must
uphold international humanitarian law and further
calls for the Commission of Inquiry’s findings to be
made public.
The only hope for Syria is for the regime to reverse
its behaviour and commit to a political process that
promotes reconciliation and avoids further needless

S/PV. 8708

conflict, repression and death. Their Russian protectors
must get the Syrian authorities back to the table.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I salute
Ms. Khawla Matar, Deputy Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, and thank her for her
valuable briefing.
The launch of the Constitutional Committee during
the third quarter of last year under the auspices of
the United Nations represented an important step in
the course of the political process in Syria towards
achieving a comprehensive Syrian-owned and Syrianled political transition through constitutional reform
that paves the way to free, fair and pluralistic elections,
under the supervision of the United Nations and in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), in a manner
that meets the aspirations of all Syrians; preserves
the unity, sovereignty and independence of Syria; and
ends the presence of external forces and terrorist and
sectarian groups.
We call on all parties and the international
community to maintain and support this positive
development. My delegation believes that as long
as the negotiations within this context are based on
the principle of goodwill, then it is natural and even
healthy to have difference and divergence of views.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s good
offices and the efforts of his Special Envoy to bring
the ongoing political process to safe harbour. In that
context, we welcome Mr. Geir Pedersen’s discussions
with the Syrian Government in Damascus in order to
advance the deadlocked Constitutional Committee’s
work, and we express our hope that the Committee will
resume its work as soon as possible in order to adopt an
agreed agenda that is in line with its own benchmarks
and internal regulations.
We urge the Syrian parties to give priority to the
interests of the brotherly Syrian people, demonstrate
flexibility and search for common denominators
through constructive engagement in the work of the
Constitutional Committee in a spirit of compromise
and without preconditions and dictates. Given its
specific experience in managing public affairs with
various political components and civil parties, Tunisia
believes that the transitional stages should be managed
not by imposing the logic of hegemony or single
opinion, but rather by conducting dialogue between the
political parties as a strategic option to defuse political

20-0228413/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

29/01/2020

tension and violence and to consolidate the pillars of
democratic architecture.

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria, including the occupied Syrian Golan.

The political process in Syria, like any transitional
political process, cannot flourish without providing an
appropriate environment in which security, stability
and national reconciliation prevail in order to assist in
the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons
and pave the way for the drafting of a constitution and
the holding of free and fair elections pursuant to that
document, with the participation of all spectrums of
Syrian society.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Viet Nam.

We are concerned about the current developments
on the ground, which do not contribute to achieving the
desired security, economic and community environment
as fighting has intensified in north-west Syria in the
past few weeks. We recall that resolution 2254 (2015),
which represents the political solution, notes the close
link between a ceasefire and the political process.
We stress once again the need to combat terrorism in
Syria, including the Security Council-listed terrorist
groups, in order to create the necessary conditions for
achieving security and stability in Syria and the region.
We are also concerned about reports that terrorists are
being transferred from Syria to Libya. We call on the
international community to redouble its efforts to end
such practices and prevent terrorist groups from again
carrying out their criminal activities and expanding
into hotspots in the Arab region and beyond.
It is unfortunate that the economic environment
in Syria, similar to the security environment, remains
unstable. According to a report issued by the United
Nations this month, the Syrian economy registered
overall growth as a result of an increase in the
reconstruction process. However, that growth will slow
down quite soon as a result of economic sanctions. We
hope that the appropriate economic conditions will be
created and reflected in the living conditions of the
Syrian people, who are the ones who bear most of the
humanitarian and economic brunt of the conflict.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of
the ongoing political process being accompanied by
confidence-building measures, as stated by the Special
Envoy many times. Progress should be made in the
areas of releasing abducted and detained persons and
clarifying the fate of the missing, so as to ensure the
sustainability of the political process and strengthen
national reconciliation among the various segments
of the brotherly Syrian people, while respecting the
14/16

I thank Ms. Khawla Matar for her briefing and
would like to make the following points.
First, the conflict in Syria, currently in its ninth
year, has brought about devastation to the Syrian people
in the political, socioeconomic and cultural spheres.
The humanitarian consequences, with millions of
people in pressing need of aid, amount to a severe crisis
that has for long plagued the region and the world.
Secondly, the only way to address the conflict is
through a comprehensive, long-term and balanced
political solution, with full respect for the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of Syria in accordance with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, in that connection, we commend the
progress made in facilitating dialogue among the
parties concerned in Syria, including the formation
and launching of the Constitutional Committee in
September 2019. We support the role of the Committee
and look forward to the continued engagement of various
parties with the Committee with a view to achieving
substantive progress in the months ahead. We urge the
Syrian Government and other parties to build on recent
progress and engage in dialogue and negotiations, with
the broad participation of the relevant parties, in order
to find a long-lasting political solution acceptable to
the Syrian people. We are concerned about the lack
of progress in the Constitutional Committee since last
December, despite the tireless efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen, while hostilities in north-west Syria currently
continue to devastate the lives of hundreds of thousands
of civilians.
Fourthly, we stress the importance of unity in
the Council so as to find viable solutions to Syriarelated issues, including the continued provision of
humanitarian support for people in urgent need in
Syria. The Council should continue to support all the
parties concerned in Syria, as well as Special Envoy
Pederson to facilitate further progress.
Finally, we are of the view that all the parties
concerned must exercise restraint and refrain from any
action that could complicate the current situation. All
20-02284

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

parties must comply with and strictly implement their
obligations under resolution 2254 (2015) and other
related resolutions. Only through a viable political
process can we hope for a sustainable road map for
peace and progress in Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Let me begin my second speech of the day with
an important observation following our deliberations
this morning concerning the humanitarian situation
(see S/PV.8707).
My country’s Government sent an official
communication a while ago to the Regional Director
of the Eastern Mediterranean Office of the World
Health Organization (WHO) informing him that the
Syrian Government had authorized a WHO convoy of
medical assistance and medicine that had been waiting
in Iraq to promptly enter the Syrian territories through
the Al-Qaim/Abu Kamal crossing at the Syrian-Iraqi
border, which is under control of the Syrian State, so
as to avoid the expiration of its products. The Syrian
Government, in cooperation with WHO and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent Society, will distribute the assistance
to hospitals, health clinics and civilians in need.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs met with Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in
Damascus this morning to discuss the political process
in Syria and the importance of making every effort
possible to achieve the desired progress and ensure
the success of that process, which serves the interests
of the Syrian people. The outcome of the process
should be Syrian-led, while emphasizing respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria. Both sides have stressed the importance of
upholding the rules of procedure of the Constitutional
Committee so as to ensure independent Syrian decisions
without any external interference from any party.
Nine long years have elapsed, during which four
successive Special Envoys of the Secretary-General
have tried to find the magic formula to resolve the
so-called Syrian crisis. Unfortunately, they were not
successful in their noble task because some in the
Council and beyond prioritize the rule of force rather
than the rule of law, disregarding the provisions of the

S/PV. 8708

Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law and good-neighbourly relations. All
of that has been at the expense of Syria’s stability, its
regional role and at the cost of its people’s blood.
Yesterday we saw a pathetic attempt by the current
United States Administration to present a new colonial
project in our region, thereby repeating the same major
crime committed by Britain over 100 years ago with the
fateful Balfour Declaration, which served Israel and its
aggressive expansionist schemes. It did so in spite of
Syrian, Palestinian and Arab rights and interests and
in flagrant violation of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and its benchmark resolutions,
especially resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981)
and 2334 (2016), all of which stress the need to end the
Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, a withdrawal to
4 June 1967 borders and ceasing illegitimate settlement
activity, which hampers the peace process. Those are
Council’s resolutions.
The surreal scene in Washington, D.C., yesterday
was that of a unilateral action and an act of aggression
against the United Nations itself — one of unparalleled
contempt for the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Palestinian question and the occupied Syrian Golan.
In 2003, President George Bush announced the road
map for peace. At the time, the United States proposal
contained 2,218 words. He said that the proposal had
been inspired by the Holy Spirit.
Following the visit of Mr. Netanyahu yesterday,
President Donald Trump launched a road map for
peace and prosperity. It contains 49,402 words.
Neither the Bush nor the Trump proposal makes any
mention of international law — or of human rights,
international humanitarian law or the United Nations.
Neither proposal included any of those words. Should
Council members doubt me, I would ask them to read
the proposals for themselves. That is the United States
policy. Council members waste their time here, while
the United States takes unilateral measures the way it
likes. In circumstances such as these, how can we trust
United States policy related to any matter concerning
the maintenance of international peace and security?
We will leave it to Council members to answer
that question.
Nine bitter years have elapsed. Some Council
members and others have insisted on using
internationally prohibited weapons of massive lies to

20-0228415/16

S/PV.8708

The situation in the Middle East

sow instability in our countries and the Middle East
region, rather than reflecting on their own actions and
positions and reforming their policies. What is even
worse is that some are convinced of their actions and
positions. They try to convince us with arguments
that lack wisdom and law, while demonstrating their
superiority and near-sighted policies that result only in
destruction and ruin our countries and peoples. They try
to justify themselves and project their anger on others.
In the words of Jean-Paul Sartre, “Hell is other people”.
The absolute reality that cannot be denied is that
the accumulated old and new big sins of some have
brought our region and peoples bitter disasters, bloody
conflicts, instability and lack of development. We have
assured the Council many times that we cannot base
our actions on false pretexts and expect good outcomes.
That is a philosophy thousands of year old. Einstein
conveyed the same idea when he said,
“The definition of insanity is doing the same thing
over and over again, but expecting different results.”
We have reiterated that the full restoration of
security and stability in my country requires addressing
the challenges related to terrorism and stopping the
wasting of the Council’s time, efforts and budget with
fabricated issues — like determining the gender of
angels, demons and everything in between.
Some colleagues try to promote fabricated
accusations to obstruct us in our war against terrorism
and boost the morale of armed terrorist organizations that
are overrunning Idlib and Aleppo under the leadership
of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham/Jabhat Al-Nusra — meaning
Al-Qaida, Da’esh and other terrorist groups of different
names and loyalties.
My Government reiterates that it has remained very
patient — as patient as Job. We have chosen political
solutions and given them ample time. We have always
dealt seriously with every initiative calling for calm,
including through the Astana and Sochi processes, as
we are committed to safeguarding the Syrian people and
ending the pain and bloodshed throughout the country.

16/16

29/01/2020

Before concluding, I will underscore two points.
First, Idlib and the surrounding areas are Syrian
territories that currently are under the control of
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is the Syrian branch of
Al-Qaida, and its affiliated terrorist groups. It counts
among its ranks tens of thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters. Some are trying to genetically modify them by
calling them the “moderate armed Syrian opposition”.
In the near future, with the collusion of the Turkish
regime, they will also call them the “moderate armed
Libyan opposition”, which will also be genetically
modified. Surviving foreign terrorist fighters will be
called “moderate armed opposition” of a third or fourth
country — because their masters invest in terrorism.
They will progressively continue in that manner in other
countries in Africa, such as Mali, Nigeria, the Niger
and Kenya, as well as countries of the Sahel and others,
in order to spread destruction and the displacement and
exodus of their peoples.
Secondly, I once again ask delegations the question
I posed before: What would Council members’
Governments do if they saw a terrorist organization
occupying a certain region in their country, target
civilians and fire rockets? Would they just watch
them with their arms folded and provide them with
humanitarian assistance while calling them ‘moderate
armed opposition?” I leave it to delegations to answer
those questions.
Our message is a message of peace, based on strength
not weakness. We strongly believe in the principle of
the sovereign equality of States — a principle that was
enshrined by the founding fathers of our Organization
and on which we rely on in our policies. We also say to
all those who entertain repeating what was done in our
region after the First and Second World Wars that their
plans will not succeed. They will fail by virtue of the
will of the Syrian people.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

20-02284
