S/PV.9405

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9405

th meeting
Friday, 25 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Ms. Zabolotskaya
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Seventeenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2023/568)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25107 (E)
*2325107*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

terrorism continue to serve as a powerful reminder of
the importance of sustaining multilateral efforts against
Da’esh and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Seventeenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2023/568)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General,
Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Natalia Gherman,
Executive Director, Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate; and Ms. Farida Khalaf, survivor,
activist and President of the Farida Global Organization
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/568, which contains the seventeenth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I thank the Security Council
for the opportunity to present the seventeenth report
(S/2023/568) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by Da’esh to international peace and security,
and the United Nations efforts in support of Member
States to counter the threat.
I would like to start by expressing my sincere
condolences to the Governments and the peoples of
all Member States who have suffered from terrorism.
Earlier this week, the Secretary-General helped mark
the sixth International Day of Remembrance of and
Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism. The horrific
impact of terrorism on the lives and livelihoods of so
many people give impetus to our common efforts to
counter and prevent it. The victims and survivors of
2/21

25/08/2023

On 19 June, the United Nations Office of Counter
Terrorism, together with the Group of Friends of
Victims of Terrorism, held a dedication ceremony
to plant the Victims of Terrorism Solidarity Tree at
Headquarters. The tree will stand as a timeless and
powerful symbol of the commitment of the United
Nations and the international community to protect and
promote the rights of victims of terrorism.
I am pleased that the Assistant Secretary-General
and Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, Ms. Nathalia Gherman, is
joining me today to present this report, which our
Offices prepared jointly with the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, led by Mr. Justin Hustwitt.
As highlighted in this and previous reports, Da’esh
and its affiliates continue to constitute a serious threat
in conflict zones and neighbouring countries. However,
the threat level remains low in non-conflict areas.
That analytical distinction can obscure what is the
complex, context-specific and dynamic nature of how
those groups operate and evolve and their impact on
international peace and security.
In parts of Africa, the continued expansion of
Da’esh and affiliated groups, as well as the increasing
level of violence and threat, remains deeply concerning.
The Da’esh affiliate in the Sahel is becoming more and
more autonomous and increasing attacks in Mali, as
well as Burkina Faso and the Niger. The confrontations
between that group and an Al-Qaida affiliate in the
region, coupled with the uncertain situation after
the coup d’état in the Niger, present a complex and
multi-faceted challenge. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, attacks by terrorist and other armed groups
have also increased, with continued clashes between
Government forces and terrorist groups. In the eastern
region of the country, some 500 persons have perished
due to terrorist violence. Conflict and instability in
the Sudan have also renewed attention on the presence
and activity of Da’esh and other terrorist groups in
that country.
Beyond Africa, the situation in Afghanistan is
growing increasingly complex, with fears of weapons
and ammunition falling into the hands of terrorists now
materializing. The in-country operational capabilities
of Da’esh’s so-called Khorasan province, sanctioned
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province, has reportedly increased, with the group
becoming more sophisticated in its attacks against
the Taliban and international targets. Moreover, the
presence and activity of some 20 different terrorist
groups in the country, combined with the repressive
measures put in place by the Taliban de facto authorities,
the absence of sustainable development and a dire
humanitarian situation, poses significant challenges for
the region and beyond.
This complex picture remains despite successful
counter-terrorism initiatives by Member States. There
has been progress in targeting Da’esh finances and
leadership cadres, including the death of the Da’esh
leader earlier this year, confirmed by Da’esh itself after
the report’s completion. Those measures had a notable
effect on the group’s operations in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic, as well as elsewhere. Counter-terrorism
initiatives in Egypt, Mozambique and Yemen have also
significantly limited the ability to conduct operations.
Yet the risk of resurgence remains.
As a result of counter-terrorism efforts, Da’esh has
moved to adopt less hierarchical and more networked,
decentralized structures, following in Al-Qaida’s
footsteps, with increased operational autonomy by its
affiliated groups. While there is little evidence that the
core leadership is exercising command and control over
regional affiliates, financial, propaganda and other
connections remain. Perhaps most notably, the typical
surge in Da’esh violence during the month of Ramadan
did not materialize in 2023.
The situation in the camps and detention facilities
in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic that hold
individuals with alleged links to Da’esh and other
terrorist groups has been dire for many years and is
unlikely to improve soon. Although the increased pace
of repatriations, mainly by Iraq, is welcome, tens of
thousands of people — most of whom are women and
children — are still stranded in camps and detention
facilities, with unpredictable consequences for regional
and international security.
I offer four key
Council’s consideration.

observations

for

the

First, compliance with international law, including
international human rights law and humanitarian
law, remains the essential bedrock for the success of
counter-terrorism efforts. Actions that contravene

S/PV.9405

those legal obligations only undermine global efforts
against terrorism. Effective counter-terrorism requires
inclusive approaches and gender-responsive measures.
Secondly, the persistent challenges posed by
terrorism underline the need for counter-terrorism
initiatives to be firmly grounded in political strategies
for resolving the conflicts that fuel terrorism the most.
Force alone cannot lead to changes in the conditions
conducive to terrorism. Indeed, the use of force, without
any clear strategy backing it and with no anchor in
international law, can be counter-productive, fuelling
more violence, aggravating grievances exploited by
terrorists and creating conditions conducive to the
proliferation of terrorist groups. In that regard, the
Secretary-General, in his policy brief on the New
Agenda for Peace, has called for a new generation of
counter-terrorism operations led by African partners
with a Security Council mandate under Chapters VII
and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, with
guaranteed funding through assessed contributions.
Those operations should align with the full range of
United Nations tools and mechanisms for responding
to crises.
Thirdly, with regard to prevention, the nature of
the threat posed by Da’esh underscores the need for
more complementarity between security responses
and preventive measures. Further efforts are required
to prioritize and significantly increase investment
in prevention efforts. The integrated and balanced
implementation of the four pillars of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy would help to
ensure that very point.
Finally, developments in some parts of Africa are
deeply concerning and interconnected with existing
conflicts and local grievances. The African counterterrorism summit being organized by the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Government of Nigeria, to
be held in Abuja next year, will offer an opportunity
to redouble international support and explore
transcontinental approaches to address the situation.
The General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
77/298 on its eighth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy sustained the longstanding multilateral consensus on counter-terrorism.
The adoption of the resolution should serve as a
reminder that consensus does not come easy. However,
once achieved, it reaffirms the unity of Member States
against terrorism.

23-251073/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Countering and preventing terrorism require longterm commitment, as well as continued and coordinated
efforts. I welcome the support expressed by all stakeholders
at the 2023 United Nations Counter-Terrorism Week in
New York for multilateral efforts to counter terrorism.
I look forward to closely collaborating with partners on
the key priorities identified during the United Nations
High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies of Member States. The United Nations,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, will continue
to support Member States in their endeavour to address
the scourge of terrorism.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gherman.
Ms. Gherman: My sincere thanks go to the
members of the Council for the opportunity to brief them
on the seventeenth report of the Secretary-General on
the threat posed by Da’esh (S/2023/568). I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his
overview and to commend both the Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT) and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team for their close collaboration
in formulating the report.
As the report makes clear, Da’esh remains agile and
ambitious, despite its diminished territorial control. In
my briefing, I will highlight four key trends from the
reporting period.
First, terrorist activity has continued to occur
predominantly in the context of existing conflict.
A fragmented geopolitical landscape, including the
presence of terrorist groups operating across multiple
regions, the emergence of new conflict areas and
growing complexities in armed conflict situations
have created additional challenges for Member States
and made the resolution of conflicts more difficult. As
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace, that trend requires a comprehensive approach that
integrates a wilful pursuit of peace while also addressing
the root causes of violence and conditions that may be
conducive to radicalization to terrorism, rather than
continuing solely with over-securitized responses in
countering terrorism.
Secondly, the report welcomes the continued efforts
of Member States to repatriate their citizens from the
north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, including some
for the first time, which is a commendable development.
4/21

25/08/2023

We must acknowledge the complex challenges that
Member States face in addressing the dire situation in
the camps in north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic,
especially with regard to women and children associated
with Da’esh foreign terrorist fighters.
At the same time, we must recall the responsibility
of Member States to bring terrorists to justice and to
demonstrate international cooperation in efforts to do
so. That also requires whole-of-society and whole-ofgovernment approaches to the prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters. The
United Nations continues to assist those Member
States facing challenges related to the return of their
nationals, including through the Global Framework for
United Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic and
Iraq Third Country National Returnees. Through that
framework, the United Nations is providing support on
legal protection for children, security and accountability
for adults, rehabilitation and transitional services,
and reintegration.
Thirdly, the Da’esh operational presence in parts of
Africa continues to evolve. It is therefore essential that
the United Nations provide tailored and comprehensive
support to African Member States to boost their capacity
in addressing underlying conditions conducive to
terrorism and strengthening criminal justice responses
to terrorism, border management responses and efforts
to counter the financing of terrorism.
During the reporting period, United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities
strengthened their partnerships with some African
countries to respond to evolving threats, particularly
in and around East and West Africa, especially in the
Sahel. Entities’ efforts were focused on countering the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, responding
to the nexus between organized crime and terrorism,
preventing terrorists’ travel, protecting vulnerable
targets and mainstreaming gender and human-rightsbased responses to terrorism. This year the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
acting on behalf of the Committee, completed its first
comprehensive assessment visits to Benin in March
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in July. The
visits focused on issues such as the threat of terrorism,
countering violent extremism conducive to terrorism,
criminal justice responses, countering terrorism
financing, law-enforcement measures and border
management, international cooperation and human
rights and gender dimensions.
23-25107

25/08/2023

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Fourthly, the United Nations has stepped up its
efforts to hold Da’esh accountable for its crimes. In
that regard, CTED continued to assess criminal justice
frameworks with a view to enhancing accountability
for terrorist acts in accordance with relevant Council
resolutions and international standards. CTED
partnered with the United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to
explore criminal justice avenues for sexual and genderbased violence when committed by a designated terrorist
group or with terrorist intent. Drawing on practitioners’
experiences in the field and the perspectives of civil
society, it is clear that only through accountability and
justice can we begin to address the fear and devastation
that terrorism inflicts on individuals, communities
and nations.

principles, and they must devote sufficient resources to
prevention. In addition, we will continue to engage with
a diverse range of stakeholders, including academia and
research partners, community and religious leaders,
civil-society organizations, representatives of women
and young people and the private sector.

If we are to successfully counter the complex threat
of Da’esh and other terrorist groups, we need to learn
from past experience while identifying and addressing
new and emerging threats. In that regard, the CounterTerrorism Committee and CTED continue to work with
our partners to explore how new technological tools and
applications, such as generative artificial intelligence,
machine-learning systems and other emerging cyberbased platforms can be used to identify threats
and enhance States’ counter-terrorism capabilities.
Following the adoption of the Delhi Declaration, CTED
has been consulting United Nations partners, think
tanks, civil society, academia and the private sector
to develop a set of non-binding guiding principles for
Member States. The principles will assist Member
States in preventing, detecting and disrupting the use
of emerging financial technologies, information and
communications technologies and unmanned aircraft
systems for terrorist purposes.

Ms. Khalaf (spoke in Arabic): I am grateful for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on
behalf of Yazidi women, who have suffered violence
and oppression by Da’esh, and of women of other
marginalized communities around the world. I also
thank the United States delegation to the Security
Council for inviting me to deliver this message today.

To further support Member States’ efforts to
counter the financing of terrorism, CTED also released
two thematic summary assessments of gaps and areas
requiring further action to implement the Security
Council’s resolutions related to terrorist financing.
Those assessments are aimed at informing the design
of targeted technical assistance and capacity-building
programmes by UNOCT and other implementing
agencies and are accessible on CTED’s website.
I would like to emphasize that it is critical for our
counter-terrorism measures to be part of a comprehensive
approach to addressing the threat of terrorism. Our
efforts must be evidence-based, tailored, age- and
gender-responsive and compliant with human rights

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate CTED’s
commitment to the successful implementation of its
mandate under the policy guidance of the CounterTerrorism Committee and in support of Member
States’ efforts to counter terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Gherman

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Khalaf.

At the outset, before entering into the details of
my message, I would like to briefly introduce myself.
My name is Farida Khalaf, President of Farida Global
Organization. I am a Yazidi survivor of Da’esh prisons
from the village of Kojo. Like many other Yazidi women,
I was abducted by elements of Da’esh in August 2014.
I suffered all forms of violence — physical, emotional
and mental. In my 20s, I was a girl who dreamed of
finishing school, forming a family and living a simple
life in my village in Shingal. However, fate saw
otherwise. My dreams were ended at the hands and in
the prisons of Da’esh. Instead of studying, I became a
slave. Instead of forming a family, I was sold and bought
by elements of Da’esh like thousands of other Yazidi
women who have suffered the worst crimes during and
after our abductions from Sinjar by Da’esh.
I do not need to tell Council members more stories
about the suffering of Yazidi women. Before me,
Ms. Nadia Murad addressed our plight in the Council
(see S/PV.9016), and many Yazidi women have spoken
out about the sexual and ethnic-based violence and
other forms of physical suffering that were perpetrated
by Da’esh and other terrorist groups against thousands
of Yazidi women. Many of those women, not having
been liberated until now, continue to face this suffering.

23-251075/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

It is likely that Council members have heard about
what happened to my people on 3 August 2014, when
Da’esh forces raided the Yazidi areas of Sinjar. I know
that most countries have been informed about those days
and the crimes that were committed. Nevertheless, at
present, the genocide continues, and we are currently
living in the tenth year of genocide.
I will refresh Council members’ memories with
evidence that proves that further efforts were not made
to end the genocide and bring forth justice. We must start
by fully recognizing the genocide and developing an
environment safe for the return of Yazidis to their homes.
It is in the name of humanity, peace and justice that
I address the Security Council today. Mine is a message
of humanity and a plea for addressing the suffering of
women in vulnerable and minority communities who
have met violence time and again without mechanisms of
protection. Violence against women in the Middle East,
including in Iraq, is not a new phenomenon, nor did it
emerge with Da’esh. It existed at the time of Al-Qaida and
other terrorist groups, who abused women as easy prey.
I come before the Security Council today strongly
and bravely, not representing myself alone but supported
by my family and the Yazidi community as well as the
local and international communities, without whose
support for Yazidi women, I would not be speaking in the
Council today. Many States around the world, without
naming names, have offered a lot to our community
through their recognition of the genocide and by sending
humanitarian assistance to the camps. However, the
current reality requires significant efforts and assistance
to achieve justice and to hold Da’esh accountable in
international tribunals. There is still much to be done to
ensure the safe and dignified return of displaced persons,
including searching for the abductees who remain
in captivity.
The suffering will continue as long as armed conflict,
wars, displacement and forced migration continue. The
violence can be brought to an end only by ensuring justice
and the rule of law. Our community continues to live in
genocide, which is in its tenth year. Approximately 2,700
persons remain missing with unknown fate, including
women and children. If Da’esh is no longer active on the
ground, where are those persons now? With whom are
they living and in which State? The areas and countries
are known, but real efforts to locate and free those
persons are missing.
6/21

25/08/2023

Very sadly, 70 per cent of Yazidis remain displaced
in camps that lack the basic requirements needed to
live in dignity. After 10 years, most tents have still not
been changed. Council members may wonder why they
remain in camps. The reason is because their home areas
are not ready yet for their return. Their areas are still
witnessing military, political and security conflicts.
No efforts are being made to provide fair reparations.
Challenges continue without formal interventions by the
State. No real efforts — locally or internationally — are
being made to resolve the displacement issue and to
provide mechanisms that allow displaced persons to
return to their homes in dignity and safety.
The prolonged displacement leads to problems
and challenges psychologically and educationally, in
particular for women. They reach a point of despair
and lose hope for the present and the future. That is
the situation for many communities around the world,
including the Yazidis, who are experiencing their tenth
year of displacement.
All those issues are indicators of the increased
number of migrants. They have a legitimate right to seek
a safe haven where their religious and racial identities
are respected and protected. In my view, they should also
have the right to seek asylum in States of their choosing
because they have survived genocide and continued
violations and have fled religious persecution.
Da’esh and Al-Qaida have committed all forms of
sexual violence against women. That cannot be denied.
It became publicly known when the world learned of the
crimes Da’esh committed against Yazidi women. More
efforts are needed to put an end to sexual violence and
to hold accountable those responsible for the crimes
against women.
The Security Council played a great and historic
role in establishing the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant through
resolution 2379 (2017), which recognized that what the
Yazidis have suffered at the hands of Da’esh amounts to
genocide. That, in itself, is an achievement on the path
to ensuring justice for the Yazidi victims.
We thank the Security Council for such resolutions.
Those efforts and the efforts of the German Federal
Court of Justice to hold the perpetrators accountable are
highly appreciated, but we know they are not enough.
We need further international efforts to hold more
criminals accountable and to establish tribunals to
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

investigate and to prosecute the crimes against women.
I would like to inform the Council that I and many other
Yazidi women are prepared to travel to tribunals to
deliver our testimonies. That is possible and reasonable
with the Council’s support.
I would also like to note that the Iraqi Parliament
is currently discussing the granting of general amnesty
for prisoners and thousands of Da’esh elements and
their affiliates. That is an affront to the suffering of
Yazidi women and victims of the Yazidi genocide. We
call on the Security Council to work with the Iraqi
Government to ensure that the Da’esh elements are not
included in that decision.
I would like to call for more international support
for female survivors and victims’ families. Reparations
are not only financial. Achieving justice is also very
important and so is the initiative by some Council
members and many States to form the Global Coalition
against Da’esh in order to combat Da’esh militarily. I
hope that the Council will take steps to allocate funds
to an international construction fund that will support
the rebuilding of Sinjar so that the displaced persons, in
particular women, can return to their homes in safety
and dignity.
Ten years have passed, and people are still living
in camps of displaced persons in the heat of the
summer and in the cold of the winter. I hope the 15
States members of the Security Council will send
representatives to spend just 10 hours in those camps
and experience the cruelty that the displaced Yazidis
have been experiencing for 10 full years. The Da’esh
elements who committed the genocide were not only
Iraqis; they were from multiple countries. Therefore, it
is the responsibility of the international community to
restore the rights and dignity of the genocide victims.
I am grateful that the Council is listening with
sympathy to our stories — mine and those of Nadia
Murad and others. However, that will not deliver justice.
It will not repair the damage if there is no action on the
ground. I hope that next year those stories and statistics
will not need to be repeated. The fact that those stories
and statistics have been presented for 10 years shows
that the situation is still the same and that not much has
changed on the ground.
The President: I thank Ms. Khalaf for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

S/PV.9405

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Executive Director Gherman for their
work on the seventeenth report (S/2023/568) of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da’esh to
international peace and security, and for their briefings.
I also thank Ms. Khalaf in advance, since I will have
spoken before she courageously shares her personal
story, which I look forward to hearing. Her leadership
as a survivor and an advocate is very inspiring to all of
us. Her story will illustrate the gruesome tactics that
terrorist groups such as Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Qaida use to terrorize civilians,
and we must hold all those responsible for those evils
to account.
The United States is committed to promoting justice
and accountability for all acts of conflict-related sexual
violence, and that commitment is laid out in President
Biden’s memorandum on promoting accountability for
conflict-related sexual violence. In June the United
States named two Da’esh leaders as specially designated
global terrorists. Both individuals committed sexual
violence against Yazidis and were responsible for the
abduction and enslavement of Yazidi women and girls.
The designation of those two individuals was a historic
act, marking the first time that a dedicated focus on
conflict-related sexual violence has led to the imposition
of United States sanctions. We will never stop fighting
for justice or forget the more than 2,700 Yazidi women
and children who remain unaccounted for.
We must use all multilateral tools available to
us, including United Nations sanctions, to prevent
such acts of conflict-related sexual violence, given
how destructive such violence is for victims and
communities and how destabilizing for societies.
We urge Member States to increase their funding
for United Nations agencies and partners working
to provide comprehensive services for survivors of
gender-based violence. Those programmes can have a
significant impact on survivors’ lives, and they must
be funded, especially because right now the world’s
most vulnerable women and girls are in dire need. To
give just one example, many of the people residing in
the Al-Hol and Roj displaced persons camps in northeastern Syria, some of whom are family members of
ISIS fighters, are also victims and survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence. The situation in those camps
constitutes a humanitarian, human rights and security
crisis, and there is an urgent need for countries to
repatriate their nationals from them. The United States

23-251077/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

views the repatriation of both detained ISIS fighters and
displaced persons in the Al-Hol and Roj camps as a top
priority. It will help to ensure ISIS does not re-emerge
in Syria, and it can prevent further human rights
abuses. We have seen an increase in repatriations over
the past six months and hope that it is a sign of greater
efforts to come. The international community must
also ensure vulnerable populations are not susceptible
to recruitment by violent extremists, including through
stabilization assistance to liberated areas.
As the Secretary-General’s report highlights,
ISIS continues to take advantage of conflict and
inequality to attract followers and organize terrorist
attacks. The United States is particularly focused
on the increasing terrorism threat across Africa, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, and we are
deeply concerned that the string of military takeovers
in the Sahel will hamper the fight against terrorism in
the region.
We look forward to the African counter-terrorism
summit in early 2024 and the opportunity to discuss
durable solutions to the terrorism challenges across the
continent. But let us be clear, the summit must include
engagement with civil society organizations in order to
be impactful.
The United States continues to provide its African
partners with critical assistance in disrupting and
degrading Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates in a manner
consistent with international law. I want to reiterate that
capable law enforcement and broader security service
responses are essential to preventing and countering
terrorism and violent extremism.

25/08/2023

we can prevent and counter the spread of terrorism.
And we can save lives and end needless suffering. We
must act with urgency, and we must act together now.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Gherman
for their analysis of the activities of the United Nations
entities entrusted to them for combating the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We express our
full support to the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
We agree with several assessments contained in the
Secretary-General’s report on the threat posed by ISIL
(S/2023/568).
When analysing the terrorist threat, it is important
to focus not on symptoms but on its root causes. In that
context, the Council often mentions issues related to
development, socioeconomic underdevelopment, weak
State administration institutions and complex security
or humanitarian situations. However, we must not forget
that those problems are often the result of the collective
West’s interference in the affairs of sovereign developing
States and the implementation of managed chaos
strategies through the organization of colour revolutions
involving extremists and terrorists of all stripes.

In South Asia, Afghanistan must deny safe haven
to terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida and ISISKhorasan, which continue to harbour ambitions to
carry out attacks and have claimed deadly attacks
in both Afghanistan and Pakistan. Today I also
want to call on member States to support increased
transparency in, and operationalization of, the CounterTerrorism Committee’s assessment. Those neutral
expert reports include recommendations to guide
the provision of counter-terrorism-related technical
assistance, and the Secretary-General’s report rightly
characterizes the fight against terrorism as requiring a
long-term commitment.

The former colonial empires have not changed
their colonizing habits. Today, under the pretext of socalled counter-terrorism operations, they maintain their
military presence, of which affected countries have long
tired. The blatant ineffectiveness, if not failure, of those
so-called counter-terrorism operations in curbing the
terrorist threat is noteworthy. That fact clearly shows
that the real objectives of foreign military presence
are completely different. Under the guise of counterterrorism, the appropriation of other nations’ natural
resources is in full swing. To realize its geopolitical
ambitions, add fuel to smouldering conflicts and create
the appearance of supposedly popular resistance to
“undemocratic regimes”, the West uses every means
possible, not shying away from providing support to
terrorists. That explains attempts to divide terrorists into
“good”, “bad” and “not so bad”.

The international community and the Council must
continue to invest in whole-of-society approaches that
respect human rights and the rule of law. By doing so,

The Secretary-General’s report on the threat posed by
ISIL to international peace and security, which is under
consideration today, perfectly illustrates the arguments

8/21

23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

we have outlined. It highlights the Middle East, parts of
Africa and Afghanistan as the most problematic regions
in which ISIL and its affiliates continue to grow stronger.
What do they have in common? The answer is quite
obvious — the destructive role of the West.
Let us start with the Middle East, where ISIS
emerged as a direct result of the aggression of the
United States and its coalition against Iraq. Even now,
when ISIL has been largely defeated in Iraq and Syria,
pockets of terrorism remain in areas illegally occupied
by the United States military.
The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
and their families, who remain and are radicalized in
prisons, camps and detention facilities in north-eastern
Syria, also emanates from those areas. The United
States provides guidance and advice to other States on
addressing that threat. But, first, it must itself withdraw
its occupying troops from Syria. National authorities
will then be able to address that and other issues much
more quickly and effectively.
Let us turn now to the situation in Africa. There
is no doubt that ISIL emerged in Africa as a result
of the NATO aggression against Libya, which led to
the collapse of the statehood of that once prosperous
country. We remember very well that France and
the United States were at the forefront of that illegal
military invasion. To divert attention from their own
destructive role, those countries and their allies attempt
to reduce everything to the poor economic and social
conditions of States, weak governance institutions and
even climate change. However, those problems are not
new and have not previously led to the radicalization
of populations nor encouraged terrorists to establish
strongholds in the region.
The situation changed after the collective West
attacked and destroyed Libya, seeking to overthrow a
Government that they saw as undesirable, pillage the
country’s resources and natural wealth and spread
a blazing fire of controlled chaos to the Middle East
and Africa. Today the highest threat level is being
experienced in the Sahel region, and the West talks
endlessly about helping to combat it. However, against
that backdrop, information has emerged that France is
cooperating with terrorist organizations in the region,
in particular, Jama’at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin.
Turning back to socioeconomic problems, which,
we must not forget, are a consequence of the colonialist
and neocolonialist policies carried out towards African

S/PV.9405

States, Africa has all the resources it needs to develop
harmoniously. It is important that those resources stay
on the continent and not go to equip other people’s
Gardens of Eden in the West. The struggle against
colonialism and neocolonialism must be completely
carried out. Our African partners know that our
country supports and has always supported them in
that endeavour.
We also cannot fail to mention Afghanistan. The
situation in that country is also a vivid example of the
West’s leveraging of counter-terrorism issues to serve
their selfish geopolitical interests. Foreign troops led
by the United States were in that country for more
than 20 years under the pretext of fighting terrorists;
back then it was Al-Qaida. All of a sudden, the United
States decided to flee the country, leaving behind an
enormous number of weapons and military equipment.
Al-Qaida was never successfully defeated, and now the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has also appeared
in Afghanistan. Consequently, the Western weapons
brought into the country to fight terrorism ended
up, among other places, in the hands of the terrorists
themselves, who threaten peace and security in Central
and South Asia. Once again, we see a familiar scenario
supporting the spread of controlled chaos.
The West’s use of terrorists and extremists for their
geopolitical purposes can also be seen in Ukraine. The
United States and its European satellites have nurtured
and fostered neo-Nazis, whom they then used as a
battering ram to overthrow the legitimate Government
in the bloody coup of 2014. Under the West’s guidance,
the neo-Nazis were given the opportunity to become
deeply entrenched in the Government, law-enforcement
and military bodies of the country. For many years, they
terrorized the civilian population of Donbas, under the
cover of silence created by Western media and, sad as
it may be, by United Nations entities as well. Today
the Government in Ukraine, which exists solely thanks
to Western handouts, does not shy away from using
terrorist methods; indeed, it openly flaunts such tactics.
It is in this difficult context that we must engage in
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
While some are fighting this scourge, others are fuelling
it in new forms and in new territories. The Russian
Federation will continue building its cooperation on
counter-terrorism issues with all parties prepared to
engage in constructive and practical interactions aimed
at achieving the common goal of eradicating terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, without hidden

23-251079/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

agendas or double standards. We call for a pooling of
efforts to improve the efficiency and coordination of
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
based on the norms of international law, including the
United Nations Charter, in particular its provisions
relating to the sovereign equality of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
Mr. Osei-Mensah (Ghana): Let me begin by
acknowledging the seventeenth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering the
threat (S/2023/568) and thanking the Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov and Executive Director
Natalia Gherman for their useful briefings. We also
appreciate the additional perspective of Ms. Farida
Khalaf, survivor and civil society organization briefer.
The continuing threat posed by terrorist groups, such
as (ISIL/Da’esh), to international peace and security is
one that should continue to engage the attention of the
Security Council. As the Secretary-General’s updated
report indicates, there is a strong relationship between
the level of threat and the incidence of conflict. The
link also reveals the weakness in the capacity of States
in conflict situations to effectively counter the threat of
terrorism on their own and underscores the importance of
international and regional support for such endeavours.
It is important to also reflect on the notable successes
achieved in our collective efforts to counter terrorism.
The report underscores the remarkable progress made
through collaborative counter-terrorism initiatives,
highlighting in particular the recent accomplishments in
Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where regional forces and joint military operations
have disrupted Da’esh and its activities. In Europe, the
unwavering commitment of law-enforcement agencies,
intelligence services and security forces has succeeded
in averting terrorist attacks conducted by individuals.
By dint of their efforts, potential threats have been
successfully identified and neutralized, leading to the
prevention of numerous planned attacks.
However, while acknowledging those and other
advances made in our collective counter-terrorism
efforts, it will be crucial to remain vigilant and address
the critical issue of arms transfers and their potential
contribution to the proliferation of terrorism. In addition
to fuelling conflicts, irresponsible arms transfers provide
10/21

25/08/2023

terrorist organizations such as Da’esh with the means
to carry out their destructive activities. To combat
that, we must prioritize responsible arms control and
strengthen border-control measures to prevent Da’esh
from expanding further. By securing our borders, we can
significantly slow down the proliferation of weapons and
undermine terrorist groups’ ability to operate. We must
address the availability of weapons for Da’esh in conflict
zones in Afghanistan, the Middle East and Africa, as
well as its ability to manufacture smaller improvised
explosive devices and its ambitions for advancing its
weapon capabilities.
In response to the role that financing plays in
facilitating terrorist networks such as ISIL, which
continues to extort and kidnap for ransom in order to
raise finances for its nefarious activities, we encourage
the further development and refinement of digital tools
that can track and flag the movement of funds outside
banking systems intended for terrorism financing,
however small the amounts transferred may be. We must
better coordinate our efforts to destroy the financial
infrastructure of terrorist groups. Moreover, we cannot
ignore the disturbing expansion of Da’esh activities in the
Sahel and West Africa, which the report highlights. That
calls for intensified cooperation, particularly in the areas
of intelligence-sharing and logistical support. A robust
initiative aimed at countering that expansion demands
a unified response whereby information and resources
are effectively shared to dismantle Da’esh’s networks
and curtail any further expansion. In that regard, we call
for collaboration and support for the Accra Initiative,
which is evolving as the Economic Community of West
African States’ counter-terrorism platform. By pooling
our resources and intelligence, and with mutual support,
we can create a robust defence against violent extremism
and counter-terrorism in the region.
We highlight the situation of Da’esh fighters and
their family members in detention facilities in northeast Syria and call for urgent and appropriate action
to address the matter, given the alarming reports of
children being recruited for suicide operations and the
presence of approximately 11,000 suspected Da’esh
members in Syrian Democratic Forces’ facilities.
The recruitment of children for suicide operations
is an abominable practice that should be roundly
and unequivocally condemned. We must also work
to prevent the exploitation of children in terrorist
activities and prioritize their protection and well-being.
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In conclusion, we highlight the need to remain alert
to the agility and adaptability of terrorist groups, and
emphasize the need for international cooperation and
capacity-building if we are to avoid gaps in national
efforts, which could create vulnerabilities in the global
fight against terrorism. We underscore the importance
of ensuring non-selectivity in our counter-terrorism
response, since terrorism, regardless of its forms or
manifestations, presents a danger to the international
community. We must acknowledge the gravity of the
situation and recognize that no single country can
combat terrorism alone. Together we can overcome the
expansionist and nefarious agenda of Da’esh.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director
Gherman for their briefings today, as well as the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
for its work in producing the report (S/2023/568). I
also thank Ms. Khalaf for her powerful testimony. Her
harrowing account of Da’esh’s atrocities serves as a
reminder of the lifelong impact of those crimes and the
poisonous ideology that we are fighting. All survivors
of gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence, including Yazidis and other communities in
Iraq, deserve to see justice delivered. We support Iraq
and the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) in
pursuing accountability for Da’esh perpetrators, and
we look forward to renewing UNITAD’s mandate next
month to continue that important work.
Da’esh continues to suffer blows to its campaign,
including the death in April of its leader Abu Al-Husseini
Al-Qurashi. However, the threat is becoming less
predictable and harder to detect and investigate. We
must therefore keep up the pressure. A resurgent Da’esh
core in Syria and Iraq remains a real risk. Internally
displaced persons camps provide a fertile ground for
radicalization in which Da’esh can recruit and operate.
In Al-Hol camp, the United Kingdom is focusing its
efforts on improving the situation through humanitarian
assistance by responding to gender-based violence and
providing child protection.
As we have heard, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province (IS-KP) continues to show
that it has the capacity to carry out high-profile attacks
on civilian and international targets inside Afghanistan
and to encourage attacks abroad. Earlier this year,
the United Kingdom convened an inaugural IS-KP

S/PV.9405

diplomatic grouping, which saw 19 countries come
together and agree to intensify and coordinate their
response in order to counter the threat from IS-KP.
Last month, the United Kingdom published a refresh
of its national counter-terrorism strategy to ensure that
we remain agile in the face of an evolving threat and
aligned with our international allies.
In Africa, Da’esh is expanding fast. All of us in
the international community should step up our efforts.
We must address the root causes that are driving
conflict in the region and enabling the expansion
of violent extremist organizations. In the Sahel, the
United Kingdom is providing financial support to
the United Nations Regional Stabilization Facility for
the Lake Chad basin, an initiative that will support
local communities.
Finally, the United Nations plays a key role in the
fight against terrorism. The United Kingdom welcomed
the adoption of the eighth review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, through General Assembly
resolution 77/298. International coordination with a
meaningful role for civil society remains essential to
our work.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I commend the
Secretary-General for his thorough report (S/2023/568)
and
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov,
Executive Director Gherman and Ms. Khalaf,
President of the Farida Global Organization, for their
detailed presentations.
There has been significant progress in the fight
against Da’esh. We are encouraged by the fact that it
has lost control over vast areas of territory and that
terror attacks have been prevented or disrupted. Yet
the menace is still there. Da’esh has been resorting to
innovative means, such as cryptocurrencies and crowdfunding, to finance its activities. It has also maintained
its capacity to spread hateful propaganda and recruit
people through social media platforms. We remain
concerned about the group’s growing activities on the
African continent and its strong presence in places such
as Afghanistan, Syria and Iraq.
As the report shows, the resurgence of terrorism
is higher in conflict-affected settings. That reminds
us that terrorism and armed conflict are mutually
reinforcing. A more durable solution to that scourge lies
in comprehensive strategies that tackle the root causes
of both conflict on the one hand, and radicalization and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism on the other.

23-2510711/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Social exclusion, youth unemployment, xenophobia,
discrimination, prejudice and the calamity of war are
the breeding grounds of terrorism. The international
community should favour investment in development
over military action if it really wants to win its battle
against terrorism. It is important to focus more on
preventive measures and peaceful means of dispute
settlement. We must enhance cooperation on counterterrorism. Brazil acknowledges the crucial role that
regional and subregional counter-terrorist operations
play in fighting terrorism.
In late June, we achieved consensus on the eighth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-terrorism
Strategy, which the General Assembly adopted (see
General Assembly resolution 77/298). That conveyed a
welcome message of unity and partnership that is much
needed to face the current challenges. However, we also
need to do more when it comes to our negotiations in the
United Nations on instruments in general and in norms
and definitions in particular. There is still no agreement
on the exact parameters of what constitutes terrorism
under international law. The lack of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism affects our ability
to counter it in a coherent and collective manner.
We must reiterate that the Security Council should not
let the lack of clarity on issues with criminal repercussions
be the norm in its work. The Council should respect due
process when designating new terrorist individuals or
entities. Decisions on the listing of terrorist individuals
and entities must be based on solid evidence, leaving no
loopholes that would ultimately be counterproductive
in the fight against terrorism. Furthermore, the Council
has the responsibility to ensure that its decisions do not
impede impartial humanitarian assistance from reaching
civilians in need, nor cause more suffering — the
very thing it is mandated to prevent. The unintended
consequences of counter-terrorism measures must be
thoroughly addressed. Counter-terrorist action should
be regulated in such a manner as to allow the humane,
neutral and impartial work of humanitarian and medical
practitioners, in full compliance with international
humanitarian law. That is crucial in order to ensure that
our actions effectively contribute to eradicating terrorism
without creating collateral damage.
Having said that, Brazil condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and under any pretexts or
justifications. Our Constitution enshrines the repudiation
of terrorism as a guiding principle of both our domestic
and foreign policy. We remain ready to cooperate in the
fight against that hideous phenomenon.
12/21

25/08/2023

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Executive Director Gherman and Ms. Farida
Khalaf for their briefings.
As the President of Switzerland said in March,
“the confidence of our people is absolutely crucial
to depriving terrorism of its breeding ground in the
long term”. He identified four elements necessary for
achieving that: the rule of law, prevention, partnerships
and inclusion. Those elements are also included
in the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace.
The terrorist threat, particularly in conflict zones, is
becoming more complex. In his report (S/2023/568),
the Secretary-General demonstrates the extent to
which the regional affiliates of Da’esh are becoming
more autonomous and involved in local dynamics. In
the light of those worrisome developments, it is all the
more urgent to invest in those four areas in order to
break the cycle of violence. Our response must take
into account the many political, economic and social
causes of terrorism and fully respect international
law. Moreover, inclusive dialogue and strengthened
international, regional and local cooperation will make
our responses more effective. In that regard, allow me
to address two points.
First, the fight against terrorism must always take
place within the framework of international law. Let
us respond to terrorism, which denies human rights,
by protecting and strengthening those same rights.
Ms. Khalaf explained that terrorist groups use various
forms of sexual and gender-based violence to destroy
and control communities, displace populations, spread
fear and advance their cause. Our responses to such
atrocities must focus on the victims. Such crimes must
not be repeated, and the perpetrators must be brought
to justice. Civil society and human rights defenders are
crucial partners in this task and must be able to operate
in safe and respectful conditions.
Secondly, access to new technologies by terrorist
groups and their affiliates represents a major risk. There
should be efforts to counter, for example, the use of
social networks or virtual currencies to spread hatred,
prepare attacks and finance terrorist activities. At the
same time, we must not hinder the vast possibilities that
new technologies can offer our societies simply for fear
of their misuse. On the contrary, such technologies can
also be used as instruments for effectively preventing
and combating terrorism, but only if they are used
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

in accordance with international law, human rights
and international humanitarian law. Switzerland
supports an inclusive dialogue in that regard among
key partners, including civil society, the private sector
and academia. We must discuss ways in which we can
use new technological developments to our advantage.
The objective remains to prevent and counter the threat
posed by Da’esh and other designated terrorist groups
in the framework of our collective efforts.
In conclusion, it is urgent for us to invest more in
the prevention of conflict and violent extremism and
in ensuring respect for and the promotion of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including
rapid, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian aid.
A failure to do so would serve only to exacerbate the
conditions conducive to terrorism. If we want to contain
the threat posed by terrorist organizations, we must
address the grievances exploited by those organizations
and offer alternatives based on adherence to the rule of
law and open, prosperous and inclusive societies.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Gherman for their briefings, and
I commend the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for their contribution to the global fight against
terrorism. I also listened attentively to the statement by
Ms. Khalaf, the civil society representative.
At present, terrorism continues to pose a grave
threat to international peace and security. In the past
month, terrorist attacks occurred in Pakistan and Iran,
causing heavy casualties. That fully demonstrates that
the fight against terrorism remains an uphill journey
that requires strengthened international solidarity and
coordination in and all-out effort to curb the spread
of terrorist forces. I would like to stress the following
four points.
First, we need to synergize international counterterrorism efforts. Terrorists operate extensively in a
complex network of fast-moving personnel, which is
beyond the capacity of any country to deal with alone.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/568)
clearly states that multilateral cooperation has
remained essential to effectively responding to the
threat of terrorism. We should all uphold a collective,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security
concept, support the United Nations in playing a central
coordinating role in counter-terrorism operations, fully

S/PV.9405

implement the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and Security Council and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and build the
broadest-based united front against terrorism.
Secondly, we must refrain from politicizing
counter-terrorism. There are no good or bad terrorists.
When it comes to terrorist organizations and individuals
designated by the Council, all countries are obligated
to strictly implement the relevant sanctions. Double
standards and selectivity on counter-terrorism are, in
essence, condoning terrorist activities and undermining
the effectiveness of international counter-terrorism
cooperation. We oppose linking terrorism to specific
countries, ethnic groups and religions, or allowing
terrorist groups to germinate, grow and launch violent
attacks under the pretext of protecting minorities and
religious freedom.
Thirdly, we must eliminate the breeding grounds
for terrorism. Lack of development is one of the root
causes of the spread of terrorism. The international
community must help developing countries improve
their economies, eradicate poverty, enhance education
and expand employment in order to protect young
people from indoctrination and incitement by extremist
ideologies. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/568)
shows that regional conflicts are another factor fuelling
the increase in terrorist threats. We should step up our
efforts to promote political settlements of hotspot issues
and seek to stabilize situations, leaving no opportunity
for terrorists to exploit them. Countries should also
promote equal dialogue and harmonious coexistence
among civilizations and religions, reject the so-called
theory of the clash of civilizations and remove the soil
in which extremist ideas can take root.
Fourthly, we must optimize the allocation of
resources. At present, the international community
should focus on addressing major issues, such as the
misuse by terrorists of emerging technologies, the
diversification of terrorist financing and the nexus
between terrorism, transnational organized crime and
inadequate border control and law enforcement, by
enhancing information- and experience-sharing and
fostering judicial cooperation. Since Africa, the Middle
East, Central Asia and other regions are on the front
lines of international counter-terrorism efforts, in the
light of the needs of the countries of those regions,
the United Nations and the international community
should channel more resources, as appropriate, and
support the countries concerned in strengthening their

23-2510713/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

counter-terrorism capacity at the legislative, judicial
and law-enforcement levels so as to enhance counterterrorism effectiveness.
China condemns all forms of terrorism and has
continued to attach great importance to international
cooperation on counter-terrorism, actively participating
in it and supporting the United Nations in playing a
central coordinating role. In recent years, through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund, we have provided training and equipment to the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and other entities to help
developing countries prevent and combat terrorism. We
have also carried out counter-terrorism cooperation
with countries of the region, under the framework of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in
Asia. China will continue to work with all sides to combat
terrorism and maintain international peace and security
in order to create a tranquil and peaceful world for all.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Executive
Director Gherman and Ms. Khalaf for their information
and introductory briefings.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/568)
confirms the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, known as Da’esh, to international
peace and security. That terrorist group continues
to take advantage local fragilities to promote violent
extremism, especially in Iraq, Syria and some regions
of Africa. The situation in Afghanistan is a particular
cause for concern owing to the ability of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant–Khorasan to continue its
attacks in the region, as occurred on 30 July in Pakistan
and on 13 August in Iran, for which Da’esh has claimed
responsibility. My delegation would like to comment on
five points in the Secretary-General’s report.
First, we must continue to address the sources
of funding for Da’esh. To do so, we must build the
capacities of international organizations responsible
for controlling assets laundering and the use of
virtual assets. We therefore welcomed the entry of the
International Monetary Fund into the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact in
May, which will contribute to multilateral efforts to
address the issue.
Secondly, there is a need to limit access to
conventional and improvised weapons, including
components of uncrewed aerial systems, which,
14/21

25/08/2023

together with the use of information technology,
are essential to organizing and carrying out terrorist
attacks. The implementation of resolution 2370 (2017),
and the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to ensure that those weapons do not fall into the
hands of non-State actors, are crucial to addressing
those challenges.
Thirdly, urgent measures should be taken to
alleviate the serious humanitarian conditions that
persist in detention centres in northern Syria. They
primarily affect women and children and provide an
ideal environment for Da’esh to recruit new members.
We call for humanitarian organizations to be allowed to
return to those areas.
Fourthly, we support the Secretary-General’s call
to prioritize actions aimed at addressing conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. Ecuador reiterates
its position that counter-terrorism must include a
focus on addressing the problematic socioeconomic
conditions prevailing in many countries.
Lastly, in the wake of the International Day of
Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism,
which we marked on 21 August, we want to see the victims
of Da’esh remain a priority for the United Nations,
especially those who are victims of sexual or genderbased violence and continue to face stigmatization
because of it. We underscore the importance of the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and
the High Commissioner for Human Rights to that end.
Terrorism is a transnational threat to which no country
is immune, which means that international cooperation
in combating it is indispensable. We therefore welcome
the General Assembly’s adoption of the eighth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in June of this year through its resolution 77/298. It
sends a message that terrorism is unacceptable in any
form or manifestation, and that as Member States we
have decided to take joint measures to prevent and
combat it. Similarly, we note the counter-terrorism
elements contained in the New Agenda for Peace.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
thank the United States presidency of the Council for
convening today’s meeting on a critical matter, and
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Gherman for their insights on such a pressing
topic. We also express our thanks to Ms. Farida Khalaf
for her briefing.
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9405

It has been a little more than two decades since the
Council began to consider, via its resolutions 1368 (2001)
and 1373 (2001), that acts of international terror are a
threat to international peace and security wherever and
by whomever they are committed. Violent extremism
remains a global issue and one of Africa’s most pressing
security threats. In many parts of the world, including
in Africa, militant armed groups employing asymmetric
tactics and infiltrating local communities have been
able to amplify local grievances and intercommunal
differences in order to mobilize recruitment and foment
anti-Government sentiment. We are indeed witnessing
a rising and global spread of terrorism, especially in
Africa, where fatalities linked to Al-Qaida and Da’esh
militant groups reached more than 22,000 over the past
12 months, representing a 48 per cent increase from the
previous year.

As far as preventing and combating terrorism
is concerned, we commend the work and support of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
building the capacities of countries to prevent, detect
and investigate international travel by terrorists. These
efforts should be enhanced, and opportunities given
to more affected countries. We also encourage further
efforts to enhance the capacities of States to counter the
misuse of new technologies by terrorists.

In his remarks to the Security Council last March,
President Nyusi of the Republic of Mozambique stated:

The deployment of the Southern African Development
Community Mission in Mozambique (SAMIM) to fight
terrorism is another clear example of successful regional
counter-terrorism collaboration. Accordingly, I wish to
share with the Council some news out of Mozambique,
where counter-terrorism efforts have been yielding
positive results. In a combined operation with our armed
forces, our partners Rwanda and SAMIM, neutralized,
over the past two days, the leadership and masterminds
of the terrorist group in Cabo Delgado. We will continue
to build on this success until terrorism is eradicated
from Mozambique.

“The expansion of terrorism is a significant threat
and is driven by factors that vary from one context
to another. On the one hand, radicalization is based
on identity variables that are fuelled by intolerance,
and on the other hand, the manipulation of socioeconomic factors has accelerated recruitment by
terrorist groups, particularly among young people.”
(S/PV.9296, p. 5).
Poverty, inequality, social exclusion and discrimination
based on religion and culture are critical root conditions
that need to be addressed more urgently if we are to stem
the spread of terrorism. Countries are called to redouble
their efforts to combat criminal activities, such as moneylaundering and illegal mining, as well as the trafficking
of arms, drugs, precious minerals, antiquities and human
beings, which provide funding for terrorism. Moreover,
we observe with concern the risks associated with the
misuse of new and emerging technology by terrorist
groups, including online gaming and adjacent platforms,
which allow them to manipulate the digital space,
communicate, recruit, spread narratives and plan attacks.
As the Secretary-General pointed out early this year,
terrorism is the root cause and the result of many of the
problems under consideration by the Security Council.
It goes without saying that we must remain united
against terrorism. We must renew our commitments to
strengthening international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and reaffirm that any act of terrorism is criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of the motivation behind it.

We wish to reiterate our call for a fruitful collaboration and cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations. Among several examples of commendable achievements made in Africa by African Union peace support operations, we would cite the African
Union Mission in Somalia and its successor mission, the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia.

In our coordinated mechanisms for addressing the
conditions that contribute to the spread of terrorism,
we need to redouble our efforts to end poverty and
combat exclusion and inequality. We must also invest
in building community resilience. The importance of
social connection between communities and governing
bodies or institutions cannot be overstated. Government
agencies, defence and security forces, and international
peace support operations must partner with local
communities to provide early-warning systems for early
intervention against terrorism and violent extremism.
More importantly, we must note that there is no better
and more efficient remedy to the threat posed by terrorism
than prevention. History demonstrates the limits of
merely responding to imminent or actual terrorist acts
without addressing the conditions that lead to them. In
this regard, for an effective eradication of this scourge, we
encourage greater investments not only in addressing the
root causes, but also in renewing a terrorism-prevention
mechanism that is coordinated with Member States.

23-2510715/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In conclusion, Mozambique supports all efforts
aimed at the practical implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as well as
the relevant United Nations resolutions on counterterrorism and violent extremism, including, inter alia,
the protection of women, youth and all segments of
society against terrorism.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General, and Ms. Gherman, Executive
Director, for their comprehensive briefings. We also
thank Ms. Farida Khalaf for her moving briefing, which
highlighted the heinous crimes that women and girls
have been subjected to as a result of terrorist acts as well
as the critical role women play in counter-terrorism.
Despite the tangible progress achieved by the
international community in countering terrorism,
terrorist groups continue to adapt their methods and
change their strategies to fulfil their objective of
destabilizing international peace and security. We
therefore believe that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by on Da’esh and Al-Qaida
(S/2023/568) prepared in conjunction with the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and other
entities, is extremely important for shedding light on
the methods, patterns and movements of the terrorist
organization, Da’esh, thereby enabling the international
community to effectively counter it.
Among the worrisome developments that the report
notes in that regard is the continued use of technologies
for terrorist purposes and Da’esh’s exploitation of acts
of Islamophobia, such as burning of the Holy Qur’an, to
fuel extremism and hate speech and calls for terrorist
attacks. Another concerning development that the
report highlights is related to the continued ability of
terrorist groups in Africa to expand their control and
take advantage of conflicts, deteriorating economic
conditions and the security vacuum in areas outside of
States’ control. There are similar concerns about the
terrorist activities carried out in other regions around
the world.
We strongly condemn the use of sexual and genderbased violence by Da’esh and other terrorist groups
as a tactical means of war, as it significantly and
disproportionately affects women and girls and aims to
humiliate and control populations. We therefore urgently
need the international community to take a serious stand
on deterring transnational terrorist threats, including by
16/21

25/08/2023

coordinating efforts, supporting countries affected by
conflicts and building their capacities. In that context,
we look forward to the Africa Counter-Terrorism
Summit organized by Nigeria and the Office of CounterTerrorism, to be held early next year. With that in mind,
my country would like to emphasize four points.
First, prevention measures must be strengthened
by addressing the root causes of extremism before it
ultimately leads to the killing of innocent people. Such
measures should also focus on building peaceful and
resilient societies against extremism. That requires a
comprehensive whole-of-Government and whole-ofsociety approach by investing in education, economic
development and the promotion of interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, as well as the empowerment of
women and youth. To that end, my country participated
in drafting the text of resolution 2686 (2023) on tolerance
and international peace and security, which calls for a
comprehensive approach in promoting the values of
tolerance and peaceful coexistence to address the causes
of conflicts. The resolution also encourages all partners,
including religious and community leaders, the media
and social media platforms to address hate speech and
extremism. We hope that tangible steps will be taken
to implement the resolution, given its importance in
immunizing our societies from the scourges of extremism
and terrorism.
Secondly, terrorism should not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Any terrorist act is an unjustifiable crime. That why
my country has been stressing the need to avoid using
names related to religions in reference to terrorist
groups, notably Da’esh. When the United Nations and
the Security Council use the designation “Islamic State”,
they compromise the fact that there is no link between
Islam and terrorism. Such designations are an integral
part of terrorist groups’ strategies to exploit religion to
achieve their goals.
Thirdly, we must continue to develop our methods to
prevent and counter terrorists’ exploitation of advanced
technologies, including artificial intelligence, drones,
cryptocurrencies and digital platforms. If they fall
into the hands of terrorist groups, that will constitute
a dangerous threat to international peace and security.
Therefore, agreeing on a common collective approach
and strengthening legal frameworks to confront those
threats, without limiting the ability to innovate, has
become necessary and requires close cooperation among
Governments and the private sector.
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Fourthly, it is necessary to revitalize and accelerate
work to adopt a comprehensive international convention
on terrorism. Despite the existence of international
conventions and resolutions to address the growing
threat of terrorism, including the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, eradicating that scourge
requires a comprehensive international convention
to strengthen the international legal framework in
that regard.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
that it will continue its efforts, including as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee this year, to strengthen
the United Nations counter-terrorism system.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) Natalia Gherman for their briefings. Also,
I join others in thanking Ms. Farida Khalaf for her
brave testimony to the Council about unimaginable
hardships, including her personal hardships, under the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We stress the importance of cooperation with
all relevant stakeholders, including civil society, in
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
Despite the progress made in targeting its financial
operations and leadership, the threat posed by ISIL and
its regional affiliates remains high.
As pointed out in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL to
international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2023/568), developments in
parts of Africa and the activities of ISIL-Khorasan in
Afghanistan remain of deep concern.
I will highlight the following three key areas,
which we believe are necessary to prevent and counter
the threat of terrorism.
First, we should continue to address the financing
of terrorism, including through emerging technologies
such as virtual assets. Japan supports the initiatives of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on accelerating
global implementation of the FATF standards on virtual
assets. We encourage all Member States to apply riskbased anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist
financing regulations to virtual asset service providers
in line with resolution 2462 (2019).

S/PV.9405

Secondly, Japan remains deeply concerned about
the misuse of technology by terrorists. In particular,
as we are all aware, the development of generative
artificial intelligence (AI) has been remarkable. In June,
Japan hosted a side-event with the Office of CounterTerrorism, the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute, CTED and Australia during
counter-terrorism week to facilitate discussions on the
malicious use of generative AI for terrorist purposes.
Japan is committed to leading discussions in that
sphere, including through the Hiroshima AI Process,
towards a human-centric and trustworthy AI.
Thirdly, we emphasize the importance of appropriate
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families. We need to make
efforts to strengthen local administration capacities,
thereby reducing their vulnerabilities to terrorism
and violent extremism. Japan has supported capacitybuilding assistance through United Nations agencies
in areas, including border control, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration and maritime security.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security. We will spare no efforts to prevent
and counter terrorism, which is integral to maintaining
the foundation of the free and open international order
based on the rule of law.
Finally, yet importantly, Japan welcomes the
adoption of the eighth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 77/298)
by consensus in June. We believe the spirit of consensus
enables us to express our united will and commitment
on global counter-terrorism efforts.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director Gherman
for their briefings. I would also like to thank
Ms. Farida Khalaf for sharing with us her bitter yet
touching experience.
Albania condemns all forms and shapes of
terrorism. And we express our condolences to the
families of victims of terrorist attacks.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
the threat of Da’esh and affiliates to peace and security
remains high in conflict zones. Terrorist organizations
continue to find new ways to use emerging technology
to carry out deadly attacks targeting United Nations
peacekeepers, civilians and civilian infrastructure.

23-2510717/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

That must be stopped. Despite significant leadership
losses and United Nations coordinated efforts in
fighting terrorism, Da’esh has continued to expand its
activities, particularly in Africa, where it is nurtured by
existing conflicts and local grievances.
We remain concerned about the increase of such
activities in Afghanistan. It is very important to prevent
the country from becoming a haven for terrorists, and
we urge the Taliban to adhere to their commitments
made in that regard.
We are concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation of the detainees in Al-Hol and Al-Roj camps,
particularly about the situation of women and children.
They require the urgent attention of the Council and
other United Nations agencies.
We believe that United Nations members should
repatriate their nationals in line with their obligations.
That requires effective repatriation, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, in which
gender considerations need to be incorporated.
The use and consequences of sexual and genderbased violence committed by Da’esh are deeply
concerning. The report of the Secretary-General on
the threat posed by Da’esh to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/2023/568) notes that many victims of terrorism,
particularly those who have experienced sexual or
gender-based violence perpetrated by Da’esh, continue
to face stigmatization, with children born out of rape
severely affected. We welcome the United Nations
work in this area, including the support provided by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to Yazidi survivors who experienced
conflict-related sexual violence. We must invest more
in victims’ protection programmes.
Countering terrorism is a priority we all share.
Albania supports a whole-of-society approach that
respects human rights, aligns with international law,
is gender-sensitive and addresses the root causes of
terrorism and violent extremism. We also welcome an
emphasis on interreligious and intercultural dialogue
as effective tools in preventing and fighting terrorism.
In that respect, we should also focus our efforts
on the implementation of resolution 2462 (2019) in
order to counter the financing of terrorism. Here, we
believe the role of international cooperation is very
18/21

25/08/2023

important. The implementation of Financial Action
Task Force standards is vital in cutting off financing
for terrorist purposes.
In conclusion, Albania reiterates its commitment
to fighting terrorism and to successfully implementing
the four pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, in particular the fourth pillar
concerning human rights and the rule of law.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director Gherman
for their briefings. I especially thank Ms. Khalaf for her
contribution and the courage she displayed in sharing
her personal story with us today. It further underlines
the need for the Council to insist on ensuring justice
and accountability.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/568) is
clear. Despite some notable progress, the threat posed by
Da’esh and its regional affiliates remains high across the
broad geographic areas in which it is present. In Iraq and
Syria, Da’esh maintains its insurgency and the ability
to conduct asymmetric attacks. The situation in Africa
is also worrisome, with a complex interplay between
terrorism, conflict, food insecurity, climate change and a
lack of socioeconomic opportunities. Malta is concerned
about increasing terrorist violence in the regions of the
Sahel, the Great Lakes and the Horn of Africa.
In addition, while Da’esh affiliates in North Africa
are weakened, we are alarmed by recent Da’esh activities
in Libya, including reports of the recruitment of scientists
focused on the development of biological materials.
Likewise, we are concerned that the Sudan may now
serve as a hub for the transfer of North African fighters
to southern Libya.
Furthermore, ongoing developments in Afghanistan
are extremely troubling, with Da’esh-Khorasan
increasing its operational capacities in the country. That
threat also extends to the wider region, with the group
claiming responsibility for the deadly terrorist attack in
north-west Pakistan at the end of July.
Terrorist groups are exploiting socioeconomic
grievances, as well as governance and accountability
deficits, to radicalize and recruit, particularly in Africa.
However, militarized approaches predominate, with
insufficient attention to and investment in actions to
tackle the underlying drivers of violent extremism. We
echo the Secretary-General’s call to prioritize and step
up prevention efforts. Otherwise, we resign ourselves to
addressing the same security challenges repeatedly.
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9405

Effective responses to preventing and countering
terrorism require whole-of-society approaches,
including meaningful engagement with civil society,
local communities, women and youth. We must ensure
that counter-terrorism measures are more sensitive to
local realities by enhancing the avenues available to
civil society to engage with the United Nations counterterrorism architecture.

The challenges of international terrorism
remain immense. Da’esh and Al-Qaida are resilient,
expanding their presence in several countries and
continents — including in the Levant, Africa,
Afghanistan and Central Asia — and have demonstrated
an ongoing capacity to carry out cross-border attacks
and beyond. We note in particular the growing threat
from Da’esh in the Sahel and around the Gulf of Guinea.

In addition, Malta shares the Secretary-General’s
view that counter-terrorism efforts must be firmly
anchored in human rights and the rule of law. Too often,
measures to counter terrorism, violent extremism and
extremism more generally are misused to silence
and repress those advocating for human rights,
including human rights defenders and civil society.
Counter-terrorism measures must always comply with
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.

Those groups thrive on the breeding ground
formed by rights violations, the exclusion of women
and gender-based inequalities. Sexual violence is
also used on a massive scale by terrorist groups. The
atrocities committed by Da’esh against women from
the Yazidi community are well known and documented.
Socioeconomic fragility, violence and political
instability, conflict, climate crises and tensions over
natural resources also have a direct impact on the
development and persistence of the terrorist threat.

Malta reiterates its support for a gender-responsive
approach to counter-terrorism. We were pleased to
convene an Arria formula meeting on gender and
counter-terrorism in June with diverse, cross-regional
co-sponsorship and participation. One of the main
concerns highlighted during that meeting was sexual
and gender-based violence in terrorist contexts. The
issue, which disproportionately affects women and
girls, deserves adequate attention from the Council
and its subsidiary organs dealing with terrorism.
Today’s powerful yet harrowing personal testimony by
Ms. Khalaf about the sexual violence perpetrated by
Da’esh against the Yazidi community reinforces that
point even further. We look forward to the upcoming
publication of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate’s study on accountability for
sexual and gender-based violence in terrorist contexts
and welcome the organization of an expert group
meeting on the topic in May.
Before concluding, Malta welcomes the recent
adoption of the eighth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (see General
Assembly resolution 77/298). As the world grapples
with a multitude of crises and challenges, we are pleased
that multilateral consensus on counter-terrorism has
been maintained.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Ms. Gherman, Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Khalaf
for their briefings.
I wish to emphasize two points.

That is why the security response, in which
France is wholeheartedly playing its part, remains
essential — but it is not enough. Initiatives aimed at
promoting development and strengthening governance,
the rule of law and the fight against corruption
are essential as well. Such a response must also
ensure respect for human rights, in contrast to the
actions of the Wagner Group, which has made mass
atrocities the cardinal principle of its actions and is
strengthening terrorism.
Our collective efforts must therefore continue in
five directions.
First, we must continue to promote a
multidimensional approach. In the Levant, France
remains mobilized as part of the international counterDa’esh coalition. Allow me to pay a heartfelt tribute
here to the two French soldiers killed in recent days in
the tireless fight against terrorism. In addition to that
commitment, in 2023 France will allocate €86.5 million
to humanitarian and stabilization efforts in Iraq and
Syria, including for a specific initiative for the camps
in north-eastern Syria. In recent years, France has
repatriated 171 minors accompanied by 57 mothers,
while putting in place robust care and legal procedures.
Secondly, it is essential to combat impunity and
provide better support for victims of sexual violence.
France is contributing €8.2 million to the Global Fund
for Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.

23-2510719/21

S/PV.9405

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

More generally, we cannot dissociate the fight against
terrorism from the fight for women’s rights, particularly
in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, it is crucial that our responses remain
adapted to changes in the terrorist threat. That is why,
in the fight against the financing of terrorism, France is
mobilizing within the framework of the No Money for
Terror initiative, which takes into account all methods of
financing terrorism, including cryptocurrencies. That
is also why France supports the work initiated by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
implement the Delhi Declaration.
Fourthly, we need to make full use of the tools at
the disposal of the United Nations. I am referring, of
course, to Council sanctions, but also to the capacitybuilding actions carried out by the Office of CounterTerrorism. France has decided to double its voluntary
contribution to the Office in 2023 for the benefit of
those African countries that request it, according to
their needs.
Finally, we will continue our fight against terrorism
within a partnership framework, including regional
and international organizations. That is the aim, in
particular, of the International Academy for the Fight
Against Terrorism, which was established by Côte
d’Ivoire and France in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, and is
now in the process of being internationalized.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing today’s briefing
on the seventeenth report (S/2023/568) of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates
to international peace and security. I would also like
to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov from the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and Ms. Natalia Gherman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for sharing their insights on Da’esh’s activities since our
previous meeting on this agenda item (see S/PV.9257).
And I would be remiss not to thank Ms. Farida Khalaf
for her extensive testimony.
Gabon remains deeply alarmed by the terrorist
threat posed by Da’esh. My delegation notes with
great concern the persistence of that threat, especially
in conflict zones, where terrorists operate more
frequently. The current alarming situation demonstrates
that terrorist organizations are taking advantage of the
structural weaknesses affecting a number of countries.
Worse still, terrorist entities are constantly on the
lookout for new instruments with which to sow terror,
20/21

25/08/2023

which underscores their strong capability to transform
and adapt. We need to redouble our efforts to contain
and reverse that worrisome trend, particularly in the
Sahel and West Africa, where the threat is becoming
more acute.
Gabon fully supports measures aimed at eradicating
this global scourge and its tendency to spread, in
particular those set out in resolution 2253 (2015).
We take this opportunity to welcome the General
Assembly’s adoption in June of resolution 77/298,
on its eighth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That adoption represents a
significant step forward in strengthening the Strategy,
in particular by taking into account the new threats in
the evolution of terrorism.
Gabon welcomes the concerted efforts that have
helped to weaken and destabilize Da’esh, notably by
neutralizing several of its leaders. However, we must not
let our guard down, as those small groups have shown
resilience and an ability to adapt in order to pursue
their goals. That is particularly evident in their ability
to raise huge sums of money, enabling them not only to
recruit new fighters but also to take advantage of social
vulnerabilities. We need to address that enormous
challenge and strengthen our efforts to combat all
the affiliated organizations and offshoots likely to
facilitate organized crime through Da’esh’s use of illicit
weapons, which is aimed at increasing its capabilities
considerably. In that context, the commendable efforts
made by the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
UNESCO to reduce Da’esh’s capacity to mobilize and
deploy massive resources for criminal purposes deserve
to be stepped up and supported.
Da’esh’s ability to acquire large quantities of small
arms and light weapons, which fuel instability and
violence in Africa, particularly in the Sahel and the
Lake Chad basin, but also in the Great Lakes region,
is a matter of great concern. The African continent’s
coordinated response in that regard has made it
possible to counter the activities of Da’esh and reduce
its capacity to cause harm. Having demonstrated
their determination to vigorously combat the terrorist
threat on their continent, the African countries
should legitimately benefit from the support of the
international community. That should enable them to
initiate targeted, well-planned and more robust peace
23-25107

25/08/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9405

support operations under the mandate of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, endorsed by the
Security Council on a case-by-case basis, as judiciously
recommended by the Secretary-General. In order to
achieve that, we need to mobilize substantial financial
and logistical resources, including through our assessed
contributions to the Organization, on the basis of the
principle of the indivisibility of collective security.

We must also ensure to maintain the highest standards
in the promotion of human rights in our fight against
terrorism, in accordance with resolution 1624 (2005).
We welcome the courageous measures taken by some
countries to ensure the protection of the wives and
children of Da’esh fighters, who suffer the consequences
of the terrorist acts carried out by the group, notably
through their repatriation to their countries of origin.

The many challenges to international peace and
security posed by terrorist movements call for constant
vigilance and concerted efforts on all fronts in order
to better equip the affected countries, which need to
strengthen their capacities, particularly in mastering
the new information technologies used by Da’esh to
spread its criminal activities. That is a fundamental
requirement, as terrorist groups will continue to act
opportunistically by trying to establish themselves
in regions in which they identify weak links. In that
regard, I reaffirm the commitments we made in
the Delhi declaration and the need to implement its
relevant recommendations.

The growing threat posed by the activities of
Da’esh calls for greater regional and international
cooperation. In that regard, I would like to commend
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for the efforts
made by his Office to promote a targeted response to
the scourge of terrorism, both regionally and globally.

In the same vein, my country welcomes the ongoing
efforts to establish Da’esh’s criminal responsibility for
all the atrocities it has committed. In that respect, the
work carried out by UNITAD and the efforts of the
Office on Drugs and Crime deserve to be highlighted.

In conclusion, it is important to recall the challenges
that the terrorist threat posed by Da’esh continues to
pose, including its heightened activity in Africa and
in conflict zones. We must also continue to act with a
heightened sense of shared responsibility and strengthen
international cooperation to deal more effectively with
this threat faced by all of us. That requires unwavering
solidarity in order to better equip those countries and
regions that are most at risk and not necessarily fully
equipped to meet the challenges posed by the growing
terrorist threat worldwide.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-2510721/21
