TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 15 DECEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
1
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1522) . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . + .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge d’affaires ad interim of Guinea
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9528) , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1522

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, , ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of ;the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Senm’ty Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 15 December 1969, at 3 p.m.
l+esident: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA (Zambia).

4. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (translated from I+ench):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to extend to you the
warmest congratulations of my delegation, and say how
pleased we are to seeyou presiding over the Security Council.

&aen:nt: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

5. The bonds of fruitful co-operation and African solidarity which have always marked relations between the
Republic of Zambia and the Republic of Guinea speak for
themselves and I need not stressthem here.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 522)

I. A.doption of the agenda.

6. Your keen understanding of international problems,
your resolute devotion and your adherence to the sacred
principles of justice ensure that the debate opening today in
the Security Council will be brought to a successful
conclusion, like those presided over by your two distinguished predecessors, Lord Caradon and Ambassador Yost.

2. Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge
d’affaires ad interim of Guinea addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/9528),

7. I should like also to thank all the members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity to submit to them a
record of the crimes and offences perpetrated against my
country, the Republic of Guinea, a young African nation,
by the backward Government of Portugal.

Adoption of the agenda
77~ agenda was adopted,
Complaint by Guinea
letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge d’affaires
ad interim of Guinea addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9528)

8. Furthermore, I feel I should draw your attention to the
important fact that, after eleven years of independence,
nine of which were marked by constant provocations and
systematic violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country, this is the first time that the
Government of the Republic of Guinea has asked for a
meeting of the Security Council. I also think it appropriate
to point out at the outset that the complaint of Africa as a
whole against Portugal and its misdeeds in the African
continent is a standing one.

I. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Guinea and
Portugal have asked to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question now before the Council [S/9528,
S/95.5.5/. In accordance with the usual practice of the
Council and with its provisional rules of procedure, I
therefore propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invitl: them to take seats at the Council table in order to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

9. The most recent provocation against my country, in
November last, and other similar provocations carried out
at the same time against other African States, have
convinced us that it is necessary to submit the record of
these events to the Security Council and bring to its
attention the serious threat to the peace and security of the
African continent posed by the constant provocations of
the Fascist Government of Portugal.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Tour& (Guinea)
and Mr. B. de Miranda (Portugal) took places at the Council
tab Ie,
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the complaint submitted to it by
Guinea on 4 December, which was circulated in document
S/9528. In this connexion, I should like to draw attention
to a further Ietter from the representative of Guinea, dated
I2 December 1969, which has been distributed in document S/9554, as well as to the letter dated 5 December
signed by the representatives of 40 African States, which
was circulated in document S/9549.

IO. Last week the Council met to hear of the violations
and crimes committed against the sovereignty of another
young African State, the sister republic of Senegal, The
accusedparty wasPortugal.
Il. In July of this very year which is drawing to a close
the sister republic of Zambia called for a meeting of the
Security Council following on clear acts of aggression
committed against it and repeated violations of its sover-

3. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Guinea, on whom I now call.
1

eignty and territorial integrity. The accused party was, here
again, Portugal.

18. On 10 September 1969, from 11.50 a.m. to 2.45 p.m.
GMT, units of the Portuguese army stationed in Guinea
(Bissau) subjected the Guinean village of Satiguiya to
mortar shelling from positions in the Territory of Guinea
(Bissau). This was followed by an air raid carried out by
three fighter bombers, which strafed the same village,
Twenty huts were destroyed by fire. I should also like to
read to the Council the document relating to theseevents:

12, The Democratic Republic of the Congo also appealed
to the Security Council and drew its attention to the crimes
and acts of brigandage of which it had been a victim on its
Own national territory. The aggressor was none other than
Portugal.
13. Other brother countries, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Congo (Brazzaville), have in recent years
alerted world public opinion to other aspects of Portuguese
aggression, to violations of their national sovereignty,
abductions, crimes and the murdering of Tanzanian and
Congolese citizens.

‘Bokt

C/46-13 September 1969

“To: Comrade Secretary Internal Affairs, Conaky

“I have the honour to inform you that according,to the
report of the Mission of Commandant Diouma who came
back from the border today, the situation is not on our
frontier. Portuguese troops fired mortars on Saliguiya on
10 September 1969 from 11.50 a.m. to 2.45 p.m. GMT,
The mortar shelling was followed by an air raid carried
out by’three fighter bombers. No lossesin human life are
reported. Twenty huts were destroyed by fire.”

14. In a letter dated 13 October 1967 [S/8193/, addressed to the President of the Security Council, the
Government of the Republic of Guinea drew the attention
of the Security Council to the warlike acts perpetrated by
the Fascist Lisbon Government against our national sovereignty, in defiance of the principles of the United Nations
Charter, from the occupied Territory of Guinea (Bissau).

19. On 27 August 1969, at 11 a.m. on the island of
Kadigue, Bake administrative region, a boat, the motor
launch Patrice Lumumba, which provides transport for the
inhabitants of the Guineap islands of Kadigue, Kanfaran
and Outse, was subjected to a surprise attack as if
approached the Kadigue landing-stage by five Portuguese
military patrol boats, which surrounded the small unarmed
Guinean launch barely a few hundred metres outside the
port. They opened machine-gun fire on the launch and
hurled grenades at the people on the boat, who thereupon
panicked and jumped into the water. The premeditated and
aggressive nature of this attack cannot be doubted in this
instance. The results of this attack were one killed, three
wounded and twenty-one persons seized, together with the
launch and agricultural produce and other goods.

15. These offences, which we have purposely listed,
clearly demonstrate how persistently and stubbornly Portugal creates insecurity on the African continent, If today the
Government of the Republic of Guinea is calling for a
meeting of the Security Council, it is an obvious sign that
we have come to the end of our patience.
16. As I have said, the complaint we bring before the
Council is a standing complaint as, indeed, the acts of
aggression of Portugal are permanent acts of aggression
against the sovereignty of African States. It is a remarkable
fact that acts of aggression by Portugal against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Guinea are of daily occurrence. As proof of this, we shall
report to the Security Council the following events, all of
which took place in the period from April to November of
1969.

20. I shall now read out the document from the Guinean
authorities:
“‘Report of the abduction of the motor launchPatrice

Lumumba in Guineanterritorial waters

17. On 13 November 1969, units of the Portuguese army
stationed in Guinea (Bissau) subjected the Guinean villages
of Dana and Doubadou in the Wedoubourou district,
Gaoual administrative region, in the north-western part of
the Republic of Guinea, to mortar shelling. This resulted in
the destruction by fire of 10 huts at Dana and 17 at
Doubadou. I shall read to you the official document from
the local authorities on the spot:

“I have the honour to report to you as follows: on 28
August 1969, at 12.20 p.m., I received a message,
No. 001-P& sent to me by Sergeant-Major Bangoura
Mamadouba, the Chief of the Gendarmerie Border post In
Sansale, who reported to us that Portuguese settlers had
on 27 August 1969 abducted the motor launch P&rice
Lumumba in Guinean waters at the entrance to the port
of Kadigue, district of Kanfarande in the BokB administrative region.”

‘ilr,, 10/C- Very urgent
“Telegram dated IS November 1969 from the Governor
‘Administrative Region to the Secretary of State for
Internal Affairs, Gmakry

This message also tells us that Portuguese settlers opened
fire on the boat and passengersin the course of this attack.
The General Secretary of the Kanfarande section, SYua
Karamoko, waskilled outright:

“Have been informed by Commandant at Wedoubourou
of shelling of two villages in district on 13 November by
the Portuguese clique. Substantial damage. A number of
huts burned. No loss of life. We are sending delegation to
the spot to assist our comrades.”

“On the same day, we received a telephone call in the
afternoon from the Chief of the Border post of Kanfarande who reported the arrival of the body of the
General Secretary. We went immediately to Kanfarande
together with a delegation from the Federal Office of

ofGaoual

2

i
I

c

Bok.6 to attend the funeral. We arrived at 6 p.m. and the
fulmal took place at 6.30. The policeman, Eamidou
Barry, of the border post of Kanfarande, who wasalsO on
the boat, WAS wounded in the feet as a result of the
grenade explosions which killed the General Secretary,
when they jumped into the water to swim to the shore.
Earuidou Barry, the policeman, made the statement
whicl~ is recorded as follows:

on the boat with the Portuguese. I would alsOpoint out
that the attack took place just at the point of entry into
Kadigue, about 100 metres from the landing-stage.
“ ‘The five Portuguese launches left Kanofac, where
fieY had lain in ambush, each one containing an African
and two whites.’
“After hearing the statement of the policeman, wamidou Barry, we visited the other two wounded whose
names were Bangoura Alpha, a farmer from Kadiguk
(Kanfarande), who was wounded rather seriously by a
grenade splinter in the left shoulder (his wounds were
rather considerable) and Mato Patrice Do&, a teacher at
Kanfarande, who was wounded in the left forearm and
the left leg.

“ ‘In the afternoon of 25 August 1969, I left Kanhrande on the motor launch Patrice Lumumba. We spent
the
night in Boffa in the Kanfarande region. The
following day we went on to Kapken. On 27 August 1969
we left Kapken for Kadigue, stopping at Karahach where
we unloaded 14 bags of paddy rice and then made for
Kadlgue.

“After obtaining this information we left Kanfarande
on the same day at 8 p.m. and arrived in Bok6 at
10.45 p.m.

“ ‘After passing Bagadaye, I saw five patrol boats
heading towards us. I pointed them out to the General
Secretary, Sylla Karamoko, saying that they were fine
looking boats and that if the Gendarmerie of Kanfarande
had such a boat, it would be useful to us for patrolling
the frontier. They were coming at us in wedge information and encircled us in the following way: one boat was
ofl our left, another on our right, while three others came
and blocked our path. The patrol boat to our left came
up so as to block our entry into the port of Kadigue. In
that boat I noticed that there were an African and two
whites. The African had a sub-machine gun in his hand
and the European was shooting with a heavier weapon, a
brown rifle. The attack on the Patrice Lumumba lasted
ablout 15 minutes. While we were under fire from the
Portuguese I heard the Portuguese European say in
French: “There is a policeman”. So it wasthat I went and
stood in the bow of the boat. When the Patrice drew
alongside, I jumped at once into the water, but unfortunately my belt caught on a nail. A few minutes later the
General Secretary, Sylla Karamoko, also jumped into the
water, The Portuguese white man immediately threw
three grenades. Sylla Karamoko was hit in the water and
died on the spot, and I was wounded in the feet by
grenade fragments while swimming.

“The immediate consequence of this act of banditry
WASthat the Bake islands werealmost completely cut off

from the headquarters of the region, from which it
normally takes about one full day by boat to reach the
nearest island.
“Furthermore, an atmosphere of great fear now reigns
in the Bake administrative region.
“The basic links must therefore be maintained between
Bake’ and the islands; those links have been broken by the
Portuguese who have taken away the only boat connecting the islands with the mainland.
“Our islands must be protected in the face of the
imperialist barbarian acts of the Portuguese colonialist
invaders.
“There can be no doubt whatsoeverthat there was a
premeditated attack.
“Lieutenant Diakite Lamine
“Done at Bok6,29 August 1969
“For the Commander of the National Gendamrerie”

“ ‘A few minutes later a white man went on board,
took over the control of the Patrice Lumumba and
headed towards Portuguese waters. The Kadigub people
had been alerted about this attack and came out in canoes
to, help people out of the water. As a result, the body of
our comrade, Sylla Karamoko, was recovered. We waited
all day and at about 6 p.m. the medical assistant at
Katifoura, police-constable Kourouma, came to administer first-aid treatment. I then ordered that the body
of the General Secretary, Sylla Karamoko, should he
brought to Kanfarande. Towards 5 p.m. we left Kadigue,
going via Kamasso, Kouan, Kaola and Kakigneni and
arrived at Kapken at 4.30 a.m. The following day, 28
August 1969, we arrived in Kanfarande with the body.

21. At the same time we received another document
annexed to the letter of the representative of Guhm
(s/9554] reporting similar factsand stating inter aHa:
“Portuguese colonial troops have attacked and taken
our motor boat Patrice Lumumba in territorial
waters.
away

“I have the honour to report to you the act of armed
aggression of Portuguese colonial troops against our
motor boat Patrice Lumumba on 27 August at I I aam.
“The Patrice Lumumba left Bake’ for the islands
merchandise and passengers.It should be noted
hat the rice supplied by the OCA wasintended for the
various island comitds.

carrying

(c ‘I should like to point out that one person waskilled
on the spot, namely comrade Sylla Karamoko, General
Secretary of the Kanfarande administrative region and
three persons were wounded on the Pa@icc Lumumba
There were thirty-two passengers on the Patrice Lumum& eight escaped and the remaining twenty-One left

“It left Kanfarande on 27 August and remained
overnight at Boffa, in the Kanfarande administrative
region. The following day it headed for Kapen.
3

“It set off for Kadigue with a stop for technical reasons
in Karahach, where 14 bags of paddy rice were unloaded
for the comiti there.

“Having

heard the declaration of the Head of the
delegation concerning the act of piracy perpetrated by the Portuguese against a Guinean motor
launch in Guinean territorial waters,
Guinean

“It proceeded on its course and arrived at Bagadaye.
After going beyond this point, about 100 metres from the
landing stage, five military patrol boats appeared going in
V~V~OUS directions. The gendarmerie report states:

‘Having been informed that this act of provocation
resulted in the death of one person and in serious wounds
to three others,

“ ‘After going beyond Bagadaye, I saw five patrol boats
heading towards us. They were coming at us in wedge
formation, with their bows headed towards us and
encircled us in the following way: one boat was on our
left, another on our right, while three others came in
front of US. The patrol boat to our left came up so as to
block our entry into the port of KadiguC.’

‘Having further learned that Portugal, in violation of
the principles of international law, seized the above-mentioned vesseland took 21 persons prisoner,
“1,

Vigorously condemns this illegal action by Por-

tugal;
“2. Expresses its complete solidarity with the Guinean
Government;

“In each patrol boat there were three military men, two
white and one African.

“3. Gzlls upon Portugal to set free immediately the
Guinean citizens arbitrarily detained and to return the
seized vesselwithout delay;

“The attack was begun by the European who was
shooting with a heavy weapon, a brow&rifle. It should be
noted that the five Portuguese patrol boats left Kanifac
where they were lying in ambush.

“4. Invites the General Secretariat of the Organization
of African Unity and the African Group at the United
Nations to take appropriate measures to induce the
international community to impress upon Portugal strict
respect for the sovereignty of States in accordance with
Article 2 of the United Nations Charter;

“The attack lasted only 1.5 minutes. Sylla Karamoko,
the General Secretary, was killed by three grenades and
the others were wounded by grenade fragments.
“After putting the Patrice Lumumba out of action, the
aggressors headed towards Portuguese territorial waters.
The survivors were helped out of the water by the
terrified population who came out in their canoes.

“5. Demands a formal apology by Portugal for this act
Of piracy as well as ample compensation for the physical,
material and mental sufferings endured by the victims;

“The body of Sylla Karamoko was taken to Kanfarande, where he was buried on 28 August.

“6. Addresses an urgent appeal to the Secretary
General of the United Nations to exert all his influence to
ensure that Portugal returns the Guinean motor launch
and immediately setsfree its passengers;

“The wounded were: Bangoura Alpha, farmer, KadiguB,
left shoulder hit by grenade shrapnel; Moto Patrice Do&
teacher at Kanfarandd, hit in left forearm and left leg;
Hamidou Barry, wounded in the feet.

“7. Empowers its Chairman to address to the President
of the Republic of Guinea an expression of the sympathy
and active solidarity of the Organization of African Unity
with the Government and people of Guinea.”

“AS regards other passengers, a list is attached.”
This list appears as annex VIT to the letter submitted to
members of the Council by the representative of Guinea.

23. The President of the Republic of Guinea, His Excellency Ahmed Sekou Tour& received the following message
shortly afterwards:

22. The Council should note one very significant fact.
Portugal chose 27 August 1969, the opening day of the
thirteenth ordinary session of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity, to commit this odious
act of piracy and these crimes against an independent
African State. Feeling among all African delegations in the
Ethiopian capital was very strong, as may be seen from the
important decisions adopted on African solidarity with the
Republic of Guinea. The following resolution issued as
document CM/Res. 201(X111) wasadopted:

“His Excellency Ahtned Sekou Toure
“President of the Republic of Guinea
“Conakry (Guinea)
“No.245. Your distinguished representative in the
Council has just informed us that another barbarous act
of aggression has been committed against the peaceful
and courageous people of Guinea and the Guinea State by
the retrograde, racist and colonialist Government of
Portugal. We are aware that these provocations by
Portugal have been perpetrated as a result of your firm
and resolute attitude in the struggle being waged for the
dignity and honour of the African peoples. Accordingly,
the Council of Ministers has instructed me to express to
you and to the party and the courageous people of
Guinea the unanimous support and sympathy of the

‘Resofution on Portugal’s act of aggression against the
Republic of Guinea

“The Council of Ministers meeting in its Thirteenth
Ordinary Session in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, from 27
August to 6 September 1969,
4

Peoples of the African continent in this new trial which
YOU must mhre and with you all of Africa. With my
highest esteem,

Tourdou and Kandiafara in the Kandiafara area m the Bake
Adrninistration Region caused panic and the mass exodus
Of the ihbitants of that region, I should also like to read
to you from the document relating to this event:

“Simon Nkoo Etougou
‘President of the Thirteenth Ordinary
“Session of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity”

“Govema of the Bake administrative region
“SecretaTY of State for the Interior and the Army,
Conakry
“No.24. 1 have the honour to report to You. The
Gendarmerie and the Army report long-range shelling in
Kandiafara area by Portugal, 25 and 26 May. NO loss of
lives or material, but panic wascausedin the Sintiourou,
Tanene, Tourdou and Kandiafara areas, the populations
Of which are fleeing through the bush.”

24. ‘The Secretary-General of the United Nations likewise
received the following message:
“His Excellency, U Thant
“Secretary-General of the United Nations
“New York

27. 1 now come to item 5 in my enumeration of events:
on 15 April 1969, an aerial bombardment was carried out
by two Portuguese aircraft in the area of Kanfara, in the
administrative region of Gaoual. I should now like to read
the relevant documents:

“N0.247. On behalf of the thirteenth ordinary session
of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, meeting in Addis Ababa from 27 August to
5 September, I have the honour to inform you of a new
act Of piracy committed by Portugal against a Guinean
motor launch and nationals in Guinean territorial waters.
In view of the urgency of the situation, the thirteenth
ordinary session of the Council of Ministers of the
Grganization of African Unity urgently appeals to you to
USC:whatever means are available to you to obtain
immediate liberation of the launch and Guinean nationals
who have been made prisoners. Our highest consideration,

“Commissioner of Police of Bake
“TO the Secretary of State for the Interior and
Security, Conakry and Head of Guinea Maritime Security,
Kindia
“CL.No.38/SP/Boke. Absolute priority. I have the
honour to report to you the evacuation of Kandiafara by
women and children. This area wassubjected to an aerial
bombardment by the Portuguese on 26th instant.”

“Dr. Nkoo Etougou
“President Thirteenth Ordinary
“session of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity”

I now read another document on the sameevents:
“Governor of the Gaoual administrative region

25. The Assembly of Heads of State and Government of

the Organization of African Unity which met in its sixth
ordinary session in the Ethiopian capital sent to the
President of the Republic of Guinea the following message:

“Absolute priority. I have the honour to report to you;
fist, that there has been a bombardment of the Kanfara
area on the fifteenth of this month by two Portuguese
aircraft, Secondly, that the bodies of a woman, Mrs. Sane
Matou, and her two infants have been discovered on the
sixteenth of this month, after a bombardment by
Portuguese artillery on the fourteenth. We have aho
noted the disappearance of several persons. A large
delegation of the Federal Bureau has come to the area to
provide assistance, take stock and comfort the local
population who have been harrassedover the past month.
It would be appropriate to take the necessarysteps to
protect our people.”

“His Excellency Ahmed Sekou Tour-e,
“President of the Republic of Guinea,
“Conakry, Guinea.
“No.243. On behalf of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government, which is holding its sixth ordinary
session, I have the honour to express to you our Complete
solidarity in the face of the barbarous aggression of the
retrograde Government
of Portugal, of which Your
country has just been a victim. Furthermore, we are
aware that this clear act of piracy against Guinea is an act
of aggression against all independent Africa. Expressing to
you once again the feelings of active solidarity of the
hIsads of African states and governments, I should like to
say to you that the sixth session vigorously condemns this
illegal act of Portugal. Our highest consideration,

28, Sixthly, on 14 April 1969, between 5.5 and 5.50 P.m.
GMT, 28 shells fired from the Territory of Guinea (Bissau)
by the Portuguese troops stationed there landed on the
villages ,of Foulamory, Gougbambel and Goloukou in the
Gaoual administrative region. Casualties: three killed (one
woman, Mrs. Sane Matou, and her two children) and three
wounded, one seriously. The shelling originated at Pitchy in
Guinea (Bissau). I shall now read the relevant document:

“His Excellency Ahidjo,
“President of the Sixth Summit
“Assembly of Heads of State and Government”

“Governor of the Gaoual administrative region
‘&Tothe Secretary of State for the Interior, ConakrY.

26. Fourthly, continuing the enumeration of Portuguese
acts of aggression: on 25 and 26 May 1969, between lo.30
and 11,X a.m., and between 3 and 5 p.m. GMT, long range
artillery shelling in the villages of Sintiourou, Tanene,

“Shells from the Portuguese troops were again fired on
Gumean Territory CH No.IS/C.Absolute priority. 1 have
5

the honour to report to you the following. Twenty-eight
shells fell in the comiti of Foulamory, Gougbambel and
Goloukou on 14 April between 5.5 and 5.50 p.m. Three
persons were wounded, one seriously, and there ‘is a
permanent threat from this shelling from Pitchy. The
population evacuated the three wounded mentioned from
the said, comitks. Fire is directed at district which has
transmitting station and at the centre of the town,
Highest consideration.”

33. The people of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau) have been subjected to a war of extermination with
the sole purpose of perpetuating foreign domination over
them against their will.
34. The Security Council must fulfil all its responsibilities.
Last week we were gratified at the unanimous vote
condemning Portugal for the attacks of which the sister
republic of Senegal was a victim. We feel we should say on
this occasion that the condemnation gave us satisfaction for
more than one reason. It compensated first of all for an
injustice by denouncing a serious act of aggressionof which
a brother State had been the victim.

29. Seventhly, on 13 April 1969, an aerial bombardment
was carried out by Portuguese troops stationed in Guinea
(Bissau) against the villages of Taguira and Zollet, in the
Kambia district, in the Gaoual administrative region. The
result was that 20 huts were destroyed by fire and there
was considerable property loss. I shall also read the relevant
document:

35. The facts and the circumstances which are always
present on the borders of the independent Republic of
Senegal and Guinea (Bissau) are the same that are present
on the borders between the Republic of Guinea and this
colonial Territory. Therefore, this first condemnation
makes us anticipate a disavowal of similar violations
committed by Portuguese colonialism against the sovereign
Republic of Guinea.

“Governor of the Gaoual administrative region
“To the Secretary of State for the Interior
Security, Conakry

and for

36. The Security Council, when condemning the provocations of Portugal against any African State, its acts of
piracy, brigandage, crimes and murders committed against
the African people, must bear in mind the source of these
events, It should always be remembered that those who
provide Portugal with assistance do not assessthe worldwide implications of such assistance. Wittingly or unwittingly, they thereby help the survival of an outdated regime
whose only purpose is to wage its colonial war of
extermination. It is a paradox that while’ today, as
yesterday, we vote to condemn Portugal, today and
tomorrow further assistance will continue to be given to
this Fascist regime which oppresses, kills and violates
innocent African peoples whose only guilt is that they wish
to determine their own future as laid down in the United
Nations Charter.

“No.8/RAG
DI 13/11/69. We have been informed
today by the Koumbia section of an aerial bombardment
by the Portuguese clique on two villages of Taguira and
Zollet, situated respectively 15 and 17 kilometres from
the Koumbia district. Damage was caused to property,
but there was no loss of human life. A delegation from
the Federal Bureau is being sent today to render
assistance to our victimized comrades. Report follows.”
30. Such are the facts and these events occurred in oniy
eight months of the year, which will be drawing to a close
in a few days.
31. But it should be pointed out to this important body
that a Guinean aircraft in distress, an AN-14 transport
aeroplane belonging to the national company of Air
Guinee, was forced to land with its two Guinean crew
members on the territory of Guinea (Bissau) in March
196%. Since that time, we have received no news either of
the aircraft or of the crew, in spite of all our represeptations. Portugal, which is also a member of the International
Civil Aviation Organization, has disregarded article 5 of the
Convention on International Civil Aviation which provides
that assistance must be given in such cases.

37. Another paradox is just as clear as the first. The
Lusaka Manifesto1 made possible a dialogue with the
colonial Powers, but today it may seem somewhat of a
disappointment, for just when the Organization of African
Unity, through its President, His Excellency El Hadj
Amadou Ahidjo of the Federal Republic of Cameroon, has
come to the United Nations to introduce this Manifesto,
the Fascist regime of Portugal is increasing its colonial
violence in Guinea (Bissau) and elsewhere. For those who
had any doubts about the fact that Portugal heeds no
argument but that of violence, there is now clear proof.

32. We shall never cease to emphasize before the Security
Council the permanent nature of the provocations by the
Fascist regime of Portugal against the independent States of
Africa. These provocations are just as constant, persistent
and obvious in the eyes of the United Nations as they are in
the eyes of the independent States of Africa. The flagrant
and constant violations by Portugal of the Charter of the
United Nations are past counting. General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples has been
ignored by Portugal. The relevant resolutions of our
Grganization and the Security Council, the ad hoc committees of the General Assembly and of the General
Assembly itself remain a dead letter to the Fascist regime in
Lisbon.

38. In conclusion, the Government of the Republic of
Guinea is convinced that the Security Council will unanimously condemn Portugal for its obduracy in maintaining
its rule over Mozambique, Angola and Guinea (Bissau). We
are equally certain that the Council will condemn Portugal
for all the acts of aggression and violations of which it isg&Y against the Republic of Guinea, a peace-loving
country.
39. We are likewise confident that the Security council
will require that Portugal: free immediately the Guinean
peasants who were kidnapped and arbitrarily detained in
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, TweW-fourt~~
Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/1154.

6

pris0n.s in Blssau; return the AN-14 aircraft of the national
airline Air Guinee, illegally held by the Portuguese author&
ties; return the motor launch Patrice Lumumba,which was
seized arbitrarily after a clear act of piracy; demandthat
Portugal compensatethe victims of Portugueseaggression
committed on the national territory of Guinea;and, lastly,
cease all acts Of provocation on the frontiers of the
Republic of Guinea, which is the subject of our condemnation.
40. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his statement and especially for the brotherly
compliments which he has addressed
to the Chair.

complah to the Security Council,but insteadhasthought
it wiseto complainnow of anallegeddestructionby fire of
ten huts at Dana and seventeenat Doubadou,Another
asPectis that the incident of 13 November1969 isalleged
tO have taken placein the villagesof DanaandDoubadou.
But looking ,at the documentsannexedto the letter of 12
December1969 from the Republicof Guinea,we notice
that there is a datementioned,13 November1969,andthe
incidentsare allegedto havetaken placein the villages of
TaPira and Zolkt [see S/9554, annex III]. Well, it is
possiblethat this is a printer’sdevil.
48. Nevertheless,this documenthas to be subjectedto
careful examination.Sincethe incidentsallegedthereingo
back severalweeks, and even severalmonths, it will be
easily understood that my delegationwill require quite
sometime to obtain information andto inform the Council
accordingly. We have to get information from long distances,we have to carry out our own investigations
and all
that will take time. In any case,it wih be easilyunderstood
that my delegationis not in a positionto commentat this
moment on the specific allegationsbrought before the
Councilby the Republicof Guinea.

41. The next speaker on my list is the representativeof
Portugal, t0 whom I now give the floor.
42. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): Mr. President,I thank
You and your distinguished colleaguesin the Security
Council for inviting me, as representativeof Portugal, to
participate in this debate under the relevant rules of
procedure. Having taken part in a debate of the Council
earlier this month under your Presidency and by your
Invitation, my delegation holds it chiefly as a matter of
courtesy to you, Sir, to participate in this debatealso.

49. But, we also ask ourselves:are our commentsreally
wanted? Our past experience,confirmedonceagainaslate
as last week, does not encourageus to believe that our
commentswill receivedue attention, Wehave tried, in the
past, to clarify the specific issuesbrought before the
Council by stating our sideof the case;for aught all our
statementscould contribute to equitablesolutions,they
have not been taken into account. In view of this
experience,and in order that the facts may be established
outside the sphereof subjectiveopinion, my delegation
thinks that there is no better courseopento the Council
than to proceedto an investigationof the allegationsmade
on both sides.

43. Until a few moments ago, we did not even know
exactly what this debate wasabout, apart from old matters
on which we have already stated our position quite clearly,
as I shall forthwith demonstrate.
44. Neither the letters addressed
to you, Mr. President,by
the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Guineanor the
statlement made subsequently in the Council by the
representative of that country gave any indication of the
question to be debated.
45, There was an accusation to the effect that Portugal
had shelledtwo villages in Guinea. But not eventhe names
of the villages or the dates of the occurrenceswere given
until a short while ago.

50. It is a well-known fact that for severalyears now
PortugueseGuineahas beensubjectedto constantattacks
coming from the Republic of Guinea, organizedin the
Republic of Guinea, officially aided and abettedby the
Governmentof the Republicof Guinea.

46. Document S/9554, which contains a letter dated 12
December 1969 together with documentsannexedthereto.
from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the
President of the Security Council, was received in our
Mission only this morning-I am sure the Secretariatwill
confirm this fact-and it cameto my knowledgeonly about
midday, We have, obviously, had no time to examinethis
document, But at first glance, we cannot fail to notice
certain of its aspects which we find rather strange.Par
example, we notice that the first incident listed in this
letter allegedly goes back to 13 April 1969 and the latest
incident is alleged to have taken place on I3 November
1969. Nevertheless, and strangelyenough,the first letter of
complaint of Guinea to the Security Council is dated
2 December 1969. In other words, severalweeksafter the
latest alleged incident and severalmonths after the alleged
first incident mentioned in this letter.

51. It is a well-knownfact which, I amsure, the delegation
of Guineaitself will not deny, thoughit may W t0 explain
it away by quoting resolutionsof the GeneralAssembly.It
appearsthat the Republic of Guineahastaken upon itself
the task of enforcing resolutionsof the GeneralAssembly.
But it should not be forgotten that reSOlUtiOnS
of the
General Assemblyare only recommendations
which Member States may accept or reject, in exerciseof their
sovereignright and, indeed, this is exactly what every
MemberState does.
52, The Republic of Guineahasauthorizedthe organization of violent movementsto operateagainstPortuguese
Guinea. It has p&xl its territory at the disposalof such
violent movementsand, asa result,Portuguese
Guinea-for
the last sevenor eight years,asI said-hasbeenthe victim
of constant attacks. The representativeof Guineain his
statementa wh& ago tried to invert facts andsaidthat we
are permanently, constantly, daily committingaggressions
.
.
againstthe Republicof .Guinea.This is a flagrantinversion

47. Secondly, we notice that in the incident allegedto
have t&en place on 14 April 1969, it is saidthat three
persons were killed, three wounded, one seriously.Nevertheless, on that occasion the Republic of Guinea did not
7

of facts and, I am sure, nobody will be taken in by such
misinformation.

in the pressof several countries, and I need not now go htc
details; it is a matter of public knowledge. It indicates that
behind the violence directed against Portuguese Guinea,
behind the attacks launched-and, it is now my turn to say
it-almost daily from the Republic of Guinea against
Portuguese Guinea, there are elements entirely extraneous
to the African continent.

53. It is we who have been suffering attacks coming from
the Republic of Guinea constantly and I should like to
bring to the notice of the Coun’cil some of these recent
attacks, only the more important ones. I shall not go as far
back as.April 1969p I shall go back only to last August and
just to exemplify.

60. My delegation mentions those facts so that the
Council may assessthe reality of the situation, that is, the
real danger of the attacks launched from the Republic of
Guinea against Portuguese Guinea. Their ideological back.
ground, the parties involved, the methods employed and
the objectives which are, in all likelihood, sought to be
achieved. My delegation is certain that the Security Council
would like to obtain information on all these aspects soas
to arrive at an equitable decision. That can be done only by
means of an investigation, and that is what my delegation
proposes. If an investigation should be held, it would not
only reveal whether or not the incidents slleged by the
Republic of Guinea actually took place, but it would also
enable the Council to place the responsibility where it
belongs. Then it would be known-the world at large knows
it already-who organizes, aids and launches violence
against whom; who take the offensive and who are obliged
to defend themselves. My delegation thinks that the
Council will be interested in establishing all those facts.

54. On 28 August 1969, the regular military forces of’the
Republic of Guinea stationed at Satiguiya shelled Gadamael
Porto in Portuguese Guinea. On 3 November 1969 the area
of Gadamael was again attacked. On 4,20,24 and twice on
26 November-that is, altogether, on five occasions in the
month of November alone-attacks were launched from the
Republic of Guinea on the areas of Chicam Bilo and Jai Juli
in Portuguese Guinea. These attacks were carried out with
140 rockets fired from launching pads mounted at
Kafembel and Mampapa Bacimgo, both places situated in
the Republic of Guinea. We have in our possession
fragments of these rockets.
55. On 3, 13 and 14 November-that
is, on three
occasions-there were attacks on the area of Quileje. Those
attacks were carried out with 82 mm mortars and longrange artillery. The latest of the attacks lasted nearly five
hours; 31 shell bursts were registered; the artillery fire came
from Kandiafara in the Republic of Guinea.

57. I must emphasize that those attacks were made with
artillery fire coming directly from the territory of the
Republic of Guinea. That is serious enough. That is an
aspect which the representative of Guinea did not mention
in his statement-naturally.
But there is another aspect to
which I should like to draw the attention of the Council.

6 1. In his statement the representative of Guinea thought
it wise to use abusive language. My delegation will not
follow him in that style which probably pleases him.
Restraining myself, and confining myself only to what the
Security Council might be interested in, I should like to say
that the over-all position of my country in regard to the
matter under discussion is already known to the Security
Council. In fact, I had occasion to state it quite clearly only
recently, on 4 and 9 December. I reiterate that position
now, and I request that our relevant remarks contained in
the records of the 1516th and 1520th meetings be
considered as incorporated in the records of the present
debate for all useful purposes.

58. In my intervention in this Council on 4December
(1516th meeting], T alluded briefly to the fact that behind
the violence launched against Portuguese territory from the
contiguous territories were certain foreign Powers entirely
outside the continent of Africa. Those Powers encourage
and actively aid violence in that continent, supplying not
only the most modern war materials, but also military
personnel specialized in guerrilla warfare. Everyone knows
which Powers I am referring to. They themselves make no
secret of their active participation in the violence directed
against Portuguese territories from the contiguous territories.

62. I now turn to the questions of the plane and boat
mentioned by the’ representative of Guinea in the letter
which was distributed today and also in his statement
earlier in this meeting. In that connexion, my delegation
wishes to draw the attention of the Council to the stale.
ment we made at the 1707th plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on 25 October 1968, in exercise of our right cf
reply to the delegation of the Republic of Guinea. On that
occasion my delegation read out the text of the joint
communique issued on 28 March 1968 by the Portuguese
Defence, Foreign Affairs and Overseas Ministries. 1 shsh
now read out the text of that communiqu6; it states:

59. In that connexion, I must mention the presence in the
territory of the Republic of Guinea of military personnel
from a country outside the African continent, participating
actively in the armed raids launched from the territory of
the Republic of Guinea against Portuguese Guinea. We have
known of the activities of such military personnel for a long
time and we have said so. Our information has now been
fully confirmed by the capture of a certain military officer.
The story of the capture and the details have been reported

“1. On the 26th instant (that is, 26 MizrCh 1968/, at
10.40 hours a Russian-made twin engine plane landed in
the village of Formosa in the Portuguese PrOVinCe of
Guinea, possibly due to technical reasons. The plane
carried registration marks of the Republic of Guinea and
displayed the national colours of that country. It had cn
board six passengers and a crew of two persons, fisY
were taken to Rissau for investigation. It was established
that the six passengers, all nationals of Mali, Were

56. On 25 November the area of Gunpure was attacked.
On 28 November there was an attack on the village of
Formosa. Such attacks have continued during the current
month.

8

members of the delegation of the Republic of Mali to the
Conference of States bordering on the River Senegal. It
was also found that the two members of the crew were
nationals of the Republic of Guinea.

returned as soon as the Portuguese military persons
unlawfully detained in the Republic of Guinea were set
free.
“The number of Portuguese military persons unlawfully
detained in the Republic of Guinea is twenty-four at the
present moment. These Portuguese nationals did not
commit any offence in or against the Republic of Guinea.
They were kidnapped from Portuguese Guinea by armed
raiders coming from the Republic of Guinea. They have
since been held there subject to a regime that must be
regarded as one of duress, with the knowledge and
consent of the Government of Conalcry which, insensitive
to the repeated appeals of international humanitarian
organizations for the liberation of the Portuguese nationals in question, has endorsed the crime and must
therefore share the blame and responsibility for it.

“2. The delegation of the Republic of Mali has already
been authorized to continue its journey to its destination.
It wasgiven the necessary facilities for the purpose.
“3. On different occasions some groups of terrorists
with their base in the Republic of Guinea seized, in the
territory of the Portuguese Province of Guinea, five
Portuguese military personnel, among them the Air Force
sergeant, Antonio de Souza Lobato, and took them away
to the Republic of Guinea, where they are held in a
regime which must be regarded as one of duress. The
Government of Conakry has thus consented that in its
territory foreign individuals arrogated to themselves and
exercised functions of sovereignty and has even endorsed
that crime, while on the other hand it has been insensitive
to the repeated appeals of all the international humanitarian institutions for the liberation of the Portuguese
military personnel. The Government of the Republic of
Guinea is therefore fully responsible and a party to the
situation thus created.

“The Portuguese Government demands the return of
the twenty-four kidnapped Portuguese nationals, unlawfully detained in the Republic of Guinea, as a condition
to be fulfilled before the return of the above-mentioned
vessel and aircraft can be considered.“3
64. Again, in the Fourth Committee on 14 November
1969, my delegation referred to the question of Guinean
persons and property and made appropriate comments
which are to be found in the summary record of that
meeting, from which I read out:

“4. In these circumstances, the Portuguese Government has ordered the internment of the above-mentioned
plane and its crew and declares that these will be returned
only when the five Portuguese military personnel are set
free.“2

“With regard to the reference to the Republic of Guinea
in operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, his
delegation had clearly refuted that accusation in the
General Assembly on 8 October [1784th plenary meeting], and had spoken of the kidnapping of twenty-four
Portuguese soldiers and their imprisonment for years in
the Republic of Guinea. If the Republic of Guinea was
prepared to release those Portuguese soldiers, it would
receive in exchange the Guinean citizens who had been
detained at a much later date in Portuguese territory,
together with their property.“4

163. On 8.October 1969, again in exercise of our right of
reply to the delegation of the Republic of Guinea, my
‘delegation made the following statement:
“On 27 August 1969 a Portuguese river patrol came
across a vesselsailing in Portuguese waters in the Inshansa
or Cacete river. In reply to a Portuguese request for
identification, the vessel opened fire on the Portuguese
patrol. Some of the persons on board the vesselmanaged
to escape by swimming to the territory of the Republic of
Guinea. The vessel was then captured by the Portuguese
patrol together with the remaining persons on board.
There were no casualties.

65. My delegation believes that the position of the
Government of Portugal on the question of the plane, the
vessel and persons detained in Portuguese Guinea at
present, Guinean property and persons in Portuguese
Guinea, has been explained quite clearly, and that is the
position we continue to maintain. It is known to the
Secretary-General and to others who tried to use their good
offices to settle the matter.

“The representative of the Republic of Guinea also
referred to the Guinean aircraft that has been detained in
Portuguese Guinea, I myself dealt with this case in the
statement I made here on 25 October 1968 before the
twenty-third session of the General Assembly (1707th
meeting]. On that occasion I read out the text of the
joint communique issued in Lisbon by the Portuguese
Foreign Affairs and OverseasMinistries. It will be recalled
that, relating the cimumstances in which the Russianmade aircraft, displaying the flag of the Republic of
Guinea, had been found in the territory of Portuguese
Guinea, the communique said that its six passengers,who
were found to be nationals of Mali, were given all
facilities to continue their journey. The aircraft and its
crew of two Guinean nationals were, however, detained.
The communique went on to state that they would be

66. However, I should like to emphasize that, on the
question of restitution of persons and property, this cannot
be a one-sided affair. I wish to emphasize also that the
Portuguese nationals who are detained in the Republic of
Guinea were kidnapped from Portuguese Guinea. They have
committed no offence against the Republic of Guinea.
They have been detained there unlawfully with the connivance of the Government of the Republic of Guinea. It is
3 Ibid., Twenty-fourth

Session, Plenary Meetings, 1784th meeting,

4 Ibid., Twenty-fourth

Session, Fourth Committee, 1847th meet-

paras.288-291.

2 ibid., Twenty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 1707th meeting,

para. 168.

ing, para. 17.
9

but fair that we should demand their return before Guinean
persons and property can be returned.

74. It seems paradoxical in this case to see the accused
transforming himself into the accuser. We are astonished
that the representative of Portugal should have provided,
after our statement, a list of acts of aggression which,
according to him, were launched from the national territory
of Guinea.

67. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Guinea has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
68. MT. TOURE (Guinea) (translated from French): The
members of the Security Council have listened once again
to the usual false arguments advanced by the Portuguese
representative when he is confronted by his accusers,
arguments whereby he himself becomes the accuser. This
tactic is obvious to all and is well known in the Security
Council.

75. Portugal is a Member of this Organization, and this is
unfortunate, for it is continuing to violate the decisions of
the Organization and literally flouting them, It is strange
that the representative of Portugal should come here as an
accuser to submit facts, when he had all the time he
needed-as did the sister Republics of Senegal, Zambia, the
Congo and the Republic of Guinea-to bring before the
Council a complaint based on proved and recognized facts
such as the ones he is now trying to adduce. In the course
of the statement he has just made the representative of
Portugal said that foreign Powers are established in Guinean
territory, but he did not have the courage to tell us which
foreign Powers were waging an offensive against his
country.

69. However, I should like to revert to some aspects of his
statement. First, the representative of Portugal asks for a
show of moderation. If there is one country that needs to
show moderation in its international relations, it is surely
Portugal. It is its lack of moderation which has been the
cause of these hotbeds of war on the African continent and
of the constant and persisting attacks against the freedom
of African States and against peoples who are merely
aspiring to self-determination. It is my view that this war
which Portugal is waging against African States is the most
striking proof of its lack of moderation.

36. Those who have any understanding of elementary
geography should look at Portugal in Europe and at the
Republic of Guinea. Thousands of kilometres separate us
from Portugal, so how could we commit aggressionagainst
Portuguese territory? If there is a foreign Power infiltrating
into and installing itself in Africa, it is indeed Portugal,
which, by crossing the seaswith its massive and destructive
armada and its hatred, comes to wage war against the
innocent populations of Africa. That is an incontrovertible
fact.

70. The representative of Portugal said a short while ago
that he needs time to prepare his country’s and Government’s accusations. Of course, this method is a customary
and well-known one and consists in finding facts which will
distort and make a travesty of the truth in an endeavour to
mislead international opinion. But world opinion is sufficiently informed about this unjust war and all the acts of
provocation committed against the freedom of the independent States of Africa.

77. Our Organization has already on several occasions
condemned that attitude and the fact-which Portugal is
stubbornly attempting to deny-that if there is an aggressor
in Africa it is indeed Portugal. The foreign Power waging
heinous war against the African populations is Portugal.

7 1. An African proverb says: “It is very easy for the witch
doctor to forget the things he does to his victim, but the
victim’s mother cannot forget them”. The Government of
the Republic of Guinea, like so many other African
countries, cannot forget for a single instant the acts
perpetrated daily by the Portuguese colonial army against
the freedom of the independent States of Africa.

78. In the statement he just made, the representative of
Portugal alluded to the incident of the aircraft on 26 March
1968. He told us that the delegation of Mali was also on
board that aircraft and that it was set free. We should like
to inform the Security Council of the conditions under
which the six passengers on board that aircraft, which is
still unlawfully detained in Guinea (Bissau), were set free,
The shoes of the six passengerswere removed, and they
were given the palrnatoria, as it is &led in Portuguese, the
punishment applied to natives, aborigines or blacks,
namely, the beating of the soles of the feet and the palms
of the hands with sticks. After that punishment they were
left to walk 150 kilometres barefoot! I think the represantative of Portugal did not give due thought to what he was
saying about the conditions in which the six Mali passengers
were freed.

72. We must denounce those false arguments at once
because we have the facts, which are eloquent and a proof
in themselves. These facts, which the Portuguese representative attempts to distort into a travesty of the truth, are
known to everyone. It is not the first time that such a tactic
has been used in the Security Council.
73. But in the course of his statement, I think the
representative of Portugal put forward, quite u&ten.
tionally, one argument which is a direct or indirect tribute
to the Republic of Guinea. He said that Guinea was
applying the recommendations of the General Assembly.
We are gratified by this, for we consider that the recommendations of the General Assembly, like the recommendations of the Security Council, must be applied by us SO
long as we continue to be a Member of this Organization.
We are not trying to hide this fact; on the contrary, we are
quite proud of being a loyal Member applying the decisions
of legal bodies in which we believe, and to which we have
freely adhered.

79. The representative of Portugal has just told US that in
Guinea there were at first five Portuguese soldiers; then the
number rose to twenty-four. We should like to put the
following question: since when is Portugal, which has no
single common border with the Republic of Guinea, at war
with the Republic of Guinea, and since when are there
Portuguese soldiers in the territory of the Republic of
Guinea as prisoners of war? Were they kidnapped? Have
10

we

organized an expedition against Lisbon? Have we the

means to organize an expedition against Lisbon or any

other city in Portugal?
80. Certain arguments really do not call for any comment.
Just now, in the second version of his statement, the
representative of Portugal told us that the aircraft in
question bore Malian markings. I wonder whether that
&craft could have split into a Guinean aircraft and a
Evlalian aircraft at one and the same time. We should like to
have more information from him on that score.
81. We have brought forward facts which speak for
themselves. Portugal is in fact engaged in warfare. We have
said so and we repeat it: a war of extermination against the
African populations. In view of the action of the freedom
f&hters and of the victory being gained over the Portuguese
colonial army-and the colonial Portuguese army acknowl.edges that the expeditionary corps from Lisbon is meeting
every day with fierce resistance from the local populations
and that that resistance is beyond any doubt-Portugal
must understand that colonial expeditions have come to an
end and that such colonial expeditions must be stopped,
the more so now that we have advanced far into the
twentieth century, in the course of which Portugal’s
European neighbours have come to realize that colonization
is a thing of the past and can no longer exist.
82. This is a fact, Not to accept that evidence is to act like
-the man who does not want to see the sun rise and who
rsays, on retiring for the night, “The sun will not rise
‘tomorrow”, but, when the sun rises the following morning,
shields his eyes in order not to see it.
83. The hour of liberation in Africa has struck. It is time
for Portugal to realize this. The people of Guinea, like the
other African peoples, fear no hatred against any people.
‘We are ready, tomorrow, to hold out a loyal and open hand
to Portugal if Portugal will understand that colonization is
over and can no longer exist; if it will understand that there
can no longer be any foreign domination in any continent.
84. Such are the facts to which we must draw the
attention of the Security Council.
85. The PRESIDENT: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal, who wishes to make a brief
statement.
86. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): I shall not follow the
representative of Guinea in his attempt to discuss here
matters that are entirely extraneous to the debate. Portugal’s policy is not under discussion now.
87. I should like, however, to reply to some of the points
he has raised. He said that Portugal is at war with the
Republic of Guinea. That is not a fact, and that is what
makes it all the more surprising, namely, tha’t the Republic
of Guinea allows, aids and abets the organization in its
territory of violence against the territory of Portuguese
Guinea.
88. He asked me to name the military personnel from
outside Africa, who are directing, in the Republic of

Guinea, guerrillas against Portuguese Guinea. There is no
need to name and indicate something which is, as I said in
my earlier statement, public knowledge. He knows that
himself. If he wishes to deny it, then let him come forward
and deny it, if he will.
89. Finally, he made certain allegations with regard to the
manner in which the delegation of Mali, which wasaboard
the aircraft that made a forced landing in Portuguese
Guinea, was treated.
90. He has drawn immensely on his imagination, and he
has tried to impress the Council with an account that I
must categorically qualify as pure fabrication. The delegation of Mali aboard the plane was well treated and was
given all assistance in proceeding to its destination. Here I
might add that nationals of the Republic of Guinea are also
treated well in Portuguese Guinea.
91. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Guinea, who has asked for the floor in
order to exercise his right of reply.
92. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (tmnslatedfiom Bench): I shall
be very brief. I merely wish to say that a few moments ago
the representative of Portugal stated that foreign Powers
were helping Guinea in its war against Portugal. Can he,
looking at the list of kidnapped persons or the list of all
other persons who happened to be in the territory’ of
Guinea (Bissau) at the time, mention the name of a single
foreign soldier among those who were kidnapped and taken
away. I think not.

93. The representative of Portugal saysthat I was drawing
on my imagination when I spoke of special treatments such
as the palmatoria treatment, But the petitioners who have
appeared here before United Nations committees have
spoken often enough about the treatment meted out to
Africans by white Portuguese, whether in Mozambique,
Angola or Guinea (Bissau), so that we know-and the
Portuguese representative knows it very well-that this form
of torture is used, a torture which consists in beating with a
stick the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands, while
the feet are tied. This is known all over the world, but
perhaps not by the representative of Portugal. The Mali
delegation was freed in such circumstances that the
accounts it gave were published by local Guinean newspapers.
94. Having thus stated the facts as they really are, we
would at this stage of the debate ask the representative of
Portugal to comment upon them.
95. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers for this
afternoon’s meeting is now exhausted. In accordance with
views expressed during informal consultations, I should like
to announce that the next meeting of the Security Council
on the agenda item now before it will be held on
Wednesday, 17 December 1969, at 3p.m. If I hear no
objection, I shall adjourn the meeting.
96. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I am happy to
conform with the wishes of other members of the Council.
When I was consulted earlier, I readily agreed to a further

meeting of the Council to consider this matter on Wednesday next, and I am still prepared to take part in the
discussion on that day. Nevertheless, in the course of the
discussion we have heard this afternoon, it has occurred to
me that there might be advantage in some further delay in
holding our next meeting. The representative of Portugal
has suggested that he will need longer than two days to
carry out an investigation on the matters which have been
raised by the representative of Guinea. I would not wish the
representative of Portugal to have any complaint on that
score; I think he should be allowed time to make a full
investigation and give a full report to the Council on the
matters that have been raised.

delegations, those principally concerned-Guinea which
lodged a complaint before the Council, and Portugal, which
endeavoured to defend itself-have made statements. No
other member of the Security Council has yet made a
statement or given its point of view.

97. Therefore, while I do not wish to press the point, I
would ask the other members of the Council whether it
might not be better to decide that we meet again, on the
directions of our President, after further consultations
between the members of the Council. I do not put this
forward as a formal proposal, but it may be that other
members of the Council will feel, as I do, that when a
representative comes here and asks for time to make an
investigation and give a report, we should not unreasonably
deny it.

(translated

98. The PRESIDENT: I should like briefly to explain the
position. The decision to hold our next meeting on 17
December 1969 at 3 p.m. was made after the most careful
consideration and after full consultations with all the
members concerned. I am reasonably satisfied that that
date meets the requirements of the interested parties, and,
unless I hear otherwise from the Council, I intend, with the
consent of the Council, to hold the next meeting on 17
December 1969 at 3 p.m

102. Accordingly, in the light of these specific facts, the
request of the Portuguese representative or anyone else to
postpone the examination of this question might seem to
be a pretext to protract the discussion. In the opinion of
the Soviet delegation, there is no real reason for postponing
the debate.

100. My delegation supports the President’s suggestion
and thinks it might be better if the debate were to proceed
in the normal way. At a subsequent stage, the situation
might be clearer. I think Wednesday would be a suitable
time. Many delegations have told us they wished to set
forth their views on this problem.
101. Mr, MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The request of the Guinean
delegation to consider the question of the aggression of
Portugal against the Republic of Guinea was, unless I was
mistaken, received on 4 December. Since then some considerable time has elapsed. If the representative of Portugal
did not at the time have any information from his
Government about the acts of aggression committed against
the Republic of Guinea, he had more than ten days in
which to consult his Government and obtain that infonnation .
from Russian):

103. The PRESIDENT: Since no other representatives
wish to speak I shall adjourn this meeting until Wednesday,
17 December, at 3 p.m.

99. Mr, AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): My
delegation fully understands the reasons put forward by the
representative of the United Kingdom. However, only two

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

I2

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Na?ions
publicalions
the world.
Consult
Your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS
be obloined
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les
publications
der
d(posilaires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

HAK

COMO

ilO/lY~MTb

Litho

in United

Nations,

Ventor,

Nuevo

New

York

Nations
Unier
sent
entier.
Informez-vour
der venter,
New York

H3AANMf-l

CONSEGUIR

Las publicacioner
en todas
parles

LES PUBLICATIONS

de
del
York

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
oupr&r
de vofre
ou Gen&e.

OPTAHM3AllMH

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

las Naciones
mundo.
Conrulle

Unidar
erlirn
a su librero

les libralries
et les ogencas
libroiric
ou adrersez-vow
b:

OSbEAMHEHHblX

NACIONES
en vtnla
o dirljare

HALIMA

UNIDAS
en

librerior
a: Nacioner

Y casas dislribuldoras
Unidos,
Seccicin

de

o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82295-December

1972-2,050
