Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution
1584 (L) of 21 May 1971 on criminality and social
change,
Commending the establishment of the Committee
on Crime Prevention and Control and the first report
of that Committee,32
Recognizing the right of each State to formulate
and implement, in accordance with its own conditions
and national requirements, the policies and measures
necessary to prevent crime and control delinquency,
Noting with appreciation the note by the SecretaryGeneral on crime prevention and control,33
1. Endorses the conclusions of the Fourth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Kyoto, Japan, from
17 to 26 August 1970,34 and the recommendations of
the Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders? 5 which met
after the Congress;
2. Endorses in particular the recommendation of
the Congress concerning meetings, seminars, training
courses and workshops of experts, at regional and
international levels, for the exchange of information,
knowledge, experience and expertise in the field of
crime prevention and control, taking full advantage of
the programme of advisory services of the United
Nations;
3. Supports the recommendations in the Declaration unanimously adopted by the Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, which emphasizes, among
other things, the need for strengthening international
co-operation in crime prevention and control;36
4. Invites Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of the situation concerning crime prevention
and control in their own countries and the measures
being taken to provide information, not later than the
end of 197 4, for a final report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session;
5. Urges Governments, organs of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other international
organizations concerned to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and, in particular, to
ensure the availability of effective technical aid to
countries desiring such assistance for the formulation
and adoption of policies, programmes and measures
for the prevention and control of crime and delinquency;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain from
Member States their views concerning the advisability
of holding an international conference of ministers
responsible for social defence or relevant ministers
to review problems of crime prevention and control
and to identify methods of prevention and control
at the international level;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to take
the necessary measures for the preparation of the
Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
;J 2 £/5}9J.

:n A/8844.
:11 Fuurth

United Nations Congress 011 the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.IV.8).
35 See E/CN.5/457.
36 The text of the Declaration is contained in the annex to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1584 (L).

69

8. Instructs the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the methods and ways likely
to be most effective in preventing crime and improving the treatment of offenders, including recommendations on the measures most appropriate in such areas
as law enforcement, judicial procedures and correctional practices;
9. Decides to consider this question at its twentyeighth session, taking into account action by the Commission on Social Development and the Economic
and Social Council.
2 I 14th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3022 (XXVII). Channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2633
(XXV) of 11 November 1970, 2659 (XXV) of
7 December 1970 and 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November
1971,
Welcoming the increasing and active awareness of
young people of their potential contribution to the
building of a better society, which requires that they
be more fully integrated into the political, economic
and social life of their countries,
Convinced that youth has an important role to
play in promoting the purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and the objectives of peace, international security and co-operation among nations, social
and economic progress and universal respect for human
rights,
Emphasizing the responsibility of society to educate
youth in a spirit of national and international service,
as well as the responsibility of youth towards society,
Noting that the existing methods of communication
and co-operation between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations could be improved
in order to meet the needs and aspirations of youth,
Aware of the need to increase the role of the United
Nations in developing contacts and communications
among national and international youth organizations,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the SecretaryGeneral's report on channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations;37
2. Endorses the conclusion expressed in the report
that the United Nations should pay particular attention
in the future to involving youth in programmes of national development and international co-operation as
well as in the activities of the United Nations;
3. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
utilize existing channels of communication with youth
and national and international youth organizations and
to seek to establish new channels;
4. Recommends that the Secretary-General evaluate
existing United Nations programmes and projects in
order to enable youth to participate fully at appropriate
levels of policy formulation and project implementation
and evaluation;
5. Recommends further that the Secretary-General
should take appropriate administrative action, with the
37 A/8743.

70

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

means and personnel available, to co-ordinate activities
of the United Nations system in which youth may participate;
6. Expresses its appreciation of the recommendations submitted by the Secretary-General in his report; 38
7. Approves the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to convene an Ad Hoe Advisory Group on
Youth to advise him on activities that should be undertaken by the United Nations to meet the needs and
aspirations of youth, including the following:
(a) Concrete measures for the implementation of
the proposals contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
(b) Assistance to Governments and United Nations
organs, especially the regional economic commissions,
to prepare systematic programmes and series of projects
to increase the involvement of youth in national development and in the promotion of human rights, with
particufar reference to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade;39
( c) Exchanges among bodies having special social
and scientific knowledge of, and competence in, concerns related to youth, with a view to sharing their experience in matters regarding the needs and aspirations
of young people
(d) Elaboration of programmes for seminars and
symposia on youth within the framework of the programme of advisory services of the United Nations;
8. Considers that the United Nations University 40
will serve as one of the important channels of communication with youth and will provide a free forum
for the teaching and for the discussion among young
people of subjects relating to international law, human
dignity and human rights, and also to the role of youth
in promoting economic and social progress, world
peace, understanding and co-operation among peoples;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
conclusions and recommendations of the Ad Hoe
Advisory Group on Youth, with his comments, to the
Economic and Social Council at its fifty-sixth session,
which is to consider, among other things, the continuation of the Group;
10. Decides to re-examine when necessary, but
not later than at its thirtieth session, the question of
channels of communication with youth and youth organizations;
11. Decides to examine at its twenty-eighth session
the report of the Secretary-General on the world social
situation of youth, to be submitted in accordance with
Economic and Social Council resolution 1407 (XLVI)
of 5 June 1969.
21 I 4th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3023 (XXVII). Implementation of the Dedaration on the Promotion among Youth of the
lclea]s of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2445 (XXIII) and 2447 (XXIII) of 19 De38 Jbid., paras. 35-42.
39 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
40 See resolution 2951 (XXVII).

cember 1968, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969 and
2770 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971, regarding the
education of youth in the spirit of the ideals of peace,
mutual understanding between peoples and universal
respect for human rights,
Reaffirming the principles inscribed in the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of
Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between
Peoples, 41 and the importance of their universal implementation,
Aware that the education of youth in the spirit of
the ideals of peace, mutual understanding between peoples and universal respect for human rights must be
accomplished by measures to encourage youth to participate actively in all spheres of social life,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General 42 regarding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the
Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding
between Peoples;
2. Requests Member States, the United Nations
organs concerned and the specialized agencies to give
greater attention to the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration, especially when establishing
their policy and programmes regarding youth;
3. Addresses a solemn appeal to all States, as well
as to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to take appropriate action,
to foster among youth respect for all peoples, irrespective of nationality, race, sex or religion, regard
for human values, and devotion to the ideals of peace,
freedom and progress and to the cause of human
rights;
4. Decides to examine periodically the implementation of the principles of the Declaration on the basis
of further reports submitted by the Secretary-General,
containing such comments and information as he may
receive.
21 I 4th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3024 (XXVII). Increased employment and mohi1ity of young people in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2736 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, in which it expressed the need for special
efforts to be made to recruit qualified young men and
women for service with the United Nations through
the development of more objective selection methods,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations, 43
Noting the reference made in the report to the need
for action to encourage and assist youth to play a
greater role in the analysis and solution of problems
affecting all people, 44
41 Resolution 2037

(XX).

42 A/8782 and Add.1-3.
43 A/8743.

44 Ibid., para.

18.
