S/2020/603

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 June 2020
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2487
(2019), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the mandate of the Mission
every 90 days. The report covers the period from 27 March to 26 June 2020.

II. Major developments
National developments and context
2.
As much of the rest of the world, Colombia has been affected by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and its effects on the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace have
been increasingly evident. The President, Iván Duque, and the Presidential Counsellor
for Stabilization and Consolidation have reiterated their assurances that progress on
the implementation of the Final Agreement has continued despite this situation.
However, the pandemic and social distancing and isolation measures have affected
peace-related programmes and have had a considerable negative impact on vulnerable
conflict-affected communities. The Government and Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) have taken steps to adapt to the situation,
including through joint efforts, and the international community and the United
Nations have also provided support.
3.
As at 26 June, Colombia reported 84,442 cases of infection and 2,811
COVID-19-related deaths. President Duque has extended the quarantine until 1 5 July
and the state of health emergency until 31 August, while gradually easing measures
and reopening sectors of the economy. Among other measures, subsidies have been
granted to more than 3 million people who have been particularly affected.
4.
State institutions have adapted to the new reality in various ways. The courts
have continued to function through virtual sessions and hearings. In Congress, despite
differing positions on whether they should meet in person, both chambers and their
committees have continued to work through virtual and semi -presential sessions,
including holding discussions on draft bills and constitutional reforms. While
discussion of some peace-related legislation has been delayed, specific sessions on

20-08027 (E)

020720

*2008027*

S/2020/603

matters related to the Final Agreement were held during the reporting period,
including on compliance with the Final Agreement by the Government and FARC and
on the continuing attacks against and killings of social leaders and former combatants.
The Mission participated in some of these sessions.
5.
Some members of Congress from the ruling party have suggested reopening
discussions on possible modifications to the Final Agreement and have signalled their
intention to introduce legislation to that effect. Opposition parties and civil society
groups have strongly criticized this initiative. Government representatives have
declared that it is not the Government’s intention to modify the Agreement.
6.
The work of departmental and municipal authorities has also been affected by
the pandemic, including discussions on development plans for the next four years.
The Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, former combatants and the Mission
have been working with regional and local authorities to include peace -related issues,
including reintegration policies, in the plans. Regional and local authorities from
across different political parties have reiterated their interest in programmes related
to the implementation of the Final Agreement but have also noted their need for
technical assistance and resources.
7.
Colombian civil society continued to engage actively on peace-related issues
and to insist that implementation should not falter amid the pandemic. Echoing my
call for a global ceasefire, civil society actors, including religious leaders and victims ’
organizations, continued to call on all illegal armed gr oups in the country to desist
from violence to provide relief for communities already affected by the pandemic.
8.
Following reports of alleged illegal activities within some military intelligence
units, including illicit profiling and wiretapping of journ alists, members of opposition
parties, union members and others, the Minister of Defence gave assurances that
investigations had been launched. Several high-ranking officials have been dismissed,
and investigations are ongoing. Members of parties from acro ss the political spectrum
and civil society organizations have condemned the alleged illegal activities and
asked that those responsible be brought to justice. In May, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights representative in Colombia issued a statement
noting that, according to international human rights norms and standards, the
regulation and implementation of intelligence activities must comply with
international human rights norms and standards.
Mechanisms for dialogue on implementation issues related to the
Final Agreement
9.
During the reporting period, the Commission for the Follow -up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement met five times, allowing
the parties to discuss key matters of peace implementation. My Special
Representative participated at their invitation.
10. Tripartite working groups continued to work on peace implementation. The group
on anti-personnel mines, composed of the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace,
FARC and the United Nations, is developing a proposal for a procedure to gather
information that FARC may have on the locations of landmines. The proposal will be
presented to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. The tripartite working group regarding former
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) assets,
composed of the Government (the Office of the Presidential Counsellor for
Stabilization and Consolidation and the Special Assets Administration), FARC and the
Mission, met twice to discuss issues related to the location of former FARC-EP assets,
including security considerations, especially in rural areas. The parties are developing
2/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

a timetable to coordinate their joint fieldwork once movement restrictions have been
lifted. The Government set a deadline of 31 July 2020 for finalizing the handover of
assets in a decree issued in February, which FARC has challenged as unconstitutional.
Comprehensive rural reform
11. The implementation of development programmes with a territorial focus for 170
conflict-affected municipalities continues, including through virtual channels,
increased planning and other measures to adapt to the pandemic. The Government
reports that, of the 1,191 planned works under the development programmes, 1,109
have been completed and 82 are under implementation. All 170 municipalities have
made binding provisions to include development programmes in their planning
instruments. The committee that approves resources for peace-related programmes
from royalties from hydrocarbon exploitation has approved 178 projects for the
municipalities, 25 of them during the pandemic. In March, there was a new call for
the “works for taxes” programme that provides tax rebates in return for business
investments in conflict-affected regions; 44 applications were received from the
private sector, 20 of which were focused on the municipalities covered by the
development programmes.
12. Various actors, including civil society organizations and FARC, have requested
that the development programmes with a territorial focus be more closely linked to
other aspects of the comprehensive rural reform envisaged in the Final Agreement,
including the 16 national plans for comprehensive rural reform, 6 of which have been
approved so far. Similarly, local communities, including women’s groups, have asked
that they be involved in the implementation phase of the development programmes.
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
13. The components of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition have adjusted their work modalities to the pandemic and are working
jointly to ensure coordination.
14. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has made progress in its seven cases,
including by issuing 115 judicial decisions since the start of the national quarantine.
Importantly, in April, the Special Jurisdiction issued the guidelines on the s anctions
that it will impose upon individuals under its jurisdiction and on the “tasks, works or
activities with reparatory and restorative content” that individuals under its
jurisdiction can carry out as reparations to victims.
15. The Final Agreement envisions an eventual role for the Verification Mission in
verifying compliance with the sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. In June,
in the context of advancing the casework and planning of the Special Jurisdiction for
the issuance of sanctions, there was a public exchange of letters between the Special
Jurisdiction and the Government, in which they both reconfirmed their aspiration for
the Mission to be able to assume such a verification role.
16. Security for individuals involved in the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, including persons under its jurisdiction and victims and lawyers involved in
its cases, is an issue of paramount importance. The Special Jurisdiction initiated an
assessment of the security situation of former FARC-EP members and members of
the security forces subject to its proceedings to determine whether to issue protective
measures. A similar assessment is ongoing on the security situation of lawyers and
human rights defenders representing victims in case 003, on extrajudicial killings
presented as casualties of combat by State agents (known as “false positives”). In
March, the Special Jurisdiction extended the collective protective measures for
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities in Chocó associated with case 004.

20-08027

3/17

S/2020/603

17. The Truth Commission held virtual meetings with victims, former combatants,
social leaders and others. Considering that its mandate ends in 2021, and the
limitations imposed by the pandemic, the Commission has focused its work on
accelerating the systematization of its interviews with more than 10,000 victims,
witnesses and perpetrators.
18. The Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed Missing in the context of and due to
the armed conflict finalized its national search plan and 12 regional search plans. The
Unit has received a total of 5,800 search requests. It has also received information on
cases of persons reported missing from 174 individuals, including former FARC -EP
members, members of the armed forces and other State agents. In June, the Un it
established its Advisory Council, with the participation of six civil society
organizations and eight public sector entities.
Substitution of illicit crops
19. The Government has identified families participating in the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, established under
section 4 of the Final Agreement, as a vulnerable group in the context of the pandemic
and has reassured them that payments and the delivery of supplies will continue.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 41,513 ha of
coca have been eradicated by 99,097 families (of which 35,304 are led by women)
since August 2017. Compliance with voluntary eradication commitments remains at
96 per cent, and the reseeding rate in 28 monitored municipalities is under 1 per cent.
Technical assistance and food security projects continue, with approximately 60,000
families receiving support. However, progress is still limited on productive projects,
which are key to helping the families participating in the Programme to effectively
transition to legal, sustainable livelihoods.
Developments related to the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
20. In response to my call for a global ceasefire, the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN) declared a national unilateral ceasefire from 1 to 30 April. The ceasefire
resulted in a reduction in violence in areas with an ELN presence. Colombian
organizations observed significant compliance with the ceasefire and no offensive
military operations by the security forces against ELN during April. ELN decided not
to extend the ceasefire, stating that it had not been reciprocated. The Government had
criticized its limited duration and insisted that ELN release all kidnapped persons and
child recruits and cease using anti-personnel mines. Since the ceasefire expired,
violence and confrontations have resumed in areas in which ELN and other illegal
armed groups are present, affecting the civilian population, particularly through
forced displacement and confinement.

III. Mission tasks
A.

Reintegration
21. The sustainability of the reintegration process has been affected by the
pandemic, primarily owing to its economic impact on former combatants ’ productive
projects and the increased vulnerability of former combatants living outside former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, including in new collective
reintegration areas, who face greater risks of contagion, as most are far from medical
facilities, and have limited social and economic opportunities. In the light of the
growing vulnerability of former combatants outside former territorial areas, the
Mission is increasingly engaging with the Government and FARC to address their

4/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

specific needs, including in terms of access to health care and basic services, and to
improve technical assistance to help them to implement their productive projects in
the context of the pandemic. The Government and FARC, with support from the
Mission and others, have worked to mitigate the impact of the pande mic and to
prevent contagion among former combatants, their families and local communities.
22. On 30 March, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization issued a
resolution establishing flexible conditions to be applied until 31 August 2020 in the
light of the pandemic to ensure the continuity of the monthly allowance for former
combatants. On 2 April, the National Reintegration Council created a working group
to follow up on the response to the pandemic on issues related to health, productive
projects and access to basic services and food. The group met six times during the
reporting period.
Economic and social reintegration
23. The National Reintegration Council met three times during the reporting period
and approved eight new collective productive projects, benefiting 232 former
combatants (68 women). Of the 57 collective projects approved so far, which benefit
2,712 former combatants (777 women), 48 have received funds, benefiting 2,245
former combatants (637 women). The number of approv ed individual projects
increased to 1,309, benefiting 1,535 former combatants (336 women). Nearly 30 per
cent of accredited former combatants have received financial support through these
mechanisms. The approval of individual productive projects is increa sing more
rapidly than that of collective ones: since the beginning of 2020, 415 individual
projects, benefiting approximately 492 former combatants, and 10 collective projects,
benefiting 258 former combatants, have been approved.
24. According to a survey conducted by the Working Group on Productive Projects
of the National Reintegration Council, half of the productive initiatives have been
affected by the pandemic. Challenges are mostly related to commercialization, owing
to movement restrictions, and technical assistance, which has been limited by the
digital gap in rural areas. Projects focused on services, especially small initiatives led
by women in urban settings, were the most affected. In April, the Council established
a Working Group on Commercialization to help to find commercial partnerships for
former combatants’ productive initiatives.
25. Eleven former combatant initiatives (six of which are led by women) dedicated
to producing textiles in former territorial areas for training and reintegrati on and in
Cali and Medellín have turned to making facemasks, demonstrating their resilience
and social engagement. Thousands of the facemasks were donated to vulnerable
populations.
26. Progress in the allocation of land to former combatants, essential for the
sustainability of the reintegration process, is still limited. To date, only one plot has
been purchased by the National Land Agency, in the former territorial area for training
and reintegration in Colinas (Guaviare), but it has not yet been allocate d owing to
legal barriers. In a welcome development, however, the Working Group on Land of
the National Reintegration Council, the forum in which the exploration of alternative
routes for access to land for former combatants, including for productive proje cts, is
being discussed, met in May.
27. The Working Group on Health of the National Reintegration Council met
regularly to coordinate COVID-19 prevention and mitigation measures for former
combatants and their families. These measures have been largely re spected by former
combatants in former territorial areas for training and reintegration. Only four former
combatants have been infected, and all cases were duly monitored. The Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization distributed 6,490 personal prevention kits and
20-08027

5/17

S/2020/603

26 collective hygiene kits to disinfect collective areas in the former territorial areas
for training and reintegration. The “Health for peace” programme is reinforcing the
capacity of the health-care system in reintegration areas and the 170 municipalities
covered by the development programmes with a territorial focus, with an additional
$4.6 million from the United Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace in
Colombia.
28. Food provisions have continued to be delivered during the quarantine to 5,049
former combatants and 1,334 children in all 24 former territorial areas for training
and reintegration and 25 nearby areas. FARC has requested that food provision be
extended temporarily to former combatants outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration and has claimed that access to clean water is limited. In
April, the Office of the Inspector General wrote to the Agenc y for Reintegration and
Normalization highlighting some of these concerns. The Agency and FARC are
addressing these issues, including by updating the lists of those entitled to receive
food and consulting with the Colombian Family Welfare Institute to ensu re that
children’s nutritional needs are met.
29. The “Arando la educación” programme, which provides education to 1,372
former combatants and community members (38 per cent women) shifted to virtual
education and concluded its most recent cycle in April. In the framework of the
programme, 164 former combatants (86 women) graduated from high school. Two
educational programmes targeting former combatants outside former territorial areas
for training and reintegration are on hold pending adjustments owing to the pandemic.
30. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, FARC and the Ministry of
Housing and Urban and Rural Planning continue to discuss access to housing for
former combatants. Progress is still limited as it is contingent on access to land. T he
Government has prioritized 1,337 former combatants living outside former territorial
areas for training and reintegration and affiliated to national savings and
compensation funds for access to housing subsidies.
31. The increase in care-related duties as a result of the pandemic has affected
women former combatants to a greater extent than men former combatants, thereby
limiting their active participation in political and economic reintegration. Additional
issues are related to access to sexual and reproductive health care and the increasing
risks of domestic violence faced by women former combatants and their families. The
Working Group on Gender of the National Reintegration Council has developed
recommendations on the impact of COVID-19 on the reintegration of women, while
continuing to call for greater progress on advancing the gender-related actions of the
national reintegration policy.
32. The High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples requested the National Reintegration
Council to create a working group to discuss issues affecting former combatants from
ethnic communities, including the limited number of productive projects available to
them.
33. On 30 March, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization extended the
deadline for completing the design of collective and individual reintegration road
maps until October. The Agency and FARC have made some progress on the
participatory methodology for the implementation of the reintegration road map.
FARC has requested, among other things, that a national reintegration system be
established with a view to leveraging a wider institutional response in the
implementation of the road map, as provided for in the national reintegration policy
(document 3931 of the National Council on Economic and Social Policy).

6/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

Transition and consolidation of former territorial areas for training and
reintegration, and new collective reintegration areas
34. Most former combatants continue to carry out their reintegration process outside
former territorial areas for training and reintegration. According to the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization, 9,279 former combatants are living outside former
territorial areas, spread over 500 municipalities. According to FARC, there are at least
75 areas outside former territorial areas in which collective reintegration is taking
place, mostly in rural areas with low socioeconomic indicators, and vulnerable to the
pandemic because of their remote locations. Fifty or more former combatants live in
27 of those areas, with larger groups in capital cities. During the reporting period,
residents of new collective reintegration areas in an Afro-Colombian collective
territory in Mandé, in Urrao (Antioquia), and in the Cañamomo Lomaprieta
indigenous reservation, in Riosucio (Caldas), and others in Tolima Department
formally submitted a request for humanitarian support to the National Reintegration
Council.
35. During the reporting period, the Government and FARC carried out technical
level meetings with residents of seven former territorial areas for training and
reintegration to update them on expected timelines for their ongoing transition and
consolidation, and to explore ways to overcome the challenges identified. The
security situation in two former territorial areas for training and reintegr ation is
critical: Buenos Aires (Cauca) and Ituango (Antioquia). Viable plots for the transfer
of both territorial areas are being identified.
36. A draft strategy prepared by the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
for the transition and consolidation of former territorial areas for training and
reintegration, which encompasses the purchase of land, the implementation of
housing projects for former combatants and the inclusion of these areas in municipal
planning arrangements, was shared with FARC. FARC has requested to have an active
role in the design and implementation of the strategy.
37. The Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation and the Director
of the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization met virtually with residents of
five former territorial areas for training and reintegration to discuss their concerns,
which included delays in the implementation of productive projects, access to land,
the consolidation of former territorial areas and the response to the pandemic.
Role of communities and local actors
38. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and FARC launched a strategy
in May to address the growing stigmatization of former combatants by promoting
dialogue through workshops targeting members of the armed forces, the media,
entrepreneurs and communities.
39. During the reporting period, the 24 local reintegration councils and 12 regional
reintegration bodies held sessions focused on pandemic prevention and mitigation
measures.
40. The implementation of the community-based reintegration strategy, jointly
designed by the Government and FARC, has not begun owing to mobility restrictions.
Political reintegration
41. The FARC party presented 59 draft bills in Congress, both individually and in
coalition with other parties, mostly related to peace im plementation and the impact
of the pandemic.

20-08027

7/17

S/2020/603

42. Owing to the pandemic, the FARC party indefinitely postponed its party
congress, which had been originally scheduled for April.

B.

Security guarantees
43. Killings of former combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders have
continued during the pandemic, which further underlines the urgency of immediate
and concrete measures to address this issue. In various regions, illegal armed groups
and criminal organizations have taken advantage of the pandemic to strengthen their
presence in the territories, including through attacks against public security forces,
forced displacement and confinement of communities, and threats and targeted
killings of social leaders and former FARC-EP members. In some cases, illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations have forcibly imposed social control measures,
including through illegal checkpoints and targeted violence against individuals
violating lockdown measures. The mandatory isolation measures have affected the
implementation of some of the security guarantee mechanisms outlined in section 3.4
of the Final Agreement. Vulnerable populations are finding it more difficult to report
critical security situations and access institutional response mechanisms.
Security guarantees for former FARC-EP members
44. Attacks against former FARC-EP members have persisted. The Mission verified
13 killings (all men) during the reporting period, for a total of 31 (including 2 women)
in 2020. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, the Mission has verified 204
killings of former FARC-EP members (4 women), 48 attempted killings (2 women)
and 15 disappearances. Almost half of those killed were former FARC -EP members
who had been released from prison in accordance with the Fin al Agreement.
45. Families of former combatants also continue to be targeted. On 6 June, two
relatives of former combatants, one aged 15, were killed along with a bus driver in
the vicinity of the former territorial area for training and reintegration in Ituango
(Antioquia). Since the signing of the Final Agreement, 44 relatives of former
FARC-EP members have been killed.
46. Former FARC-EP members living outside former territorial areas for training
and reintegration continue to be particularly vulnerable to threats, attacks, forced
displacement and forced recruitment, as well as to stigmatization and retaliation.
47. Criminal organizations and illegal armed groups have reportedly taken
advantage of the quarantine to strengthen their control over strategic illicit trafficking
routes, especially in Cauca, Meta Putumayo, Chocó, Nariño and Antioquia. The
Mission has verified killings of and threats against former FARC-EP members living
in former territorial areas for training and reintegration and new collective
reintegration areas in those regions. On 8 April, in Frontino (Antioquia), three former
FARC-EP members and 12 family members were evacuated and forcibly displaced as
a result of threats against them. On 18 April, former combatant Rigoberto García
Restrepo was killed in the new collective reintegration area in the Afro -Colombian
territory of Mandé, in the municipality of Urrao (Antioquia), where illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations have repeatedly threatened and forcibly displaced
former combatants and local communities, despite military deployment in the
surrounding area. On 30 April, in Argelia (Cauca), 1 6 former combatants had to
abandon their homes and productive projects as a result of threats from illegal armed
groups. In June, 17 former combatants and their families had to abandon the new
collective reintegration area of El Diamante, in Uribe (Meta), also owing to threats.
The threat of illegal armed groups in the territory remains, both against communities
and the former combatants left behind.

8/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

48. Also concerning is the situation in the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration of Ituango (Antioquia) and Miranda (Cauca). Former combatants have
progressively abandoned these areas as a result of deteriorating security conditions
and threats from illegal armed groups, including against local communities. On
17 June, at a meeting to discuss the impact of measures, chaired by the Presidential
Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, and with the participation of the
Ministry of Defence, the Office of the Attorney General, the Office of the
Ombudsman, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and local authorities
and public forces of both regions, the Deputy Attorney General emphasized the need
to execute pending arrest warrants against those allegedly responsible for the
violence.
49. In May, the FARC political party requested the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights to grant precautionary measures to protect former FARC -EP members
and accelerate the State’s fulfilment of the security guarantees in the Final Agreement
commitments. In June, the FARC party met with the United Na tions High
Commissioner for Human Rights to discuss the security situation facing former
combatants and their families.
50. Efforts by the Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General
led to 8 new convictions and 8 indictments of suspects of attacks against former
FARC-EP members, bringing the total to 29 convictions and 20 cases at trial stage.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement, 10 suspects have been captured as
intellectual authors and 44 as material authors linked to criminal organizations. Arrest
warrants are pending against 38 alleged intellectual authors and 72 alleged material
authors linked to criminal organizations.
51. The tripartite working group on investigations, which includes the Special
Investigation Unit, FARC and the Mission, has been established in Putumayo,
Guaviare and Cundinamarca to follow up on potential threats and investigations at
the territorial level, with more departments to follow.
52. According to the Specialized Subdirectorate for Security and Prot ection of the
National Protection Unit, since the signing of the Final Agreement, 17 former
combatants have been killed while waiting for protection measures. The
Subdirectorate continues to report an urgent need for adequate resources to properly
implement 11 newly approved and 77 incomplete protection measures. An additional
140 bodyguards and more analysts are necessary to effectively respond to protection
requests, as the number of analysts has decreased from 22 in 2018 to 7 in 2020.
53. Women former combatants continue to face challenges in accessing protection
measures. However, the Subdirectorate circulated internal guidance in April calling
upon its staff to ensure the equal use of collective protection schemes by men and
women.
54. With the assistance of the Tripartite Protection and Security Mechanism and the
Office of the Inspector General, the Subdirectorate and security forces have supported
more than 15 emergency evacuations of former FARC-EP members after receiving
imminent threats. A critical inter-institutional evacuation road map is being discussed
by the Technical Committee on Security and Protection.
55. Former FARC-EP members have resorted to judicial measures to expedite
protection requests. On 21 April, a local court ruled in favour of a request by former
FARC-EP members and ordered the National Protection Unit to implement protection
measures for a new collective reintegration area in the indigenous reservation of
Tallambí (Nariño).
56. The preventive deployment of security forces in the former territorial areas for
training and reintegration continues unchanged, except in Mesetas (Meta) and Buenos
20-08027

9/17

S/2020/603

Aires (Cauca), where security forces moved their command posts to new locations,
prompting concerns regarding the security of former combatan ts. Almost all new
collective areas of reintegration, which account for approximately 4,000 former
combatants, continue to lack specific mechanisms for protection from public security
forces.
57. On 28 April, the Government issued a decree authorizing the High
Commissioner for Peace to verify the “willingness for peace” of organized armed
groups, including their willingness to submit to justice and reintegrate into civilian
life. Some social organizations and victims’ groups have called on the Government to
ensure that the process includes mechanisms to guarantee the rig hts of victims to
truth, justice and reparation. Civil society representatives to the National Commission
on Security Guarantees wrote to the Government asking to discuss the decree in
relation to the mandate of the National Commission to develop public policy to
dismantle illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their support networks.
Security guarantees for communities, human rights defenders and
social leaders
58. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, during the reporting period, 6 social leaders and human rights defenders (all
men) were killed and another 27 cases are under verification (including 2 women and
1 individual from the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
population). In 2020, as at 19 June, the Office had verified a total of 32 cases of
homicides of social leaders (including 4 individuals from ethnic communities and
4 women), and 47 more cases are under verification (including 3 women, 13 individuals
from ethnic communities and 1 person from the LGBTI population).
59. The highest levels of violence against social leaders continue to be recorded in
Cauca Department, despite the increased deployment of security forces, which has
almost doubled since the beginning of the year. During the quarantine, in Cauca, five
massacres have been reported, as well as killings, including of social leaders and their
family members. Illegal armed groups and criminal organizations continue to inflict
violence against local communities, including killing children, older persons and
pregnant women.
60. The security situation in Putumayo Department also continues to be of grave
concern, including specific risks for women leaders, women’s organizations and
participants in illicit crop substitution initiatives.
61. The massive forced displacement and confinement of communities, particularly
ethnic communities, continues as a result of the actions of illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations, and because of confrontations among them and with security
forces. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, during
the reporting period, over 7,500 people were forcibly displaced in the Pacific region
(Nariño, Cauca, Valle del Cauca and Chocó). Over 80 per cent of those a ffected were
women and children, and 50 per cent were from ethnic communities. More than
45,000 people were subjected to forced confinement in May, 70 per cent of whom
were inhabitants of the Catatumbo region of Norte de Santander.
62. Recruitment and use of children by illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations remained a grave concern and the Office of the Ombudsman has
reported a heightened risk during the quarantine. The Mission received several reports
of cases in Cauca, Guaviare, Meta and Nariño. Some prevention activities, including
skills training and awareness-raising with parents, were held in two former territorial
areas for training and reintegration in Antioquia and Nariño. The establishment of
immediate response teams to address recruitment cases in Cauca was a positive
development.
10/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

63. Tensions and protests, sometimes leading to violent confrontations, have been
on the rise between communities and public security forces over operations of forced
eradication of illicit crops, especially in Norte de Santander, Antioquia, Meta,
Caquetá, Nariño, Guaviare, Cauca and Putumayo, including in some ethnic territories.
During the reporting period, two persons were killed in the context of such protests
in Norte de Santander and Nariño. Several actors, including the Ombudsman and
peasant and ethnic organizations, have called on the Government to prioritize
voluntary substitution over forced eradication and to make progress in the
implementation of the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substituti on of
Illicit Crops.
64. The Office of the Ombudsman continued to issue early warnings for several
regions, prioritizing early warnings of imminent character during the quarantine. In
total, 12 early warnings were issued, 10 of imminent character, for Nort e de
Santander, Chocó, Caldas, Antioquia, Valle del Cauca and Bolívar Departments. In
addition, a national imminent warning on the security situation of conflict -affected
communities in the context of the pandemic was issued, highlighting risks related to
actions of illegal armed groups and criminal organizations.
65. The National Commission on Security Guarantees, mandated under the Final
Agreement to design a public policy for the dismantling of illegal armed groups,
criminal organizations and their support networks, has not been convened since
January, although its technical subcommissions on gender and ethnic affairs have met
once and twice, respectively. In June, the High Commissioner for Peace, as the
secretary of the Commission, presented draft rules of procedure for the Commission.
Civil society representatives to the Commission have insisted that the proposal be
discussed in a participatory manner. On 19 June, a technical meeting of the
Commission was held to advance the discussion.
66. In May, the Ministry of the Interior reactivated the technical committees on the
implementation of Decree No. 660 on the comprehensive security and protection
programme for communities and organizations in the territories. The Ministry of the
Interior announced that it is moving forward with the implementation of five pilot
programmes on protection for communities in Guapi (Cauca), Tumaco (Nariño),
El Tarra (Norte de Santander), Morales (Bolívar) and San José de Uré (Córdoba).
67. There was modest progress during the reporting period in the implementation
of the action plan of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders. Some progress has been made on the regional
pilot of the Programme in Putumayo, resulting in the incorp oration of actions related
to the Comprehensive Programme into two municipal development plans.

C.

Legal guarantees
68. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the Mission met
regularly in the tripartite working group regarding the tr ansition to legality of former
FARC-EP members, including to discuss new pandemic-related challenges.
69. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace has confirmed that 290
additional former FARC-EP members (including 126 women) were accredited during
the reporting period, bringing the total to 13,394 (3,101 women). They were part of
the list used by the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the Mission
in 2019 to jointly address pending accreditations. Owing to movement restrictions, it
has not been possible to notify all of them. The Government has confirmed that an
additional 134 persons on the list have been identified and are under evaluation for
accreditation. The parties have agreed to make an additional effort to identify the
remaining 209 persons on the list once movement restrictions have been lifted.

20-08027

11/17

S/2020/603

70. The parties made progress in overcoming the challenges related to 206 cases on
the list of individuals submitted by FARC on 15 August 2017 whose legal situation is
still pending definition, 110 of whom are deprived of liberty. The parties are working
on the rules of procedure of a joint mechanism for the settlement of disputes that
would help to resolve those difficult cases, as provided for in the Final Agreement.
71. The tripartite mechanism regarding the transition to legality has been addressing
the 180 cases of accredited former FARC-EP members who are still deprived of their
liberty. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has confirmed that 153 of these individuals
have cases open under its jurisdiction and recently reported that during the national
quarantine it has issued decisions in 132 cases, granting conditional liberty in 10 cases
and denying it in 122 cases. The FARC party has expressed concerns over the high
number of denials and has confirmed its commitment to providing further information
to the Special Jurisdiction as requested.

D.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender
72. The COVID-19 pandemic and preventive isolation measures have had specific
effects on the security situation of women and girls, owing in particular to a marked
increase in sexual and gender-based violence, and continued violence against women
leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. According to the Office of
the Presidential Counsellor for Women’s Equity, during the preventive isolation
period, there has been an increase of 150 per cent in reports of domestic violence to
the national hotline. In response, the Vice-President and the Office of the Presidential
Counsellor for Women’s Equity established a high-level working group to devise
prevention and response measures for gender-based violence. The FARC National
Commission on Women, Gender and Diversity has promoted local campaigns to raise
awareness on gender-based violence among former combatants, considering
increasing reports of domestic violence in former territorial areas for training and
reintegration. Women continue to be at risk of sexual violence perpetrated by illegal
armed groups and criminal organizations, particularly in rural areas.
73. The pandemic has presented additional challenges for advancing the gender
provisions of the Final Agreement related to reintegration and security guarantees.
The active and meaningful participation of women in the implementation of the Final
Agreement has been undermined by the economic and social consequences of the
pandemic, including loss of livelihoods and restrictions on connectivity and mobility.
74. The Mission has continued its dialogue with women’s organizations and women
former combatants through virtual means. My Special Representative has promoted
dialogue at a national level, in coordination with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to address the current
situation of women social leaders and human rights defenders and the impact of the
pandemic on gender-related aspects of the Final Agreement.
Ethnic affairs
75. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, 74 per cent of
former combatants of indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin live in remote areas
outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration. Inhabitants of those
areas have inadequate access to public services and do not receive sufficient support
to start income-generating initiatives or food provisions, making them particularly
vulnerable in the context of the pandemic.

12/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

76. In some areas, indigenous and Afro-Colombian former combatants have
assumed new leadership roles. Three former combatants (one woman) of the
Kankuamo indigenous people are now leading the cooperative in the former territorial
area in Pondores (La Guajira). The new indigenous local governor of the Embera
community of Nevata (Antioquia) is a former combatant, as is the vice -president of
the community action board of the Afro-Colombian community of Altos de Murrí,
also in Antioquia.
77. Violence in ethnic territories, as a result of the presence and activities of illegal
armed groups and criminal organizations, remains of grave concern and has persisted
during the quarantine. In Cauca and in the Atrato River basin in the border region of
Chocó and Antioquia Departments, thousands of people from ethnic communitie s
have been forcibly displaced or confined, many of them facing the risks of recruitment
and sexual exploitation.
Children
78. The pandemic has affected the well-being of children in former territorial areas
for training and reintegration, hindering, in particular their access to health care and
education and protection against domestic violence and sexual abuse. The Colombian
Family Welfare Institute has guaranteed nutritional support for the children included
in its programmes for early development and day-care centres. The creation of childfriendly spaces in former territorial areas advanced at a slow pace, with some progress
made on infrastructure in three former territorial areas, on planning in two and limited
advances in four others.
79. During the reporting period, the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace
reported that it had issued resolutions recognizing 232 former FARC -EP combatants
as children at the time of the laydown of arms and that the total number of children
disengaged from FARC-EP stood at 404. With the support of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Population Fund, the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization is designing a youth approach to provide
differentiated care and services for young people in their reintegration process.
80. The programme “A different path of life” for 123 young adults formerly
associated with FARC-EP is ongoing. The Mission verified the relocation of a
participant as a result of threats by an illegal armed group. The M ission also verified
two cases of female participants without health coverage for them and their newborn
babies. Psychological support remains a challenge. As at April, 71 participants had
received monetary reparations, and the reparations for 43 were pend ing. As part of
their reintegration process, one participant is now the spokesperson of the FARC
political party in Chocó and another is leading a community youth initiative in
Tolima.
Youth and peace and security
81. The first departmental, municipal and local youth council elections since 2005,
originally programmed for November 2020, were suspended until 2021 owing to the
pandemic. These councils are the official mechanisms for youth participation in the
formulation of public policies. Youth representatives of political parties are preparing
to campaign, including the FARC party, which plans to field several candidates. In
May, the Mission supported the establishment of the Cauca Department Inter-party
Youth Committee, bringing together youth representatives from 10 different political
parties, including FARC, to promote youth participation. To support former
combatants’ productive projects during the pandemic, youth leaders in Bogotá created
an online platform through which eight former combatants’ initiatives are selling their
products, with young entrepreneurs providing mentorship for each initiative. In
20-08027

13/17

S/2020/603

Guaviare, 37 youth former combatants, indigenous youth and peasants planted 35,000
seedlings to help to reforest the Amazon rainforest and promote reconciliation.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
82. The United Nations country team continues to support the implementation of
the Final Agreement, adapting to the new realities of the pandemic, in coordination
with the Mission. During the reporting period, a United Nations system-wide effort
to coordinate support for the development programmes with a territorial focus was
carried out, including a mapping exercise that identified ongoing initiatives totalling
close to $127 million. In addition, 990 other potential initiatives in need of support
were identified. The country team has resources available to support about 60 per cent
of the identified initiatives.
83. Within the framework of the inter-agency working group on reintegration, the
United Nations country team and the Mission coordinated a joint effort to support
former combatants in the context of the pandemic in three key areas: health (led by
the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization), socioeconomic
reintegration and food security. The United Nations country team launched a
COVID-19 response plan. In collaboration with the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean and the Mission, the country team is assessing the impacts
on Colombian society and social cohesion, the economy and vulnerable groups,
including victims and former combatants.
84. The United Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace in Colombia
approved $3.5 million for civil society organizations and United Nations proj ects to
prevent the recruitment of children and young persons, and to support the High -level
Forum of Ethnic Peoples and the Special Forum on Gender.
85. The national steering committee for the Peacebuilding Fund comprehensive
reintegration project, composed of the Government, FARC and the United Nations,
has requested the extension of the project until December 2020.

IV. Mission structures
A.

Mission support
86. The Mission is continuing to address the effects of the pandemic on the
Mission’s activities, under the overall coordination of a COVID -19 task force,
including a review of the Mission’s footprint, a programme criticality assessment, a
scenario planning exercise and a plan for a future and gradual return to the office,
aligned with the decisions of the Colombian authorities. Task forces have also been
established at the regional level, as was a welfare committee focused on the mental
health and well-being of Mission personnel in remote locations. Regional offices
continue to receive personal protective equipment and occupational health and safety
briefings. Information technology infrastructure continues to be strengthened as a key
enabler in the current work environment.
87. As at 1 June 2020, 49 per cent of all civilian personnel are women. For other
categories, women represented: 60 per cent of United Nations Volunteers; 36 per cent
of international observers; and 40 per cent of consultants and individual contractors.

B.

Safety and security
88. The Department of Safety and Security has adapted its security management
strategy to the conditions of the pandemic and is closely monitoring the security

14/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

situation. Non-essential missions for the United Nations system have been suspended.
During the reporting period, the Department registered 337 security incidents related
to the pandemic, particularly related to mobility restrictions and social protests, with
Cundinamarca, Antioquia, Cauca and Bogotá as the areas with the most incidents.

C.

Conduct and discipline
89. The Mission has adapted its conduct and discipline strategy to prevent and
respond to misconduct in the context of the pandemic and mandatory isolation
measures. A risk assessment was conducted and corresponding preventive actions
have been taken, including the dissemination of information to all staff and the
holding of online meetings, with a particular focus on sexual exploitation and abuse,
harassment and abuse of authority, misuse of social media and violation of security
regulations. From 27 March to 22 June, no allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse were reported.

V. Observations
90. As Colombians face the unprecedented challenge of the COVID -19 pandemic,
I commend them for their resilience, creativity and tenacity in mitigating the effects
of the health crisis and in taking steps gradually and responsibly to restore normalcy.
Those same qualities led to the adoption of the Final Agreement, and th ose qualities
are necessary to continue to push forward with its implementation.
91. The three priorities for peace implementation in 2020 that I recommended in my
previous report (S/2020/239) remain relevant and urgent in the light of the pandemic,
namely: stronger steps to protect the lives of social leaders, human rights defenders
and former combatants; reinforced measures to ensure the sustainability of the
reintegration process; and a focus on conflict-affected communities. I encourage the
Government and State institutions, as well as FARC and all other actors to remain
focused on them to ensure that the implementation of the Final Agreement continues
to move forward. As my Special Representative has noted, peace in Colombia cannot
be another casualty of the pandemic. The hard-fought gains of peace have to be
safeguarded and expanded.
92. Regrettably, the pandemic has not stopped illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations from inflicting suffering and violence upon courageous Colombians
who are building peace at the grass-roots level and defending their communities, as
well as those who laid down their arms and are seeking to reintegrate into civilian
life. In the face of the continued killings of social leaders, human rights defenders
and former combatants, I call once again upon the Government and State institutions
to make full use of the security guarantees mechanisms devised in the Final
Agreement to deliver concrete results and put a stop to such tragedies. Progress has
to be made by the National Commission on Security Guarantees in the design and
implementation of public policy for the dismantling of criminal organizations and
their support networks. Many former combatants and social leaders have been killed
while awaiting a response to their protection requests. I reiterate the urgent need for
adequate funding and support for the Specialized Subdirectorate for Security and
Protection of the National Protection Unit to address the backlog of prote ction
requests to safeguard the lives of former combatants at risk.
93. I welcome progress by the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the
Attorney General in investigating those responsible for crimes against social leaders,
human rights defenders and former combatants, and I encourage all relevant actors to
redouble their efforts in the fight against impunity, including by capturing individuals
20-08027

15/17

S/2020/603

with pending arrest warrants, so that justice can serve as a credible deterrent. More
progress is necessary in the implementation of the Comprehensive Programme of
Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, particularly given the
effects of the pandemic on women’s security. I reiterate my call to all actors to take
all steps necessary to address domestic and gender-based violence. Finally, I
encourage the Government to reinforce security for former combatants living in new
collective reintegration areas outside the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration, especially considering how many of them have been killed in these
settlements.
94. Unfortunately, the pandemic has taken a toll on the pace of the reintegration
process, particularly on former combatants’ productive endeavours. I therefore
welcome the extension of flexible conditions until 31 August 2020 to ensure delivery
of the monthly allowance. At a time when all economic activities are being affected
and their sustainability is at stake, the provision of technical assistance to productive
projects and efforts to help former combatants to find commercial opportunities for
their products and services have to be reinforced. I also call upon the national
authorities to redouble their efforts to work with FARC in the design and
implementation of the individual and collective reintegration road maps and to make
progress in the allocation of land to former combatants whose productive and housing
projects depend on it. It is also important to advance in supporting the reintegration
initiatives of women former combatants, including participation in decision-making
spaces. I encourage the National Reintegration Council to prioritize the
recommendations of its Technical Working Group on Gender. The leadership of
women former combatants should be a driving force in the recovery efforts fr om the
crisis. The pandemic has also highlighted the plight of over 9,000 former combatants
who live outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. The lack
of basic services in such areas makes them more vulnerable to contagion. The
Government should continue to work to ensure coordination between the reintegration
process and the implementation of other parts of the Final Agreement, especially
comprehensive rural reform.
95. With regard to ensuring that conflict-affected communities are at the centre of
peacebuilding, the reactivation of the technical committees of Decree No. 660 on the
comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories is a welcome step. The resumption of their activ ities
has to translate into concrete progress, for which adequate resourcing is important. I
stress again the importance of all relevant actors adopting timely and coordinated
responses to the recommendations in the early warnings of the Office of the
Ombudsman. The pandemic has demonstrated the vulnerability of communities in
areas in which the State presence still remains weak. Providing opportunities,
infrastructure, services and investments through the integrated deployment of State
institutions is essential to bring security and development to conflict-affected
communities. The Government’s efforts to implement the development programmes
with a territorial focus are noteworthy. I trust that, through constructive dialogue, the
parties will work towards the concept of the development programmes with a
territorial focus envisioned in the Final Agreement, including by ensuring the
continued participation of communities and former combatants in their
implementation.
96. I am concerned that illegal armed groups and criminal organizations have taken
advantage of the pandemic to expand their territorial control, adding to the suffering
of communities and civilians. I reiterate my emphatic call upon all illegal armed
groups to put life above any other consideration and refrain from further violence.
97. The Government and FARC set up a COVID-19 working group within the
National Reintegration Council. The parties continue to work jointly through tripartite
16/17

20-08027

S/2020/603

mechanisms on accreditations, mines, investigations and assets. These examples
demonstrate that dialogue and joint work is the best way of finding solutions to the
challenges of implementation, and I invite the parties to spare no effort in finding
ways of broadening and deepening constructive dialogue on other p ending issues. I
therefore encourage the National Reintegration Council to reactivate its working
group on children and to consider the proposal of the High -level Forum of Ethnic
Peoples to create a working group to specifically consider the situation of f ormer
combatants from ethnic communities. I hope that the parties, accompanied by the
guarantor countries, will continue to meet regularly in the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement
and enhance its functioning to discuss differences and overcome obstacles to
implementation.
98. In the spirit of putting victims at the core of peacebuilding, the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition continues to play a
fundamental role, and I urge all actors to continue to support its three components,
including by ensuring the necessary resources for its proper functioning. I commend
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed
Missing, and the Truth Commission for ensuring that their work continues in spite of
the pandemic. I call upon all actors, including those under the jurisdiction of the
Special Jurisdiction, to fully contribute to the work of the Comprehensive System so
as to fulfil victims’ expectations and uphold their rights to truth, justice and
reparations.
99. I once again urge all actors to avoid reopening discussions on potential
modifications to the Final Agreement. Debates on potential modifications have
generated polarization and division in the past; and, in the light of the pandemic, it is
more important than ever to achieve strength through unity. I note that the
Government has affirmed that it does not seek to modify the Final Agreement and has
reiterated its position that any reforms or legislation would apply only to future peace
processes. Indeed, the commitments made to those who laid down their arms in good
faith and remain engaged in the reintegration process have to be respected, most
importantly, the full implementation of the entirety of the Final Agreement. Its focus
on addressing the root causes of the conflict and forward-looking measures to build
genuine peace, security and development throughout Colombia have inspired the
world.
100. The consequences of the pandemic will continue to be felt, but I am confident
that Colombians can overcome these challenges as they have so many others. I
encourage Colombians to be guided by the common goals of preventing contagion,
supporting the most vulnerable and ensuring that the gains of the peace process are
not only protected but built upon. The United Nations stands firmly behind them in
these efforts.

20-08027

17/17
