S/PV.8867

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8867th meeting

Tuesday, 28 September 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Gotru
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ben Lagha
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-26710 (E)
*21XXXXX*

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Shukria Dini, co-Founder and Executive Director
of the Somali Women’s Studies Centre, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, to
whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on Ireland’s
presidency this month and to thank you for the invitation
to brief the Security Council today. I would also like to
extend my greetings to Ms. Shukria Dini, whom I had
the pleasure of meeting during my visit. I commend
the Council for its leadership on women and peace and
security, and in particular the commitment of Ireland,
Kenya and Mexico to prioritize this issue during their
successive presidencies.
Earlier this month, I had the opportunity to travel
to Somalia. That was the seventh mission I have
undertaken in recent years on women and peace and
security, and the first mission in person since the start
of the pandemic. It is also my second visit to Somalia
on this issue. The trip was undertaken in solidarity with
Somali women’s calls for full and equal participation in
political life, including through the implementation of
a 30 per cent quota, and to express the support of the
international community for timely, inclusive, peaceful
and credible elections.
Somalia reached a milestone in its 2016 elections,
with 24 per cent of parliamentary seats taken up by
women. Those figures demonstrate that progress is
possible, even in the most difficult circumstances. But
even so, they fall short of the commitment that Somalia’s
political leaders made to achieve 30 per cent women’s
representation in Parliament. Every woman matters.
There is real concern that in the current elections to
the House of the People, the levels of representation will
2/16

28/09/2021

decrease, despite promises and stipulations in electoral
agreements. While in Mogadishu, I met with President
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister
Mohamed Hussein Roble, members of the National
Consultative Council, comprised of the Prime Minister
and the federal member state leaders, members of the
Federal Elections Implementation Team, state-level
election implementation teams and the Electoral
Disputes Resolution Committee, in addition to women’s
groups, civil society and traditional elders, as well as
representatives of the international community.
Consistently and across the board, I heard a
strong commitment to the principle of women’s
equal participation and the 30 per cent quota. It was
encouraging to hear from the National Consultative
Council that it has agreed on measures to ensure the
integrity, transparency and credibility of the elections,
as well as the gender quota.
I also appreciated the Prime Minister’s leadership
and the concrete actions he has taken to build women’s
representation. Those include reducing candidate fees
for women and appointing goodwill ambassadors to
support and advocate for the 30 per cent quota with
federal member state leaders. It was also encouraging
to hear traditional elders acknowledge the central role
of women in advancing peace and security in Somalia.
All were committed to the issue of women’s
inclusion, yet real challenges remain. Women
themselves spoke of ongoing obstacles they struggle
to face access to financial support to hold campaigns.
They also lack the political networks and connections of
their male peers. The political environment in general
is not conducive to women representatives, and many
male leaders continue to promote male candidates.
Those challenges are compounded by violence
and discrimination. Women reported that, in some
states, female candidates are unable to rent campaign
offices — a simple and effective way to prevent them
from being elected. Across the board, women spoke
of the need for greater protection from intimidation,
harassment and violence.
Just three days ago, sadly, Ms. Hibaq Abukar, an
adviser on women’s affairs and human rights in the
Prime Minister’s office, was killed in a bomb attack in
Mogadishu. I pay tribute to Ms. Abukar and all Somali
women, who run the risk every day to fight for their
rights. Women in areas controlled by Al-Shabaab face
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8867

added security challenges that undermine their efforts
to campaign openly.

the progress on elections that will strengthen stability
across the region.

The women I met called for a concrete mechanism
to ensure the implementation of the 30 per cent quota
and for a move towards direct elections in the form of
one person, one vote. The current format of indirect
selection leaves political decision-making in the hands
of clan elders, all of whom are men.

The need for regional stability was also highlighted
in meetings that I had with Presidents Kenyatta and
Hassan, of Kenya and Tanzania, on my way to Somalia.
Both Heads of State emphasized the need for increased
and sustained attention by the international community
to issues the stability in the Horn. It is clear that Somalia
is a neighbourhood concern. Both the country and the
region need a secure transition, so that they can focus
on consolidating the dividends of peace and investing
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals.

Women called on their leaders to implement in
full all political agreements related to the elections.
That includes the political agreements of 17 September
and 27 May, as well as the 22 August communiqué, in
which leaders of the Federal Government of Somalia
and the federal member states made a commitment to
the 30 per cent quota for women. Women also called for
constitutional reforms that would create a permanent
solution by reserving a proportion of the parliamentary
seats for women, and for women to be included in
electoral committees as delegates and candidates.
At the State level, the Federal Minister of Women
and Human Rights Development, with whom I spoke,
encouraged the United Nations to continue to support
both the constitutional review process and a multiparty
electoral system. She emphasized that this is the key
to increasing women’s participation in future elections
and political processes. There was also recognition
that women’s economic empowerment is inextricably
linked with political participation and directly impacts
women’s ability to engage in public life. She then called
on the United Nations to redouble our efforts to support
women’s opportunities, independence and participation
in economic activities.
My visit to Somalia took place at a time of
heightened tensions among political leaders. In my
talks with the President and the Prime Minister, I
reinforced the message of the international community
that Somalia must not return to the divisions and
conflicts of the past. Both leaders committed to doing
everything possible to avert a crisis by continuing
dialogue, resolving issues peacefully and maintaining
the momentum for the elections.
Since then, the situation has evolved, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
briefed Council members on this. Despite sustained
negotiations, there has been no breakthrough yet, and
I continue to encourage Somali leaders to de-escalate
tensions, find a compromise solution and continue

Somalia has achieved considerable momentum with
its electoral process. It is critical that this continues
through the finalization of the Upper House elections
and the start of the Lower House process. In this regard,
I welcome the announcement of the electoral schedule
for the Somaliland seats. Going forward, I urge leaders
to prioritize the full implementation of the electoral
agreement, establish concrete mechanisms to implement
the 30 per cent quota and strengthen efforts aimed
at protecting women from violence, including equal
access to justice for all women. Somalis cannot move
their country forward and build trust in institutions
and elections without women’s equal participation.
Inclusive elections will lay the foundations for a
resilient, sustainable and inclusive country.
I made this second visit to Somalia because women’s
political participation is a game changer in our efforts
to achieve sustainable peace development and a more
resilient and inclusive society. Women’s participation
and representation in political life is a precondition for
lasting peace in Somalia. The 30 per cent quota is a
crucial first step towards the equal representation of
women in all sectors of life, from business to public
service, elections to appointments. As one federal state
woman minister noted, women in Somalia account for
over 50 per cent of the population, so the 30 per cent
quota can only be the beginning. This point was echoed
by a member of the state electoral implementation team,
who observed that the Parliament is called the People’s
House, so it should reflect that half of those people
are women.
I would like to share with the Security Council
the appeal I heard from many Somali leaders for the
international community to keep up our sustained
focus, support and partnership. The United Nations

21-267103/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

mission and country team are committed to ensuring
this with the Council’s support, and with these efforts,
I am confident that Somalia will continue to move
forward. I hope to return to see the progress and meet
the new Parliament with a minimum of 30 per cent
women representatives in the near future.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Shukria Dini.
Ms. Dini: Madam President, I thank you for the
invitation to address the Security Council.
My name is Shukria Dini. I am a gender and
peace activist and currently a member of the goodwill
ambassadors charged with advocating the achievement
of the 30 per cent quota for women in the Somali
national election 2021-2022. Allow me to convey to the
Security Council the warmest greetings from the entire
team of the goodwill ambassadors and Somali women
across the country.
I am honoured and privileged to be speaking on
behalf of Somali women. In this briefing, I consider
myself a transmitter of the views and concerns that
Somali women wish to share with the members of the
Security Council.
The recent visit by the Deputy Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Amina J. Mohammed, in early
September, and the visit by Ireland’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs in July have given us a much-needed
boost. Their visits have placed much-needed focus on
the issue and put pressure on critical actors in Somalia
to support women’s representation and participation
in the ongoing electoral processes. Both visits were
appreciated by Somali women and reassured us that we
are not alone in our struggle for political participation,
empowerment and equality.
In my briefing, I will shed light on the importance
of women’s participation and representation in political
processes, particularly in the ongoing elections, the
concerns of Somali women and the importance and
urgency of achieving women’s 30 per cent quota. As a
result of the protracted conflict, the roles of women in
Somalia have been changing. Women have become the
primary breadwinners for their extended families. In
fact, it is estimated that over 60 per cent of households
in Somalia heavily rely on women’s meagre income.
4/16

28/09/2021

Women have also become the protectors of
their families. In fulfilling these new roles and
responsibilities, Somali women have learned to exercise
their agency and have become true leaders in their own
particular ways. They have proven how resourceful
they can be and how important they are to the survival
of their families and communities. They have been able
to build local strategies and social solutions and are
transforming their country. While women have been at
the forefront in building peace and preventing conflicts
in Somalia, they are not sufficiently represented
in formal peace and political processes and lack
opportunities that can improve their representation in
formal decision-making.
The Deputy Secretary-General’s visit, which was a
high-level mission from United Nations Headquarters,
was a historic and much-needed one. Seeing a woman
leader expressing solidarity with Somali women and
engaging national and federal member states’ leaders,
clan elders and electoral teams to ensure the delivery of
the 30 per cent quota was indeed a very rare but very
effective opportunity for Somali women. It left them
more encouraged and more energized to continue their
struggle to realize a minimum 30 per cent quota in the
upcoming election. Somali women are very appreciative
for Ms. Mohammed’s visit.
I would like to point out that the representation of
women in political processes is a human rights issue,
a justice issue, a security issue, a peace issue and a
democratic issue. The challenges that women face in
our society need more women’s voices and leadership
to address them. We need more women leaders who are
going to address the barriers facing women. Women’s
participation in political and electoral processes is
critical to rebuilding a transformative, peaceful and
inclusive Somalia.
The ongoing electoral process provides an
opportunity for improving women’s roles, representation
and participation in politics, and it is critical that we
deliver an inclusive election. Women’s representation
and participation in elections and political processes are
critical to realizing an inclusive society and increasing
women’s influence in decision-making, agenda setting
and resource allocation.
Political accountability and gender-inclusive
governance can be achieved only when women
are included in formal decision-making forums.
Exclusionary political processes threaten lasting peace,
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

stability, gender equality and recovery in Somalia.
Somali women bring different experiences, skills
and perspectives to the table, and that can enrich
the peace and political processes, not to mention the
whole process of democratization. Women have used
their marginalization within the clan system to earn
the trust of all clans, thus giving them the ability to
mobilize community actors to unite, come to the aid of
the most vulnerable groups, stretch their limited, hardearned incomes, and feed their extended families and
non-family members.
Our national election needs to be seen as an appeal
to promote peace, security and unity in Somalia. Somali
women have been calling for peaceful elections and
believe that their presence in electoral processes will
reduce tension among competing actors. Women have
been calling for all parties and stakeholders to set aside
their political rivalries and support peaceful elections
for the sake of the country.
Safeguarding the 30 per cent women’s quota must be
a top priority in the ongoing national election. Despite
promises of political leaders to safeguard the women’s
quota, Somali women remain extremely concerned
about the outcomes of the election, particularly given the
results so far in the already-concluded Senate election.
This is where the work of the goodwill ambassadors
becomes extremely critical, particularly in carrying out
high-powered, sustained advocacy and putting pressure
on critical actors.
Since their appointment, the goodwill ambassadors
have been actively engaging in advocacy and lobbying
with such critical actors as national and regional
leaders and other crucial actors to secure the women’s
quota. We have been visiting federal member states and
engaging directly with various stakeholders, urging
them to safeguard the women’s quota. The goodwill
ambassadors have offered ideas and recommendations
for such a mechanism for all stakeholders.
Somali women and goodwill ambassadors urged
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, to support Somalia to continue their pressure
on members of the National Consultative Council in
Somalia. I also urge the Security Council to convince
our leaders that they cannot and must not drive our
country into chaos and unrest. That political solution is
the only path; the elections must happen without further
delay, and the 30 per cent quota must be delivered.

S/PV. 8867

For the 30 per cent quota to be realized, our
demands are very straightforward and include, first:
identify and reserve 83 seats for women in the House
of the People election; set aside and reserve 10 seats
for the remaining 25 Senate seats for women; and
hold elections in women’s seats before the elections in
general seats.
Secondly, our demands include also: take
appropriate measures to ensure the protection of
women during the electoral processes. And, thirdly,
the federal member state leaders who are members of
the National Consultative Council must ensure that the
federal electoral implementation team and state-level
electoral implementation teams reject any nominations
of male candidates in the seats reserved for women.
We have a message for the international community
as well. We ask it not to support the elections if the
30 per cent women’s quota is not protected. Do not
commend actions and decisions by national stakeholders
if women’s reserved seats are not protected.
The space of civil society remains critical to
supporting women’s leadership and offers an entry
point for women to enter politics. It is in that space
that Somali women have been delivering much-needed
services to vulnerable populations and building women’s
leadership. It is critical to empower women operating
in this space for leadership positions so that they can
impact the lives of many women across Somalia.
To conclude, Somalia is in a better place than it was
10 years ago, but we are at a crossroads, and any progress
that lopsided will leave women out of the corridors of
power. Building a new Somalia can be only possible
when women and all other marginalized communities
are fully included in all peace and political processes.
The opportunity of the ongoing election must not
be missed.
Once again, I wish to extend to you, Madam
President, and other members of the Security Council
our sincere thanks and appreciation for this opportunity
and your unwavering support for Somalia and
Somali women.
The President: I thank Ms. Dini for her
excellent briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.

21-267105/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

28/09/2021

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I should like to start by thanking our briefers, the
Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Shukria Dini. I am
very struc.

commitment to ensure that a minimum of 30 per cent
of parliamentary seats go to women in the ongoing
elections, in accordance with the 2020 and 2021
electoral agreements.

I am very grateful to Ireland for having convened
this briefing. I think that here in the Security Council
we tend to focus on the so-called big picture of
political and security crises, including the security
situation in Somalia. But today we have a chance to
focus on the real-life impacts on the day-to-day lives of
Somali women and girls shaped by those so-called big
picture factors.

As the Upper House electoral process moves towards
its conclusion, it is disappointing to see that Somalia’s
leaders have not met that commitment, and so we urge
them to take steps to ensure that their commitment is
met for the upcoming Lower House elections.

We have also heard both from the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and from Shukria Dini that Somali women
and girls are not just passively affected by politics and
security; they are powerful agents of change too. I
would like to make three points in that regard.
First, we should be clear that both the coronavirus
disease pandemic and Somalia’s persistent political
crises have prevented substantial progress on Somalia’s
other priorities, including on the women and peace and
security agenda. That is the opportunity cost of the
current crisis, and this setback exacerbates Somalia’s
political problems. Gender inequality and the perpetual
cycle of violence against women and girls contributes
towards Somalia’s protracted insecurity, instability and
Al-Shabaab’s insurgency.
In that respect, I want to underline that the United
Kingdom is deeply concerned by the continued
pervasiveness of sexual and gender-based violence in
Somalia. Reports indicate that rates of forced marriage
and female genital mutilation have increased during the
pandemic. And so we again urge Somalia’s leaders to
prioritize the adoption of the 2018 sexual offences bill
as soon as possible and to implement its provisions.
Secondly, to solve those problems, as we have heard,
we need women to have seats at the table when decisions
are made. For Somalia’s long-term development to be
inclusive and effective, it is vital to take steps to bring
about equal participation and representation of women
in decision-making and leadership positions.
As we heard today from Ms. Shukria Dini, and
as we have heard before from Somali civil-society
leaders, women have an important, constructive role
to play in Somalia’s development, and they deserve a
level playing field. So the United Kingdom therefore
calls again on Somalia’s leaders to deliver on their
6/16

Thirdly, we also encourage Somalia to accelerate
the finalization, adoption and full implementation of its
national action plan on women and peace and security,
in close cooperation with civil society. That is a vital
component of efforts to strengthen women’s participation
in peacebuilding and socioeconomic progress.
The United Kingdom reiterates its commitment
to working constructively with Somalia and Somali
women to strengthen the role of women in peace and
security and advance progress in human rights and
democracy to enable long-term stability.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Ms. Dini for their briefings. and I would like to express
my condolences in connection with the victims of the
two bombings in Somalia on 25 September.
Women represent an important force in achieving
lasting peace and building an inclusive society. In
recent years the Somali Government has made great
efforts to protect women’s rights and interests, combat
gender-based violence and enhance women’s voices in
political, economic and social life. China welcomes the
Government’s commitment to guaranteeing women
seats in the elections and the concrete measures
taken to encourage women’s political participation,
including reducing fees for women candidates,
appointing goodwill ambassadors and setting up
publicity committees.
After a long period of war in Somalia, national
reconstruction cannot be accomplished overnight.
The international community must be patient and
encourage, in a step-by-step manner, greater political
inclusivity in Somalia.
Political stability and national unity in Somalia will
help create favourable conditions for women’s equal,
full and effective participation in political life. We have
noted that differences among Somali leaders remain
unresolved and are concerned about the possible impact
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

on the political and security situation on the ground. On
18 September, the Security Council issued a statement
to the press (SC/14641) calling on Somali leaders to
exercise restraint, put the interests of the country and
the people first, overcome their differences through
dialogue and consultation, and preserve political
security and stability. We believe that Somali leaders
will heed the voices and wishes of the people and the
international community by strengthening unity.
China encourages the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia to continue their mediation efforts to bring the
political situation in Somalia back on track. The most
urgent task for Somalia right now is to hold the elections
successfully. All parties have made some progress in
implementing the consensus reached on 17 September
2020 and 27 May 2021. At the same time, the Somali
elections still face many complex challenges. Some
core pending issues may affect their progress.
China encourages Somalia to continue to advance
the election process in accordance with the time frame
agreed upon by all parties and to resolve the outstanding
issues through political dialogue. The international
community should continue to provide the necessary
financial and technical support for the elections, in
accordance with the principle of a Somali-led and
Somali-owned process.
Faced with the multiple challenges, the current
situation in Somalia is sensitive and complex. The
Security Council should calibrate the periodicity and
efforts invested in the deliberations and be seized of
the priorities of the situation so that Somalia can focus
on advancing important issues concerning its future
and destiny.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We welcome Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed’s
timely visit to Somalia and the meetings held with the
President, the Prime Minister, women civil society
members, the electoral management bodies, goodwill
ambassadors and the elders, and the importance of that
in underscoring the full and meaningful participation
and leadership of women in the country. I thank
Ms. Mohammed for sharing her analysis of the situation.
Her expression of solidarity for securing the 30 per
cent quota is both timely and necessary. We also thank
Ms. Dini for sharing her expertise and experience as a
researcher and civil society leader with us today. Somali

S/PV. 8867

women’s participation in politics and in the economy
must be guaranteed and supported, and they must be
able to do so free from violence and intimidation. We
express our condolences to the family of Hibaq Abukar
and to the families of all the victims of the attack in
Mogadishu last weekend.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the
commitment demonstrated by the Federal Government
of Somalia to achieving the quota. The appointment of
the advocacy committee, goodwill ambassadors and
champions by Prime Minister Roble and the National
Consultative Council (NCC) to advocate for women’s
inclusion in the elections is evidence of that commitment.
The reduction of the candidates’ registration fee by
50 per cent, as was done in the 2016/2017 election, is
yet another significant decision taken by the Federal
Government of Somalia and the NCC.
However, we acknowledge the concerns expressed
by Ms. Batula Axmed Gaballe, Chairperson of both
the Somali National Organization of Women and the
recently established advocacy committee, as she briefed
the Security Council last month (see S/PV.8833). Even as
she welcomed the commitment and actions undertaken
by the Government to achieve the quota, she reiterated
the importance of cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states,
the need to engage the federal member state and clan
leaders on reserving parliamentary seats for women
only and the overall establishment of a concrete
mechanism for the implementation of the quota. We
reiterate calls for cooperation among members of
the Federal Government of Somalia and between the
Federal Government and the federal member states not
only to ensure the successful completion of the various
phases of the election, but also to guarantee that the
target regarding the election of women to Parliament is
either met or surpassed.
With organizations such as the Somali Women’s
Studies Centre, represented here by Ms. Dini, working
at the intersections of gender and youth to focus on
women’s political participation, ending gender-based
violence and women’s economic empowerment,
Somali women are at the front lines of changing their
society. We must also not lose sight of the climate and
security risks to which women and girls are made most
vulnerable and how transforming such arrangements
requires women’s political participation and leadership.

21-267107/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

The support of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to the country has
been significant. We applaud UNSOM’s provision
of technical and logistical support, as well as the
coordination of international financial commitments
for the election in Somalia. Recent visits to federal
member states, including the visit to Puntland by
the Heads of AMISOM, UNSOM and the European
Union and Swedish missions in Somalia, have been
critical in underscoring the regional and international
commitment to the cooperation of the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
regarding the election, as well as Somali women’s right
to political participation and in broader State-building
processes. We also welcome the visit by the delegation
of international partners to Baidoa, in South-West
State, to reiterate the same.
We commend the National Election Security
Committee in its efforts to coordinate security for the
elections, and we welcome the role of AMISOM, working
alongside the federal and state police commissioners, in
those efforts. The commitment of the African Union to
the budgetary request made by the Federal Government
of Somalia to supply equipment for the elections and its
efforts, alongside the Somali security forces, to thwart
Al-Shabaab’s attempts to disrupt the elections must
also be commended.
In conclusion, let us not lose sight of the purpose
for which the elections are being held and why it is
imperative that they be inclusive. As signalled in both
the 17 September 2020 and the 27 May 2021 agreements,
the election is critical to normalizing the security
situation, addressing the urgent humanitarian needs and
accelerating socioeconomic development. In short, the
election is key to advancing the State-building process.
Unless women are sitting at the decision-making table
at all levels and unless women are crafters of policies
and architects of actions, the possibility of equitable
and just development will remain elusive. That is
true of every society. In 2016/2017, Somalia achieved
what a majority of countries in our United Nations,
including developed countries, have failed to do: 24 per
cent of parliamentary seats were secured by women,
as we heard. The current election should set another
milestone, thus achieving the aspirations that Somali
women have set for themselves.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Mohammed for coming to brief us today and
8/16

28/09/2021

for undertaking the trip to Somalia. There is nothing
like being there and being on the ground to speak with
the people and get their perspectives. We were glad to
receive her in Kenya in mid-September, and we would
again underline the commitments that our President
made to her and his focus on regional peace and
security. I also want to thank Ms. Shukria Dini for the
work that she is doing and for the leadership that she is
displaying. We take to heart her recommendations to
the Security Council.
The focus of this briefing is the situation of
women in Somalia. I will go beyond the parliamentary
dimension. I will go beyond the election, because,
after all, the situation of women in Somalia is the same
as the situation of women in many other countries
that have a militant terrorist organization on their
territory. We have seen and observed the Security
Council reflect profound concerns about the situation
of women in Afghanistan following the takeover of
the State by the Taliban. The fear has been that the
pictures and the reality that we saw women go through
before the Taliban were overthrown will be reinforced
on the women of Afghanistan. As we sit here, there
is no guarantee that that will not happen. There were
certainly some promises that we heard, but there is no
guarantee. Similar to the sort of extremist ideology that
we fear will be visited on the women of Afghanistan is
the same fearsome ideology that we fear will be visited
on the women of Somalia, the women of Kenya, the
women of the Horn of Africa, the women of the Sahel
and all those women who happen to come into contact
with Al-Qaida or with groups that are driven by the
Al-Qaida ideology.
If we are to talk about women and peace and
security, we must also consider the role of such groups
as detractors to the safety, security and status of
women. Since I arrived in the United States, I have
heard the phrase “toxic masculinity” used in the media
to describe the behaviour of men that is negative and
harmful to women. If one can recall the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and its depredations; if one can
recall the pre-2001 Taliban; if one can recall the areas
that Al-Shabaab has held in control and the controls
it has put on women against their equality, safety and
sexual safety, then one can understand that to embrace
the women and peace and security agenda for the
situation of women in Somalia is by necessity is to
be opposed in a profound fashion to the continuity of
Al-Shabaab as a viable military organization and as a
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

potential political player. We want the Security Council
to pay attention to that because we do not believe that
with the existence of a group, such as Al-Shabaab, which
has not seen its capabilities sufficiently degraded under
our collective watch, that we can continue to speak
only about parliamentary quotas as if solving those
will remove that particular challenge. We embrace the
30 per cent quota. We want the 30 per cent quota to move
forward, but we also want women to be more involved
and integrated in the military and police services. We
want women’s voices to be heard across the sector. We
want women to be more safeguarded from Al-Shabaab,
its ideology and its military and political movement on
the ground.
And that is not just Somalia. That is Kenya; that
is Ethiopia; that is every part of our region where
that group has ambitions, because we must remember
that Al-Shabaab’s ambitions go beyond Somalia and
actually extend into neighbouring countries.
We have seen what Al-Shabaab has done to women.
I personally have spoken and engaged with women who
have been under its control at one time or another. The
tale they tell is of unremitting sexual violence and
subjugation. I want to recommend to the Security Council
that we redouble our efforts against Al-Shabaab, in the
understanding that defeating Al-Shabaab, removing its
military capability and cutting off its funding is one
of the most important initiatives we can undertake on
behalf of the women of Somalia and the women of the
Horn of Africa.
That does not exclude or minimize the concerns
that are being expressed in the Chamber today by other
delegations. It is only to offer our feedback so that we
can have a more rounded picture.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this briefing. Focusing on
women and peace and security in Somalia is indeed
timely. And I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Shukria Dini for their briefings
and important recommendations.
Let me also express our deepest condolences to
all those affected by Saturday’s Al-Shabaab attack in
Mogadishu, including the family of the Gender Focal
Point at the Office of the Prime Minister, Hibaq Abukar.
I would like to add three main points on this
issue today.

S/PV. 8867

First, building an inclusive democracy has been a
central goal in the Somali-led and Somali-owned peace
and State -building process. However, a significant
flaw in the democratic reforms thus far has been the
lack of inclusion, particularly of women. Looking at the
current figures from the elections to the Upper House,
it seems unlikely that women will get more than around
25 per cent of the seats. Yet, Somalia’s ambition should
be to move beyond what was already achieved almost
five years ago. We therefore urge those responsible at
all levels to redouble their efforts and ensure a clear
mechanism for implementing the 30 per cent quota in
both houses of Parliament.
Secondly, achieving the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women is about more than implementing
the 30 per cent quota, so well described by the Permanent
Representative of Kenya at this meeting. The Somali
Women’s Charter is designed and promoted by Somali
women and provides a solid foundation towards more
broad-based and inclusive processes in all reform areas.
It deserves our full support.
Further, a clear timeline for the implementation
of the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2001)
should be developed, and we encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia to establish a
women’s advisory board that could advise on how the
national action plan can be implemented.
And thirdly, today’s political crisis demonstrates
the need to prioritize national reconciliation. The
implementation of the national reconciliation framework
could be one such way and may provide women with
greater opportunities to participate. Women have shown
their capacity to build bridges between clans and act as
a first channel for dialogue between parties to conflict,
as well as being important influencing agents vis-à-vis
elders and others with decision-making authority. And
women mobilize resources.
To that end, Norway has supported the work of the
Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
in preparing the Somali women reconciliation action
plan, which proposes several concrete activities to
strengthen the role of women in peacebuilding and
reconciliation. We also support the establishment and
training of inclusive networks for reconciliation, in
which young people and women have key roles.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): Allow me at outset to
express our sincere condolences to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of

21-267109/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

Somalia following last week’s terrorist attack near the
presidential palace in Mogadishu, for which Al-Shabaab
has claimed responsibility, which is yet another
reminder of how fragile and volatile the situation in
Somalia is.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her briefing on her recent visit to
Somalia and commend her efforts to advance the women
and peace and security agenda in general and women’s
participation in the upcoming elections in Somali in
particular. We support all the appeals by Somali women
that Ms. Mohammed echoed in her presentation.
I also would like to thank Ms. Shukria Dini for
briefing us on the activities of the goodwill leaders
and civil society to promote the rights of women in
Somalia and increase their role and participation in
decision-making processes. I thank her for clearly
voicing the demands of Somali and the Council. I can
assure her that we are very sensitive to those goals.
We would like to reiterate the importance of holding
free, fair, timely and inclusive elections in Somalia
within the time frame agreed by all parties, and we
encourage Somalis to continue working to overcome
all obstacles to those elections, which are critical for
the stabilization and the future of Somalia.
We hope in particular that the agreement reached
on the 30 per cent minimum quota for women in the
parliamentarian elections will be upheld and that it will
pave the way to stronger women’s representation and
participation in the future. We welcome in that regard
the efforts of the Government of Somalia to that end
through such actions as the reduction of nomination fees
for women candidates and the appointment of goodwill
ambassadors and champions to advocate for greater
inclusion. At the same time, we share the view that it
is important at this stage to agree on how precisely the
30 per cent quota will be implemented.
Lastly, while encouraging the Government
of Somalia to continue to advocate for the full
representation of women at all decision-making levels,
we believe that there is a need to address the concerns
on the overall situation of Somali women, in particular
with regard to the high level of violence and insecurity
they face, which is hindering their full participation in
political and economic life.
We believe that women’s full inclusion in all sectors
of society and their economic empowerment would
10/16

28/09/2021

contribute to greater resilience, peace and stability
in Somalia
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We listened carefully to the briefing of
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed on
the outcomes of her trip to the region, as well as the
briefing by the representative of Somali civil society,
Ms. Shukria Dini.
We appreciate the very important political signal
that the Deputy Secretary-General’s visit sent to
the political forces of Somalia regarding the need
to overcome existing conflicts and to expeditiously
complete the protracted electoral process. We welcome
her focus on enhancing the role of women in Somali
political life, particularly with regard to fulfilling the
obligation to ensure a 30 per cent quota of women in the
future composition of the Federal Parliament.
We also had an opportunity to learn more about this
thanks to a very detailed press release about her trip
that was issued by the Secretariat last week. We believe
that the obligation related to the 30 per cent quota is
national in scope and character. These obligations were
undertaken by the Somali people and we trust they will
be able to fulfil them by themselves if given the time
and favourable political, socioeconomic and security
conditions to do so.
Here in the Security Council, we must be guided
by the political reality in the country and should set
the right priorities. We believe that the Council already
sent all the necessary signals in its press statement
dated 18 September (SC/14641).
The main task of the Somali people in the short term
is to complete their national elections. Unfortunately,
due to the destabilization of the domestic political
situation, the federal authorities were forced to once
again postpone the scheduled elections. Now the
elections can be expected to conclude no sooner that
the end of November.
It is extremely important to prevent further
degradation of the already critical security situation.
Despite the additional measures taken by the Federal
Government to prevent terrorist attacks, the Al-Shabaab
terrorist groups continues to carry out skilfully
planned attacks that use asymmetrical methods to
fight Government forces and the contingent from the
African Union Mission in Somalia. A good example is
the car bomb explosion near the presidential palace in
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8867

Mogadishu on 25 September, which claimed the lives of
at least 10 people.

Upper House is reassuring. We hope that elections to
the Lower House will also be held as scheduled.

We expect the Secretary-General, the African
Union (AU) and Somalia to articulate proposals
as to parameters for the continued presence of AU
peacekeeping Mission in the country, as required by
resolution 2568 (2021).

India supports the call for the inclusion of women
across all sectors of society in order to advance peace
and stability in Somalia. We believe that the 30 per cent
quota for women’s representation in Parliament is very
achievable, given the fact that women candidates won
24 per cent of parliamentary seats in its most recent
elections. Women can play a vital role in conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconciliation. We support
a greater role for women in the decision-making process.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia also remains
difficult. According to the latest data, the number of
people in need of food and social assistance has reached
almost 6 million. In addition, approximately 4 million
people are exposed to extreme risk. The number of
refugees and internally displaced persons is growing.
Since the Deputy Secretary-General’s remit
includes providing development assistance to States,
we trust that efforts in Somalia to that end will continue
and intensify.
Mr. Gotru (India): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her detailed briefing on
the recent visit to Mogadishu. I also thank Ms. Shukria
Dini for sharing the perspective of civil society
in Somalia.
As we continue to closely monitor developments
in Somalia, I would like to underline the importance
of keeping our priorities very clear. Somalia has
witnessed a long period of uncertainty with regard to
the elections for legislative bodies mandated by the
transitional constitution. Therefore, the holding of
elections and formation of a new Government is of
the utmost priority for Somalia today. We hope that
the Somali leadership will continue to move forward
with the ongoing process of elections. The international
community and the United Nations need to continue
supporting those efforts. In that context, we welcome
the visit of the Deputy Secretary-General and the
message of solidarity that the visit conveyed to the
people of Somalia. The peaceful conduct of elections
within the agreed timelines and in accordance with the
17 September and 27 May agreements is important for
the democratic future of Somalia.
We also note that the Somali political leadership,
both at the level of the Federal Government of
Somalia and the federal member states, have shown
their commitment to the election process. In view of
recent developments reflecting disagreement within
the Somali Government, the ongoing elections to the

Lastly, the delays in holding the elections have
enabled Al-Shabaab to consolidate its hold and
further gain ground. The recent attacks carried out
by Al-Shabaab demonstrate that trend. We strongly
condemn the 25 September Al-Shabaab terrorist
attacks. We also share some of the concerns and points
outlined by the Permanent Representative of Kenya with
regard to Al-Shabaab. We reiterate our full support to
the operations conducted by the Somali forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia against Al-Shabaab.
We cannot afford to lose sight of our fight against
terrorism while we focus on the ongoing elections.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Ms. Dini for their insightful briefings.
We are encouraged by Deputy Secretary-General’s
recent visit to Somalia to support the role of women
worldwide, particularly in Somalia. Amid myriad
challenges faced by Somalia, the visit played an
important role in facilitating the electoral process in
the country. It also helped highlight notable progress
in the participation and representation of women in the
political and peace process in Somalia. It is encouraging
to learn about positive results from various projects that
have provided valuable supports for women in Somalia.
We also welcome the engagement by leaders of Somalia
in those efforts. It is all the more heartening given that
attempts to promote broader participation of women in
various countries, not least Somalia, continue to face
considerable headwinds, including on the political,
social and cultural fronts.
With regard to numerous issues going forward, we
would like to stress several points.
First, as the Deputy Secretary-General highlighted,
parliamentary elections are an opportunity to build on
the progress made in women’s political participation and

21-2671011/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

to contribute to greater resilience, peace and stability
in Somalia. However, much remains to be done. We
urge the Government of Somalia and related parties to
create conditions for women to participate in political
life. The 30 per cent quota representation of women
in the Parliament should be guaranteed. A specific
mechanism for implementing that criterion should also
be agreed upon. Long-term peace and prosperity in
Somalia depend on it.
We would also like to reiterate the need for continued
international support for women’s full inclusion in all
sectors of society, especially in the upcoming elections.
It is also important to create a favourable environment
and to step up protection measures for civilians in the
electoral process. The preparations for the upcoming
elections should be addressed from both the protection
and participation angles. Adequate institutionalization
of the role of women in this process will help bring
about long-term inclusions of women in political,
security and socioeconomic mechanisms.
Secondly, we strongly condemn the egregious
sexual violence and attacks, including those against
civilians, especially women and children. Recently,
on 25 September, terrorist attacks took the lives of
at least eight people, including Hibaq Abukar, the
Advisor for Women’s Affairs and Human Rights in the
Office of the Prime Minister, a person, the SecretaryGeneral said, who was a tireless advocate for women’s
rights in Somalia. We would like to express our deep
condolences to the families of the victims and urge that
the perpetrators of the violence be brought to justice.
Thirdly, Somalia continues to face a number of
long-standing thread and challenges, including desert
locusts, floods and the coronavirus disease pandemic.
It goes without saying that women and girls will be
among those who suffer most. In this regard, we call on
international partners to further assist the Government
of Somalia in evaluating the socioeconomic impacts
of these threats, especially the development of
women-owned projects. This must go hand in hand
with addressing the deep-rooted economic issues
facing Somalia, especially in the area of agricultural
development. Only with such assistance can the
Government and the people of Somalia overcome longterm challenges and try to achieve sustained stability
and security.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to
various United Nations agencies, especially the Office
12/16

28/09/2021

of the Deputy Secretary-General, UN-Women and
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, for
their commitment to peace and development in the
country, and especially to the future of and for the
women of Somalia. We reiterate our full support for the
international community’s efforts aimed at ensuring
that the voices of women are heard, that their needs
and concerns are addressed and that the roles they play
and the contributions they make in bringing peace and
stability to Somalia are both enhanced and recognized.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed for being
with us today. I also thank Ms. Shukria Dini for her
comments and recommendations.
The United States acknowledges with gratitude the
civilian and uniformed personnel working in Somalia
to serve the international community in an extremely
challenging environment. We would also like to extend
our appreciation to Ireland and Mexico as Chairs of
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security of the Security Council.
We welcome the considerable progress that has
been made on elections in Somalia over the past three
months, yet it is imperative that the current dispute
between the President and Prime Minister not disrupt
the process and that it be resolved peacefully. Moreover,
as Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed highlighted
today, there remain aspects of the process requiring
continued focus and attention.
Because women are often the victims of
discrimination and oppression, it is vital that their voices
are heard at the highest levels of Government. This is
why it is critical to finalize arrangements for meeting
the 30 per cent quota for women’s representation in
Parliament, pursuant to Somali political agreements.
As Ireland and Mexico outlined in the annex to their
19 July letter to the Secretary-General (S/2021/668),
women active in the political system are more likely
than men to experience harassment and violence during
the electoral period. In the past, women candidates
have even been kidnapped and killed. Efforts aimed at
promoting inclusion and participation should include
completing election security preparations with a
gender-sensitive lens to ensure voting can take place in
a safe and secure environment.
We know societies that empower women are more
stable, peaceful and prosperous, both economically
and politically. The United States is actively engaged
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

with partners across the globe in supporting efforts to
aimed at advancing women’s participation in political
and security decision-making. We call on all States
Members of the United Nations to adopt and implement
national action plans and strategies on women, peace
and security. Together we must make it a priority to
elevate and amplify women’s voices, ensure they are
heard, protect the safety and security of women and
girls, and make certain that they can lead meaningfully
in promoting international peace and security. The
world is safer and more prosperous when women and
girls are at the table, supported and heard.
As we noted in August, during consideration of
the mandate reauthorization of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, this is a moment of
tremendous opportunity for Somalia (see S/PV.8833),
and we urge the Government to do its utmost to adhere to
established electoral timelines and continue promoting
cooperation between the Federal Government of
Somalia and the federal member states. Despite
encouraging signs, much more work needs to be done
to make a peaceful, prosperous and democratic Somalia
a reality for all of Somalia’s people.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Amina Mohammed and Ms. Shukria Dini, for
their briefings, which have given us an insight into
the involvement of women in the political process
in Somalia.
We offer our condolences to the families of the
victims, the people and the Government of Somalia
following the latest deadly attack. We wish to express
our concern about the forms of violence directed
against women.
We welcome the positive progress in the
implementation of the quota for women in the most
recent elections. We encourage and urge Somali leaders
and political actors to do more to achieve the 30 percent
quota for women in future elections.
It is clear that the ongoing electoral process is a
catalyst for the improvement of the condition of women
in Somalia, including their political, administrative and
economic involvement, which is why the international
community in general and the Security Council in
particular are interested in ensuring that the electoral
process is inclusive and participatory.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Before I begin my formal remarks, I would

S/PV. 8867

like to extend the condolences of my country, Mexico,
to all the families who suffered losses in the Al-Shabaab
terrorist attack in Mogadishu a few days ago.
I welcome Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed to the Council Chamber today and
thank her for her briefing. I also welcome and thank
Ms. Shukria Dini.
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed’s recent
visit to Somalia was an opportunity not only for a
timely expression of support to thousands of women
in the country, but also a reminder of the international
community’s ongoing follow-up to its commitments in
this area.
We consider today’s briefing to be a great
complement to the work of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security of the Security
Council as regards the situation in Somalia. As we
have previously stated in the Council, the future of
Somalia depends on the full and equal meaningful
participation of women in the political process and
other spheres of public life. Women’s involvement
is indispensable to achieving sustainable peace and
development. Accordingly, we stress the importance of
intensifying the efforts aimed at fulfilling the Somalis’
own commitment to achieving at least 30 percent
representation of women.
We also continue to advocate truly inclusive
elections. It is of concern to my country that no
federated state has so far achieved the 30 percent quota
in the Upper House elections. In addition to financial
constraints, candidates face a number of challenges,
including security challenges, fear and intimidation.
It is imperative to strengthen protection for
women candidates so as to ensure their participation
in the electoral process. It is equally important that
recently elected women be provided with the support
and resources necessary to carry out their legislative
functions effectively and without fear.
Mexico condemns all forms of violence against
women and threats to their security. Protecting them
against all forms of violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence and discrimination, must be a
priority. Of equal importance are the finalization of the
national action plan on women and peace and security,
ratifying and fully implementing the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and adopting laws to criminalize

21-2671013/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

sexual and gender-based violence, including female
genital mutilation, marital rape and child marriage.
The formation of the new Parliament represents an
opportunity to reintroduce the 2018 Sexual Offences
Bill and establish a zero-tolerance policy on female
genital mutilation, among others.
Similarly, my country calls on the Somali
Government to fulfil its commitments on gender
mainstreaming in security sector institutions. More
must also be done to ensure women’s access to equal
educational and employment opportunities. For its part,
the international community must support the Federal
Government of Somalia in strengthening its capacities,
not only with regard to ensuring the electoral process,
but also the investigation and prosecution of sexual and
gender-based violence.
Lastly, concerning recent political developments,
we reiterate the importance of resolving differences
through dialogue for the benefit of Somalia and
prioritizing the peaceful holding of transparent,
credible and inclusive elections. Discord among key
political voices must not be allowed to jeopardize the
gains made in the country.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): We thank you, Madam President, for
convening this very timely meeting. We fully support
the inclusion of the women and peace and security
agenda in all country-specific discussions. We believe
that this cross-cutting approach is crucial to the
implementation of the normative framework of the
Security Council’s resolutions. I thank in particular
the Deputy Secretary-General for her presence among
us and for taking the initiative to call for this meeting
upon her return from her mission to East Africa. I also
thank Ms. Dini for having brought the voices of Somali
women to this forum.
We share the concerns and the recommendations
that were voiced. The increase in sexual and genderbased violence is unacceptable. Those responsible for
the violence must be held accountable for their actions.
Moreover, we also call for the imposition of sanctions on
the perpetrators of those violations in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. The feminist
diplomacy that is being pursued by France prioritizes
the universal implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. That was the overarching purpose
the Generation Equality Forum, which was held in Paris
and co-organized with UN-Women and Mexico in June.
14/16

28/09/2021

The Forum has launched a mechanism to monitor
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, entitled “Compact on Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action”, 20 years
after the historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
that inaugurated the agenda. At the Forum, States
committed themselves to ensuring the full and equal
participation of women in all relevant spheres.
That is especially urgent in Somalia. Change must
occur in all areas of society. Today, as several of my
colleagues have recalled, almost one in three girls in
Somalia has undergone female genital mutilation. One
in twelve girls is married before the age of 15. France
urges Somalia to uphold its international and regional
commitments by adopting appropriate legislation for
the protection of women and girls and to prosecute,
convict and punish the perpetrators of all acts of sexual
and gender-based violence.
It is obvious that the awakening of political power
and the awareness of the imperative, legitimate and
fair inclusion of half of the population in the decisions
concerning the future of the country will be facilitated
when the quota of 30 per cent for the parliamentary
representation of women is fulfilled. Today’s meeting
also reminds us of the cost of inaction. The current
political crisis is paralysing Somalia. As is often the
case, women are being disproportionately affected.
Elections must be held without delay in accordance
with the September 2020 and May 2021 agreements,
as the Council recalled on 18 September. The Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member
states must work together to ensure that the electoral
deadlines are met.
Finally, there is an urgent need to address the
security situation. As my Kenyan colleague recalled, the
presence of Al-Shabaab in a large part of Somalia poses
a constant threat to all Somalis, especially women, who
are victims of violence and forced marriage. We must
pursue our efforts to combat that group. The Somali
transition plan must be fully implemented, with the
support of all Somalia’s regional and international
partners. As provided for in resolution 2568 (2021), the
fight also includes the establishment of a reconfigured
African Union mission beginning in 2022.
France commends the work of the United Nations
in Somalia and the courage of all civil society actors
who are working daily on the ground to defend the
rights of Somali women.
21-26710

28/09/2021

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing and
undertaking her visit to draw attention to the importance
of women’s political participation. I would also like to
sincerely thank Ms. Dini for sharing her insights.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the ongoing
disagreement between President Farmajo and Prime
Minister Roble. We urge all parties to avoid actions
that could lead to violence, resolve their differences
urgently through dialogue and prioritize the peaceful
holding of transparent, credible and inclusive elections
within the agreed timelines. Successfully completing
elections is the only way through which broader
State-building efforts can continue, and therefore it
must remain a priority.
Since the elections lay the foundation for the
next chapter for Somalia, the importance of women’s
participation cannot be overemphasized. Therefore, we
call on Somali leaders to live up to their commitment to
ensuring the implementation of the 30 per cent quota of
women in the elections in order to safeguard women’s
political representation.
We also see the need to do more to advance
women’s rights in society more broadly. Estonia is
alarmed by the increase of sexual and gender-based
violence. Too many Somali women and children remain
trapped in a cycle of violence, and that requires the
urgent attention of Somali authorities. Estonia calls on
the Federal Government to accelerate the adoption of
a new national action plan for ending sexual violence
in conflict. It is also crucial that women’s rights be
codified in the revised constitution and other legal
frameworks. Greater resilience, peace and stability in
Somalia can be achieved only through the full inclusion
of women in all sectors of society.
In order to provide a better life not only for Somali
women, but all Somali people, defeating Al-Shabaab
must remain a priority for the Government. In that
regard, we call on the Federal Government to accelerate
the implementation of the Somali transition plan to
make a liberated Somalia a reality.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Estonia’s full
support for Somalia and its people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
leadership in general, but in particular today in

S/PV. 8867

supporting women’s political participation in Somalia.
I also sincerely thank Ms. Dini for joining us today. I
know that the Irish Foreign Minister greatly appreciated
her insights when she met with him in Mogadishu
in July. I was particularly struck by her heartfelt
presentation today.
I express my deep condolences to the families
of the victims of the attacks this weekend, including
Ms. Abukar, whose death is truly a tragic reminder of
the toll that Somalia’s conflicts continue to extract from
the women of Somalia, including those courageously
working for change.
Let us be clear: the world over, there is a direct
correlation between the political participation of women
and the stability, peace and prosperity of their societies.
Women’s participation in every aspect of public life
is a sine qua non for sustained peace and security. In
Somalia, the upcoming national elections represent an
opportunity to build on progress already made and to
see women assume their rightful place at the helm of
their society.
Encouraging, in 2019, the landmark Somalia
Women’s Charter set a target for women’s participation
in all aspects of Somali public life at 50 per cent. The
leaders of the Federal Government and federal member
states took the next steps towards that goal when they
recommitted to the 30 per cent quota for women’s
representation for the upcoming parliamentary
elections. The measures subsequently taken to reduce
registration fees for women candidates, appoint
goodwill ambassadors to advocate for greater women’s
inclusion and to enhance security arrangements for
women candidates were also very welcome as practical
steps to bolter that effort.
However, just over a month ago in this very
Chamber, we heard from our civil society sister,
Ms. Gaballe, that a concrete mechanism to implement
the 30 per cent quota “remains elusive and challenging”
(S/PV.8833, p.7). I urge Somalia’s leaders to take further
measures to translate their commitments into practice,
including by reserving 30 per cent of the seats in both
houses of Parliament for women.
We continue to receive reports that women political
candidates are held back by insecurity and intimidation.
That cannot stand. The Somali Government must do
everything in its power to create a safe environment
for all women candidates. I encourage all stakeholders
to adopt a holistic approach to empowering women,

21-2671015/16

S/PV.8867

The situation in Somalia

including by providing post-election support to newly
elected women parliamentarians to facilitate their
fulfilling their legislative role.
I am deeply alarmed at the shocking increases
in sexual and gender-based violence and in conflictrelated sexual violence, as outlined by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten
recently. During his visit to Somalia in July, Ireland’s
Foreign Minister heard first-hand from women civil
society leaders working both to provide protection to
survivors and to challenge the conditions that allow
that violence to flourish. I urge the Somali authorities
to take immediate steps to protect women and girls
from all forms of violence, including sexual and
gender-based violence. I also call on Somali authorities
to immediately carry out a credible investigation into
the disappearance of Ms. Ikran Tahlil.

16/16

28/09/2021

The political participation of women and their
protection from violence go hand in hand. Only by
tackling gender inequality, including through the
political participation of women, will we be able to
root out gender-based violence. At this crucial moment
for Somalia’s political future, I believe the Somali
leadership has the courage to set aside differences and to
put the people of Somalia first. We cannot allow further
delays in the electoral process. I urge Somalia’s leaders
to urgently implement the electoral process, including,
importantly, the 30 per cent women’s quota. Somalia’s
people — Somalia’s women — deserve no less.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

21-26710
