S/PV.8515

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8515th meeting

Wednesday, 24 April 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Goolab
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/321)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-11869 (E)
*1911869*

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/321)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/321, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: In eight years of conflict, Syrians
have lived through a litany of horrors. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been killed, many more
maimed physically and psychologically, and Syrians in
the north-east and north-west remain in constant fear of
yet another humanitarian catastrophe unfolding. Today,
more than eight in ten people live below the poverty
line and nearly 12 million people in Syria continue to
depend on humanitarian assistance.
I would like to highlight three key areas of concern.
First, on Idlib, where an escalation of hostilities
since February is reportedly causing civilian deaths
and injuries, as well as significant destruction of
civilian infrastructure. Since February, well over 200
civilians have reportedly been killed as a direct result
2/21

24/04/2019

of increased military clashes and attacks, with many
more injured. Fighting has also caused more than
120,000 people to flee to areas closer to the Turkish
border. Civilian structures — particularly schools and
hospitals — continue to be hit. There were 11 attacks on
schools in February and March alone, and we have heard
reports that, on Monday, two schools were impacted by
air strikes, resulting in three children being killed. In
addition, many schools in the area have been shuttered
indefinitely due to the hostilities.
We count on all parties, especially Turkey and the
Russian Federation, as guarantors of the de-escalation
agreement, to rein in the current escalation and
press all parties to the full implementation of the
17 September 2018 memorandum of understanding. In
addition, it is as critical as ever for all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and take all feasible
precautions to avoid and minimize civilian harm. As
the Secretary-General has said many times before, any
large-scale military offensive in Idlib would come at
an unacceptable cost in terms of loss of human lives
and suffering.
Across north-western Syria, an estimated
2.7 million people remain in need of humanitarian
assistance, including more than 1 million children.
This includes 1.7 million internally displaced persons,
many of whom have been displaced multiple times
and have been living in camps for years. Some 40 per
cent of children are out of school. Two million people
rely on water trucking for most of their clean water.
Humanitarian partners continue to respond to evolving
needs, with thousands of those most recently displaced
receiving food and other assistance. Each month, some
1.7 million Syrians are reached with critical assistance
through cross-border operations out of Turkey. Ensuring
this sustained humanitarian access is critical.
Secondly, I would like to highlight the situation in
Al-Hol camp. We have frequently reported to the Council
about the plight of those tens of thousands of civilians
at the Al-Hol camp, 92 per cent of whom are women
and children. Most have been exposed to violence and
trauma under the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
They are now living in extremely difficult conditions
in which they face a range of protection challenges
and an uncertain and disconcerting fate. This includes
the risk of being denied repatriation, rehabilitation
and re-integration or a fair trial, or even the risk of
becoming stateless, despite having citizenship or a
claim to citizenship. It also includes family separation
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8515

and not knowing the whereabouts of family members,
given the notable absence of adult males and adolescent
boys over the age of 15 in the camp.

the necessary assessments, obtain relevant security
assurances and finalize logistical arrangements for the
convoy to proceed in the coming period.

All children, including those suspected of being
associated with armed groups or terrorist groups,
are entitled to special care and protection under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. They must be treated first and
foremost as victims. Solutions for foreign nationals
need to be urgently found, and we call on all Member
States to take all measures necessary to ensure that their
nationals are repatriated for the purposes of prosecution,
rehabilitation and/or reintegration, as appropriate, and
in line with international law and standards.

My third and final point will be on Rukban. As
Council members may know, over 7,000 people have
left the site in recent weeks, including nearly 2,000 just
yesterday. Those who have already left organized their
own transportation to the 55-kilometre border area,
from where they have been transported to four collective
shelters in Homs governorate through a combination of
private and Government vehicles. Many are quickly
leaving the shelters to stay with relatives in towns in
eastern Homs governorate. Some people — mostly
men — remain in the shelters for a longer period while
they settle their status with the authorities.

The camp at Al-Hol currently hosts more than
73,000 civilians. Almost two-thirds of them — twothirds — are children under the age of 12. Approximately
43 per cent of the camp population are Syrians, 42 per
cent are Iraqis and 15 per cent are foreign nationals.
There are 458 unaccompanied and separated children,
including 121 who remain in interim care centres
awaiting family tracing and reunification. The
humanitarian community in Syria is ensuring that
all those in need at the camp receive humanitarian
assistance, without discrimination and in accordance
with humanitarian principles. This includes assistance
to the foreign nationals in the annex part of the camp.
However, access to the annex remains constrained,
particularly for health, nutrition and protection
partners, who require a permanent presence inside the
annex in order to provide continued care and services.

Colleagues in Damascus have reiterated the United
Nations willingness to be directly involved to ensure
that core protection standards are met and movements
are conducted in a voluntary, safe, well-informed
and dignified manner. Today, our teams accessed
the shelters for the first time. The United Nations is
ready to engage further, but we must be fully engaged,
from start to finish. We continue to advocate for full,
unimpeded and sustained access to shelters, as well as
areas of origin and destination, and to people en route, in
order to be able to adequately support the humanitarian
needs of those leaving Rukban.

The United Nations also continues to advocate
with the Syrian authorities for the deployment of surge
staff from Damascus to support the teams operating in
north-eastern Syria, who have now been responding
uninterruptedly to successive crises for the past
many months.
Further south, in Deir ez-Zor governorate, an
estimated 150,000 people along seven villages between
Hajin and Al-Susah, east of the Euphrates river, are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance. The Syrian
authorities recently approved the deployment of an
inter-agency convoy to the area to bring assistance
for up to 50,000 people as a first step. Aside from the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy deployed earlier in
the year, this would be the first inter-agency convoy
to reach the area. Preparations are ongoing to conduct

While efforts to pursue durable solutions — guided
by the needs, rights, security and dignity of the people
in Rukban and based on their informed and voluntary
choice — are under way, additional and sustained
assistance for those who remain in Rukban is just
as necessary. Food, medicines and other life-saving
supplies delivered in February are running out.
The United Nations has requested access to provide
life-saving assistance, but on Monday was informed by
the authorities that such a convoy would not be possible.
People are exhausted. The number of children who
have reportedly died at the settlement from preventable
causes since January now stands at more than a dozen.
The deployment of a third humanitarian convoy to
Rukban remains urgent if we are to avoid the deaths of
more innocent children.
As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
Syrian people have suffered a litany of horrors. Among
those people who have suffered the most — and are
still suffering today — are those with disabilities.
Those disabled before the start of the crisis often

19-118693/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

face heightened challenges, and many more who
have become disabled as civilians have been heavily
impacted through years of conflict, including those
injured due to explosive remnants of war.
In these settings, persons with disabilities are often
excluded and highly vulnerable. Many lack access to
health care and education, and experience difficulties
in meeting their basic needs. They also face specific
protection and psychosocial challenges, including
heightened risk of violence and abuse. We must do our
utmost to support and protect persons with disabilities
and to ensure that their specific and diverse needs are
addressed, including by ensuring the accessibility of
activities and services, the training of staff and the
collection of disaggregated data.
We — and I include the important role of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in this — must do more to include persons with
disabilities in our work, making sure that they, and
their representative organizations, take an active part at
every step of planning and decision-making processes.
Nujeen Mustapha, whom I had the pleasure of meeting
yesterday, will speak in just a moment. She is an
incredible advocate not just for those with disabilities
in Syria, but for all those with disabilities in conflict
settings, for women and for young people. She is an
advocate for inclusive humanitarian action, and she is
carrying with her an important message that we will all
benefit from hearing.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mustapha.
Ms. Mustapha: My name is Nujeen Mustapha. I am
a 20-year-old Kurdish girl from Aleppo, Syria. I have
cerebral palsy and use a wheelchair to move around. It
is a privilege today to share with the Security Council
my insights on the humanitarian situation for people
with disabilities in Syria.
I will start by posing a question. What does it
mean to be a person with a disability in Syria? For me,
it meant not being able to go to school, hang out with
friends or go to the cinema. It was almost like house
arrest. Having a disability in Syria means that you are
hidden away, confronted by discrimination, and that
you are pitied. I was fortunate, however. My family was
very supportive and I did not have any fears until the
war broke out. I quickly realized that I was the main
obstacle standing in the way of my safety for my family.
4/21

24/04/2019

We lived in a tall building with no lift. If we needed to
evacuate, I would need to be carried down five flights
of stairs.
For weeks, I heard military helicopters buzzing
over our neighbourhood, ready to drop bombs at any
moment. My mother would carry me to the bathroom
and stay with me there until the bombs passed. Every
day, we would hear of relatives and friends who had
been killed. Every day, buildings in our neighbourhood
were bombed and people left trapped beneath the ruins.
Every day, I feared that I could be the reason my family
was one or two seconds too late. My brother even
called us the “walking dead”. It took the bombing of a
funeral in June 2015, where some of my relatives died,
to convince our family that we needed to flee our home
and leave our home and everything we knew behind.
In Syria, I did not have a wheelchair, so I had to
be carried out of the country by my siblings, but many
people with disabilities cannot depend on their families
to help them reach safety, often because their family
members have been killed or have already left. Being a
woman and having a disability makes it doubly difficult.
For example, a man can ask for help from a male friend,
but in a society like Syria’s a woman cannot do that.
She cannot just ask a male friend to carry her.
While living in a country at war is daunting for
anyone, it is particularly challenging for someone with
a disability. The support system on which people with
disabilities rely breaks down in conflict situations,
leaving them with a higher risk of exposure to violence
and making it more difficult for them to get assistance,
especially if they are women.
Many people with disabilities have developed
different tricks for coping with daily life. For example,
I had my independence at my home in Aleppo. I could
easily reach my bed or the toilet, gracefully managing
the two steps up, without anyone’s assistance. A
blind person may know how to manage in her own
environment, but can Council members imagine what
it must be like to navigate rubble and debris strewn
across her path to safety? Someone who is deaf may not
realize that there are gunshots or warnings to evacuate
and may end up in danger. If one has an intellectual or a
psychological disability, leaving what is familiar behind
can be very confusing and a source of great anxiety.
However one looks at it, one is at greater risk
just because one has a disability. That is why it is so
important and heartening that members of the Security
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Council are taking the time to listen to the perspective
of a young woman with a disability from Syria. But this
is not just my story — it is the experience of thousands
of Syrians with disabilities, who struggle to survive
because of the limited services still functioning in
the country, the lack of accessibility and the constant
threat of violence, especially against women and
girls. And if one becomes disabled as a result of the
conflict — according to UNICEF, there are 1.5 million
such persons still living in Syria — one faces stigma and
exclusion within one’s community and one suddenly
finds oneself having to deal with having a disability.
I would like to leave Security Council members
with three insights.
First, the crisis in Syria has a disproportionately
high impact on people with disabilities. The use of
landmines and cluster bombs has had devastating
human consequences. Thousands of Syrians have lost
their limbs to those dreadful weapons, which have
rightly been banned by most Governments because of
the immense harm they do to civilians. The conflict has
had a significant psychological impact, too. Even in my
case, I still jump when I hear a loud noise, a reminder
of those hours hiding out in the bathroom.
In the current situation in Idlib, there are more than
175,000 people with disabilities, many of whom now
have disabilities because of the conflict. Residents fear
military action because it could result in large numbers
of civilian casualties since Idlib is densely populated.
The Council cannot allow Idlib to be another Aleppo,
with hundreds of thousands forced to flee. Half of the
people living in Idlib have already been displaced by
war, like my family, except that this time they do not
have anywhere to go.
All humanitarian programmes — many of which
are funded by Governments represented around this
table — should include specific programmes to reach
people with disabilities to ensure that they can get things
like health services, assistive devices and psychological
support, which are essential for people with disabilities
to feel like they are a part of their communities and
recover some sense of normalcy.
Secondly, the well-being of people with disabilities,
like the well-being of women and girls, seems to be an
afterthought. The humanitarian response in Syria and
neighbouring countries largely overlooks the needs of
people with disabilities. Independent organizations like
Human Rights Watch have documented that people

S/PV. 8515

with disabilities cannot even access basic services such
as sanitation, health care and education — something I
myself experienced when I fled. On my way to Germany,
I did not find many accessible bathrooms along the
way — and that is especially hard for a woman.
There is very little data on how many people with
disabilities live in Syria or have fled to neighbouring
countries and what our needs are. And without that
data, the programmes and policies just do not meet our
needs. We are invisible. People with disabilities are
forgotten in times of peace. What do Council members
think we expect in times of war? But that does not make
it right. The international community needs to count
us, because we count too. United Nations agencies and
humanitarian non-governmental organizations need to
systematically collect data categorized by disability,
age and gender and to monitor and report on people with
disabilities so that Council members can understand
the full impact the conflict has on us. Otherwise, we
will continue to remain invisible.
The Security Council’s job is to protect all civilians,
including people with disabilities. “No one left behind”
should not just be words that members say.
Thirdly, people with disabilities are a resource,
not a burden. We know best what risks we face and
what we need, so ask for our input, involve us in
aid planning and reach out to us to report on the
challenges we face — nothing about us, without us.
That means ensuring the meaningful participation and
representation of people with disabilities, including
women and organizations of people with disabilities, in
all parts of the Security Council’s work. I might be the
first person with a disability to address the Council, but
I hope I will not be the last.
This should not be just another meeting where we
make grand statements and then move on to the next
item on the agenda. Council members can and should
do more to ensure that people with disabilities are
included in all aspects of their work. We cannot wait
any longer. I understand that there are many competing
priorities in this conflict and in the response to it, but
the Council needs to address the needs of people with
disabilities, particularly women. That is not a favour.
That is not charity. That is our right.
I am very grateful for the chance to brief the
Council today. My hope is that people with disabilities,
especially women and girls, can one day live in a world
that protects, respects and values us.

19-118695/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I thank Ms. Mustapha for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I will deliver this statement
on behalf of the three co-penholders: Belgium, Germany
and Kuwait. Let me thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Ursula Mueller for her valuable briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We would like to
extend our heartfelt gratitude and deep respect to all
humanitarian and medical workers throughout Syria, in
the region and at Headquarters for their tireless efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for sharing her story with us.
Her optimism and bravery in facing the challenges she
has encountered is inspiring, and she has reminded the
Security Council of the struggles that young refugees
face, especially those with disabilities. It is important
that the Council does not lose sight of the perspective of
the people living through the conflict. It was therefore
important that she could be with us today to share her
experiences. I would like to assure her that she will
never be invisible to us and the State of Kuwait.
Nujeen’s story is just one of millions of stories of
Syrian civilians who have been affected by the conflict,
which has entered its ninth year. It is one of the worst
conflicts of our time. The humanitarian situation in
Syria today remains dire, with nearly 12 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. The
past few months have seen some worrying humanitarian
trends, as we heard some moments ago from Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller.
We are extremely worried by the recent spike in
aerial bombardments and shelling in north-western
Syria, which has affected the civilian population,
forcing the displacement of more than 100,000 civilians
since February. That escalation contributes to a further
deterioration of the already catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the north-western de-escalation zone.
Many civilians have also been killed and injured in
north-eastern Syria. We strongly condemn the loss
of civilian lives as a result of the recent escalation of
violence, and we remind all parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We recall resolutions 2286 (2016) and
2427 (2018), which condemn attacks on hospitals
6/21

24/04/2019

and schools, respectively. Abuses against civilians
in times of conflict are a clear and indisputable
breach of international humanitarian law and remain
completely unacceptable.
The fight against terrorism must not impede
principled humanitarian action. We reiterate our
call for the sustained implementation of the RussiaTurkey memorandum of understanding in Idlib. We
also reiterate our call for a nationwide cessation of
hostilities, in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).
The situation in the Al-Hol camp is of great
concern. The camp’s population has increased rapidly
from around 10,000 people in December to more than
70,000 this month. Ninety-two per cent of the residents
of the camp are women and children, many of whom
have been exposed to violence and trauma under Da’esh
and are now living in conditions where they face a range
of protection concerns. The special needs of the most
vulnerable, including the elderly and disabled, must be
urgently addressed. We call on all parties to the conflict
to allow sustained access to displaced people. The
United Nations and its partners must be in a position
to provide needs-based humanitarian assistance to
all people in need without delay, discrimination or
bureaucratic impediments.
In Rukban, almost 40,000 people remain in the
settlement. There is a need for more durable solutions for
the people of the settlement through collective efforts
and arrangements in coordination with the United
Nations. We stress that all movements of the residents
of the camp must be voluntary, safe, dignified and wellinformed. In parallel, we also strongly advocate for the
continued sustained humanitarian access to Rukban
until a lasting durable solution is reached. That is a
matter of great importance, especially as the assistance
delivered to the settlement by the humanitarian aid
convoy in February is running out.
In Hajin, there are reports of shortages of basic
commodities and a lack of basic services, particularly
health services and access to safe and clean water.
Furthermore, unexploded ordnances are rife in the area,
posing a serious protection risk for civilians. Access to
Hajin should be prioritized.
Syria has witnessed some of the most serious
crimes under international law since the conflict began.
Accountability must be ensured for those who have
committed violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We stand firm
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in our commitment to fight impunity. In that context,
we renew our support for the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
With regard to refugees, we would like to reiterate
that any return of refugees must be safe, voluntary and
dignified. Measures such as arbitrary detention and
expropriation, to name just two, hinder any efforts that
would allow Syrians to return. We also reject attempts
to make demographic changes in Syria.
A month following the successful third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria, we, as
penholders, reiterate our commitment to delivering on
our pledges announced at the Conference to support the
Syria humanitarian response. We kindly ask all donors
to make their funding available as soon as possible.
Lastly, the penholders would like to emphasize
the importance of ensuring humanitarian access by
all parties to the conflict throughout Syria, including
areas where the control changed. Humanitarian access
must be provided in an unconditional, safe, timely,
unhindered and sustained manner. We remind all
parties to the conflict of resolution 2449 (2018) on
humanitarian access and cross-border assistance,
adopted more than four months ago, which calls upon
all parties to ensure principled, sustained and improved
humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2019. It is high time
for all parties to the conflict to live up to that obligation
and to do more to ensure sustained quality access to all
in need throughout Syria.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): During
the Arria Formula meeting on the situation of persons
with disabilities in armed conflict, held in December
2018, the United States made a commitment to raise the
situation of persons with disabilities more systemically
in the Security Council. We are very pleased to see the
Council do that today. We want to thank Ms. Mustapha
for sharing her story and her perspectives and for
ensuring that Syrians with disabilities will never
be invisible to the Council. For our part, the United
States will continue to advocate for the needs of
persons with disabilities when planning, coordinating
and implementing humanitarian assistance in Syria
and elsewhere.
Numerous United Nations reports detail the
Al-Assad regime’s systemic, barbaric use of arbitrary
detentions against hundreds of thousands of Syrian
civilians. The United States will continue to work
towards accountability and justice for those who

S/PV. 8515

have been arbitrarily or unlawfully detained and for
missing persons in Syria. That will be necessary as
the political transition in Syria moves forward under
the leadership of Special Envoy Pedersen in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The United States strongly supports a third United
Nations-led humanitarian convoy to the Rukban
internally displaced persons camp. Unfortunately,
as we have heard, the Al-Assad regime has denied
the United Nations request. We also understand that
commercial traffic into the encampment is blocked.
It is unacceptable to starve the Rukban residents
into submission. The United States condemns any
attempt to prevent the United Nations from delivering
humanitarian aid. As the residents of Rukban prepare
for the holy month of Ramadan, we call on Moscow to
ensure Damascus’s agreement to provide humanitarian
assistance to Rukban immediately and to stop blocking
commercial traffic into the encampment.
Recent discussions among the humanitarian
community and in the press have once again shined
a light on the issue of cross-border assistance. Crossborder assistance remains a critical lifeline for more
than 11 million people inside Syria. The Security
Council must remain united in its support for the
full implementation of the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism authorized by resolution 2449 (2018) in
December 2018. The United States is deeply concerned
about recent attempts by Russia and China in the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly to politicize
and undermine the Security Council’s unanimous
authorization of cross-border humanitarian operations
by proposing cuts to the mechanism’s operational costs.
Those attempts are at odds with the vital necessity of
United Nations cross-border humanitarian aid to the
Syrian people.
The United States calls on all Council members, as
well as its regional partners, to ensure that the United
Nations has the operational capacity to implement
cross-border aid deliveries through all agreed border
crossings, in accordance with resolution 2449 (2018).
No one should politicize or try to dictate United Nations
operations for cross-border aid delivery in Syria — not
the Al-Assad regime, not the Russian Federation, no
one. The Al-Assad regime continues to prioritize
the provision of humanitarian assistance, including
cross-border assistance, only to areas controlled by
regime forces. Yet even areas under regime control,
like Quneitra and Dara’a governorates in south-

19-118697/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

west Syria, are struggling and reliant on approvals
that are purposefully delayed by regime officials
in Damascus. Those delays of regime approvals for
routine humanitarian access requests underscore the
importance of cross-border operations to continue
unimpeded from all four border crossings, including
the Al-Ramtha crossing from Jordan, which represents
a direct route to reach the hundreds of thousands in
need in south-west Syria.
The United States remains committed to the
guiding principles for the voluntary and safe return
of IDPs and refugees in dignity. They should return
only at a time of their choosing. They should be able to
choose where they go. They should have access to the
proper civil documentation necessary for the exercise
of their legal rights. They should be able to reclaim
their property and, when that is not possible, be given
appropriate compensation; and they should be free
from fear that they will be victims of disappearances,
unlawful detention or forced conscription.
Finally, the United States is alarmed by the surge
this month in Russian and regime air strikes in Idlib
governorate that have killed scores and displaced more
than 110,000 people. The United States position on Idlib
is clear. The September 2018 Russian-Turkish-brokered
ceasefire must hold. Any military escalation, including
any use of chemical weapons by the regime and its
allies in Idlib, would be catastrophic for the millions of
people there and for the stability of Syria’s neighbours
and the broader region.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Ms. Mueller for
providing us with an up-to-date overview of the
assistance being provided in the various areas of Syria,
as well as the main concerns and difficulties on which
the Council must focus and work together so that it
can play the meaningful role with which it has been
charged, without divisiveness.
We were particularly touched today by the
incredible story of the young woman present among
us — Ms. Nujeen Mustapha — which once again
demonstrates the immense strength and resilience of
persons living with disabilities. Her perspective has
undoubtedly had a profound impact on us, and we are
grateful for her courage, openness and sincerity with
which she told us her story.
8/21

24/04/2019

In all honesty, following the testimony that Nujeen
shared with us, I do not believe that any of us could
possibly hope to add anything new or insightful to
the discussion. Thanks to her participation in today’s
meeting, I will take away several powerful messages,
including the fact that the dramatic plight of a person
on the long road to better living conditions can be
understood only when we hear what it means in her
own words, and that, in addressing that issue, we can
never lose sight of her concerns and point of view. Her
participation here has accentuated the need for the
Council to continue to open its doors to people like her,
who give a voice to those lacking one and who remind
us that, beyond the statistics and numbers, there are
millions of human stories. For my delegation, and me
in particular, that requires our serious commitment
to keeping the human aspect at the centre of the
deliberations of the Council and to working to find a
peaceful, credible, inclusive and definitive solution
to this conflict. In that perspective, I should like very
briefly to raise the following points.
Syrian civilians, especially women and girls,
continue to feel the effects of the conflict. The virtual
collapse of basic services, the rule of law and the loss
of civil documentation threaten their security and
access to health services. It is therefore necessary to
establish coordination mechanisms to provide care for
Syrian women, thereby contributing to the long-term
comprehensive health of the entire population.
The Dominican Republic is deeply concerned
about the increase in hostilities in various regions of
the northern part of the country, which have forced
hundreds of thousands of people to leave their homes
and take refuge in the camps there. We know that this
mass displacement, together with the recent floods
in the north-east and north-west, entails significant
operational and protection challenges. We therefore
commend the measures taken to date to meet the
needs of those people, but we know that considerable
challenges remain. Accordingly, we call on the parties
to respect the rules of international humanitarian law,
particularly with regard to the protection of the civilian
population, and to refrain from attacks on civilians and
vital infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools. That
includes counter-terrorism operations, which must also
respect and protect civilian populations. The statistics
pertaining to casualties resulting from those clashes are
not encouraging.
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate our appeal and join others in calling
for the continued implementation of the Idlib ceasefire
agreement in order to maintain sustained access to
the millions of people who depend on cross-border
humanitarian assistance, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We deplore the recent
indiscriminate attacks that have affected schools and
health-care centres in the region, which in turn have
forced the displacement of thousands of people. Only
two days ago, we received reports of the deaths of three
children from the same family who were sheltering at
the same location while fleeing the bombardment of
their school.
Lastly, we reiterate the need for safe, timely and
unhindered access throughout Syria in order to reach
the almost 12 million people in humanitarian need.
In that regard, we urge the teams on the ground to
continue to strengthen their partnerships with local
entities, as well as with the Syrian authorities, so as
to facilitate the provision of assistance under the
humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I warmly thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her
very informative briefing and acknowledge her
outstanding work and that of her teams in responding
to the humanitarian emergency in Syria. I especially
welcome the presence of Nujeen Mustapha among us,
and thank her most sincerely for having travelled here
to give testimony before the Council. Her courage is
a source of inspiration and admiration to us all, and
her briefing reminds us of the need to take fully into
account both the situation of persons with disabilities
and the absolute urgency to end eight years of conflict.
More than ever, we must remain fully ready to act
on three key priority areas: maintaining the ceasefire in
Idlib, about which Ursula Mueller spoke; guaranteeing
humanitarian access; and achieving a lasting political
solution in Syria.
With regard to the first priority of preserving
the ceasefire in Idlib and respecting the front lines
throughout the country, an offensive in Idlib would
have disastrous humanitarian, migratory and security
consequences throughout the region and beyond.
We therefore call on Turkey and Russia to intensify
their efforts to preserve the ceasefire agreement, in
accordance with the commitments reiterated at the
quadripartite summit in Istanbul. At the same time,

S/PV. 8515

we should work jointly to come up with a coordinated
response to the threat posed by the presence of terrorist
groups in that region. In the north-west, as in the rest
of the country, the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an
absolute priority for all stakeholders. It is unacceptable
that hospitals and schools are still being targeted, and
we cannot say often enough that attacks on hospitals
and health workers amount to war crimes and that the
perpetrators will be held accountable for their actions.
A military intervention in the north-east, wherever it
might come from, would have terrible humanitarian
consequences. All actors must therefore refrain from
taking such action and all the parties must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
is not a negotiable requirement.
Secondly, humanitarian access must be guaranteed.
Here I should point out the shocking fact that of the
338 requests for access made to the Syrian regime in
February and March, only half were granted. That is
simply unacceptable. We once again call on the actors
with influence on the regime to ensure immediate,
safe, comprehensive, unhindered and sustainable
humanitarian access throughout Syrian territory,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law. In that
context, the Whole of Syria humanitarian architecture
put in place by the United Nations to meet the needs of
the most vulnerable Syrians is more relevant than ever
and must be maintained.
It is especially vital to ensure that a new aid convoy
is allowed to deploy to Rukban camp immediately. We
must also ensure that the return of displaced persons
from Rukban is voluntary, safe and dignified, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
in close coordination with the United Nations. It is
also important to increase the humanitarian response
in the north-east to cope with the influx of displaced
persons. France will continue to do its part in that
regard. We have made emergency funding available to
support the humanitarian response in the region. We
must also do everything possible to ensure that safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to the Al-Hol camp is
fully guaranteed.
Thirdly, a sustainable political process must be
launched under the auspices of the United Nations in
Geneva. We will continue to support the implementation
of a political solution, in line with all the elements of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué

19-118699/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

24/04/2019

(S/2012/522, annex), and to lend our steadfast support
to the Special Envoy’s efforts in that regard. Provided
that a balanced agreement on its composition and
operating rules can be reached, the constitutional
committee could help to implement such a solution. It
will be up to Geir Pedersen to tell us when the time
comes if that is the case. Only the implementation of
a credible political process will make it be possible for
refugees to return to Syria, which must take place in
safe and dignified conditions and under United Nations
auspices. The low numbers of returnees show clearly
that so far those conditions, especially on the political
and security fronts, have not been met. It is essential
that the United Nations be given free access to Syrian
territory in order to ensure that returns take place in a
transparent manner.

It will be genuinely possible to make continued
significant progress, but to achieve that, the
politicization of the humanitarian issue and the use of
double standards in assessing events in the Syrian Arab
Republic must cease. The time has come to reconsider
long-outdated approaches that have been overtaken by
the evolving situation in Syria, and end the persistent
attempts to blame Damascus for everything and hold
back the processes of normalizing the situation in and
around Syria, including its reintegration into the Arab
family. Bringing a speedy end to the illegal occupation
of Syrian territory, including in the north-east and
in the area of Al-Tanf, would help the joint work of
strengthening peace and stability in the country, along
with a genuine united effort to combat the ongoing threat
of terrorism, which, most alarmingly, is beginning to
spill over the borders of the region.

After all these years of the Council’s failures in
Syria, it would be a new and terrible political and moral
mistake to turn the page today and direct our attention
elsewhere, whether out of indifference or cowardice.
That is first and foremost because it would be a serious
lapse of judgment to think that the tragedy of Syria is
behind us, and also because we believe that today, for
perhaps the first time in eight years, there is a small but
real window of opportunity to end the conflict. That is
the role that we, the members of the Security Council,
must play collectively on this existential issue for the
United Nations.

We want to draw attention once again to the
pernicious and damaging effects of unilateral sanctions,
which are only exacerbating the humanitarian situation
in Syria and other States, wreaking havoc on civilians,
undermining the normal functioning of Syria’s medical
and social services and hindering the reliable supply
of vitally necessary fuel for the people. We urge
everyone to join the efforts to rebuild Syria’s ruined
infrastructure and restore normal life to the stabilized
areas. With the assistance of Russia and other partners,
the Government of Syria is taking active steps in
that direction. Houses are being built and civilian
infrastructure, hospitals and roads are being repaired.
Since July of last year approximately 900 educational
and 200 medical facilities have been rebuilt, a number
of road bridges and more than 1,000 kilometres of roads
repaired, approximately 1,000 kilometres of power lines
laid and 140 water supply facilities, 180 bakeries, 631
electrical substations and more than 14,000 industrial
facilities operationalized. Many thousands of hectares
have been demined.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ursula Mueller for her briefing. We deeply appreciate
the selfless and courageous work of the humanitarian
workers in Syria and other hotbeds of conflict. We
are also thank Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for telling us her
own story, one that is both tragic and heroic and that
encourages us to redouble our efforts in our quest for a
settlement of the Syrian crisis.
We are seeing a significant stabilization of the
situation in Syria, with real breakthroughs in the fight
against terrorism and declining violence, especially
in the areas controlled by the legitimate Government.
Nevertheless, the situation in the country remains
challenging and will require even greater assistance
on the part of the international community in the work
of consolidating the progress that has been made and
creating the necessary conditions for normalizing the
situation further.
10/21

We welcome the growing economic relations
between Syria and its Arab neighbours. The restoration
of ties destroyed by conflict is a natural and objective
process, while a policy of good-neighbourliness is a
key to strengthening security and stability throughout
the region.
Despite the real challenges, the process of Syrian
refugees’ return has maintained a steady positive trend.
Approximately 1,000 people are returning to Syria
every day. More than 190,000 Syrian nationals have
returned to their homeland since July of last year.
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We are also seeing positive developments in terms
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) returning to
the homes they had fled. The Syrian Government
is working actively to improve the effectiveness of
the repatriation process and provide the necessary
guarantees. In 413 settlements that suffered the least
from military activities, centres have been opened to
receive and rehouse more than 1.5 million refugees. The
Syrian committee coordinating the return of refugees is
implementing various socioeconomic measures.
By contrast, we are seeing very different and
negative trends in the areas that are not under
Damascus’s control. We share the concerns about the
dire humanitarian situation in the temporary shelter
at Al-Hol, which has continued to deteriorate rapidly
despite the efforts of international humanitarian
organizations. A camp designed for 40,000 people is
now coping with twice that number. People are living
in intolerable conditions, and many of them, most of
whom are women and children, as today’s briefings
testified, have been through traumatic ordeals. Until
very recently they were living under terrorist control
and were forced to flee indiscriminate air and ground
strikes during counter-terrorism operations in the areas
of Hajin and Baghouz.
We believe it is vital to continue the coordinated
work of resettling Rukban camp residents. That is the
only way the problem can be solved, considering that
almost all its residents have expressed a desire to leave
the Al-Tanf area. Since February some 7,000 people
have been transferred in accordance with their own
wishes from there to areas under Government control.
If that pace continues, as many as 60 or 70 per cent
of the camp’s residents could leave in the space of two
weeks. The Syrian authorities are providing guarantees
of decent living conditions for citizens who return from
Rukban. All those who have left the camp have been
provided with medical assistance and basic necessities
and food. Problems with recovering documents and
providing employment are also being resolved, and such
steps or their positive aspects should not be ignored.
However, the situation in Rukban remains difficult.
The militants of the illegal armed group Maghawir
al-Thawra who control the camp subject its inhabitants
to violence on a daily basis, block the return process
and even attempt to impose their own agenda. We
believe that involving the United States in the joint
coordination meetings on Rukban organized at Russia’s
initiative for representatives of Russia, Syria and

S/PV. 8515

various United Nations agencies would help to solve
the Rukban problem very quickly and would represent
a genuine practical step towards normalizing the living
conditions of civilians, including those with disabilities.
The situation in Idlib remains unstable. The former
Al-Nusra militants who have metamorphosed into
the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham group continue to attack
Government positions. They make indiscriminate
strikes, including on civilian infrastructure, and
innocent civilians are dying. The pseudo-humanitarian
White Helmets continue preparing new provocations
in order to accuse the legitimate authorities of using
toxic agents. We see what is going on, and we do not
know how long the status quo in Idlib can continue. It is
absolutely unsustainable, and it is dangerous for Syria
and the region. We continue to work with our Turkish
partners to develop a lasting solution to the problem.
Russia and Turkey’s ongoing consultations include the
detailed discussion of our joint steps with regard to the
Syrian situation.
If we are to increase the sustainability of the
positive developments in Syria, we must continue
consolidated work on the political front in support of
the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, particularly with
respect to launching the constitutional committee as
soon as possible, and the Astana troika is doing just
that. Their twelfth meeting will be held in Nursultan
on 25 and 26 April, and the leadership of Kazakhstan
is providing organizational and other assistance for
the event. We believe that meeting will make another
significant contribution to the Syrian settlement, and we
want to point out that it has been preceded by intensive
work. The Russian representatives have held a series
of consultations with all the key stakeholders and the
Syrian Government and opposition first and foremost.
Importantly, the eighth meeting of the working group
on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of
bodies and the identification of missing persons will
take place on the margins of the event. We should point
out that in the past few days, thanks to the group’s
efforts, an exchange of prisoners took place between
the Syrian Government and illegal armed groups in the
area of the town of Al-Bab.
We once again urge all our colleagues to act in the
interest of Syrians and not for the sake of geopolitical
plans that have already destabilized a number of
countries in the Middle East and North Africa and
destroyed their statehood. Together we can put an end
to the destructive trends in Syria and the region as a

19-1186911/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

whole. We are ready to cooperate and open to serious,
feasible initiatives that can be achieved in practice. The
realities of the region demand that we all come together
and join forces.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and for the very comprehensive
briefing by Ms. Mueller. We appreciate the valuable
and often heroic work of her team on the ground. We
also appreciate the moving testimony of Ms. Nujeen
Mustapha, who reminded us of our obligation to bear
in mind the suffering of civilians in Syria, particularly
the most vulnerable.
Peru has been following the humanitarian situation
in Syria with deep regret. The conflict continues to
claim numerous lives and to cause the displacement
of tens of thousands of people. We have to particularly
deplore the escalation of violence in various areas in
north-western Syria, including Idlib, resulting from
terrorist organizations’ control of the area and military
responses that ignore the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
deplore the reported attacks on civilian infrastructure,
including schools and medical centres, as well as the
arbitrary arrests and abductions. In that context, we
believe that the efforts of Turkey and the Russian
Federation to deploy joint patrols aimed at enforcing
the scope of the agreement signed last September and
thereby prevent Idlib from becoming the scene of an
even greater humanitarian tragedy are critical.
We want to emphasize the importance of facilitating
the provision of sustained assistance to the civilian
population displaced in Rukban, while ensuring that
those who make the decision to leave the camp do so
under internationally accepted parameters and with
the support and assistance of the United Nations. We
also emphasize the urgency of continuing to meet the
growing needs of the internally displaced in Al-Hol,
who fled the clashes with the remnants of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. We are grateful for and
support the work being done by the United Nations and
other agencies to assist them in such a critical situation,
as well as their efforts to help those affected by the
devastating floods of recent weeks.
Moreover, we believe that it is essential that at
the meeting to be held this week in Nursultan new
and greater developments are brought forward on
the issues of identifying missing persons, the return
12/21

24/04/2019

of mortal remains and the release of detainees and
missing persons, and that this defuses tensions. We
also stress the importance of continuing to mobilize the
international community in support of humanitarian
mine clearance and the removal of improvised explosive
devices in Syria, which continue to wreak havoc on the
population. We therefore welcome the recent launch of
the Humanitarian Mine Action Support to Syria project
and Japan’s generous financial contributions that have
made it possible.
I conclude by emphasizing the urgency of a
permanent cessation of hostilities in order to begin to
overcome the suffering of the Syrian population caused
by this long conflict. Resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) should
guide these efforts.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first of all thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her
briefing and Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for being here with
us and sharing her stories. We applaud Ms. Mustapha’s
optimism and strong efforts in advocating in favour
of refugees and people with disabilities. I share the
conviction of many of my colleagues who have spoken
before me that she has displayed great courage and
should be assured that her message does not fall on
deaf ears.
Indonesia is deeply concerned about the ongoing
humanitarian situation and hostilities in various parts
of Syria, which have severely affected civilians,
including women and children. As laid out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/321), there are nearly
12 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
in Syria, around 6.2 million within the country are
displaced, some 2 million children are out of school,
and there are also millions of Syrian refugees. We
know these numbers by heart, and we have high hopes
that they will decrease in time.
But hope alone cannot improve the current situation.
Along with the ongoing humanitarian responses by the
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners,
we also need the full commitment of all parties to the
conflict to respecting international law and international
humanitarian law. In this context, Indonesia is of the
view that we must focus on two priorities.
First, civilians and civilian infrastructures must
be protected. Indonesia urges all parties to the conflict
to do everything in their power to protect civilians. It
is indeed heartbreaking to learn that, as mentioned in
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the Secretary-General’s report, civilians continue to
be killed and injured within the demilitarized zone in
Idlib. It is also disturbing to learn that people — mainly
women and children — continue to be killed as a result
of the increased use of improvised explosive device,
especially when they are used to target civilians. With
regard to the protection of civilian infrastructure,
Indonesia stresses that it is urgent to stop the heinous
attacks on schools and medical facilities, and that all
necessary measures must be taken to ensure this basic
infrastructure is not being targeted.
The second priority is that all parties must allow
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to
all in need in all parts of Syria. This also means that all
parties to the Syrian conflict shall enable the immediate
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance by
the United Nations and its partners directly to people
throughout Syria on the basis of the United Nations
assessments of need, without any political prejudices
and purposes.

S/PV. 8515

In conclusion, it is the collective obligation of the
Council that the story of Nujeen or any similar story
does not remain buried in the archives of the United
Nations so as to ensure that the history of humanitarian
calamities is not repeated.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller for her informative
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria and
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for telling us the story of her
personal journey and for providing us with an insight
into the reality those with disabilities are facing in
the country. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to the United Nations and its
various implementing agencies that provide essential,
life-saving humanitarian assistance to the thousands of
people who require it.

In Al-Hol camp, there are already 73,000 people,
92 per cent of whom are women and children, living
under extremely severe conditions, without access
to health care and other limited basic needs. We can
only imagine the situation. The camp is exceeding its
capacity of around 41,000 people, with thousands of
people arriving at the camp with illness and trauma
caused by violence. There is great fear for their safety.
That is a grim picture.

Nine years into the conflict in Syria, the
humanitarian situation in the country remains dire.
The escalation of violence in some parts of Syria is of
serious concern, particularly where such violence has
resulted in the injury or death of innocent civilians.
We are particularly concerned at the large numbers of
civilians that were reportedly killed during the recent
reporting period in Idlib and eastern Deir ez-Zor. In
addition to the increased violence, severe weather
conditions, such as flooding and extreme cold, have
added to the burden of suffering of the Syrian people.
In this regard, we call on all parties to uphold their
commitments and obligations under international law.

With regard to Rukban, we are pleased with the
ongoing efforts to find durable solutions for people
there. However, it is also necessary to ensure access
for sustained humanitarian assistance for people who
choose to remain. Indonesia shares the SecretaryGeneral’s important call for a carefully planned and
principle approach to the situation in Rukban that does
not create additional harm to the already traumatized
and displaced people. In addition, I would be remiss if
I did not mention the situation in Hajin as well as the
severe flooding in north-west and north-east Syria that
damaged 14 camps for internally displaced persons,
40 villages in Hassakeh, including the Areesha camp.

My delegation has noted reports of people leaving
Rukban to return to their homes or to their destinations
of choice. This is a welcome development. However, it
must be emphasized that all parties must ensure that
the necessary conditions for their return are met and
that these returns must be voluntary, safe, dignified
and well informed. Humanitarian aid to Rukban is still
necessary while people remain at the camp. While a
long-term solution needs to be found, humanitarian
aid, including medical assistance, is still necessary. We
therefore call for the necessary access for the provision
of the essential humanitarian assistance to Rukban,
particularly with Ramadan fast approaching.

All of foregoing are challenging situations, and the
humanitarian needs in Syria must be addressed as a
matter of priority. And we in the Security Council need
to consistently urge all parties to ensure principled,
sustained and improved humanitarian assistance to Syria.

Additionally, South Africa reiterates its previous
call for the full implementation of resolution 2449
(2018), which renews the authorization for cross-border
and cross-line humanitarian access to Syria, allowing
for the delivery of aid to the places that most need it.

19-1186913/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

Millions of children remain at risk of
undernourishment, dehydration, infectious diseases
and injury. In this regard, South Africa is deeply
concerned at the attacks that have struck, in particular,
health-care facilities and schools. In order to ensure a
peaceful future for the people of Syria, the international
community must support every effort towards a Syrianled and Syrian-owned settlement.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing and Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for her statement.
China is greatly attentive to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, sympathizes with the Syrian people
for what they have been going through and commends
the efforts of the United Nations and other actors aimed
at improving the humanitarian situation in the country.
As we speak, there continue to be a large number of
people in Syria who need humanitarian assistance, and
the problems in respect of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and Syrian refugees remain dire. Flooding has
hit large swathes of north-western and north-eastern
parts of the country, damaging or destroying IDP
camps there.
The international community has been following
with concern the humanitarian situation in the Al-Hol
camp, Rukban camp and the Idlib governorate. In
order to comprehensively address the humanitarian
challenges, a tailored solution is needed. In that regard,
I would like to share how China sees the situation.
First, we should actively support the Syrian
Government and people in its economic and social
reconstruction and support the return of Syrian
refugees. Ravaged by many years of conflict, Syria has
yet to recover from widespread devastation. The Syrian
Government’s reconstruction efforts require strong
support by the international community to inspire
confidence and hope in the hearts of the Syrian people
about a better life ahead.
Recently, thanks to the efforts of various concerned
parties, some Syrian refugees in Lebanon and Jordan
have returned to Syria and some of the internally
displaced persons in the Rukban camp have also left
the camp of their own accord. China welcomes those
developments and supports efforts to find a long-term
solution to the Rukban issue.
Secondly, we should further increase financial and
in-kind assistance to the Syrian people and adjust and
14/21

24/04/2019

improve humanitarian relief operations in response to
changes in the humanitarian needs on the ground. The
population of the Al-Hol camp has surged in recent
months and more than 90 per cent of its residents are
women and children.
The humanitarian response should be strengthened
in the light of the camp’s demographics and efforts
should be focused on long-term solutions. The United
Nations humanitarian operations and the international
community in Syria should fully respect Syria’s
sovereignty, strictly adhere to the Council’s resolutions
and step up their communication and coordination with
the Syrian Government.
Thirdly, the fight against terrorist forces should
continue to defend hard-won security gains. The
terrorist groups in Idlib, left unchecked and growing
in strength, are jeopardizing security and stability in
Syria and the region. According to the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/321), in the areas
controlled by terrorist groups there is no assurance for
civilians’ right to personal safety or other rights. The
status quo is not sustainable.
China supports the commitment of various
concerned parties to find a proper solution to the Idlib
issue and eliminate the risk of a humanitarian crisis.
The international community should apply uniform
criteria to combating all terrorist groups that have been
designated by the Council, while giving comprehensive
consideration to humanitarian needs and avoiding harm
to the civilian population.
Fourthly, the efforts to advance a political
settlement should continue to create the fundamental
conditions for easing the humanitarian situation on the
ground in Syria. The international community should
stand resolutely behind the United Nations as it plays
its role as mediator, pushes the Syrian parties to seek
a solution and addresses the concerns of all parties
through negotiation, while respecting the principle of
a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned process and adhering to
resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian parties should put
the future of the country and the well-being of their
people first, continue to overcome their differences
through dialogue and consultations, contribute to the
country’s stabilization and minimize conflict.
China looks forward to further progress being made
in the new round of the Astana dialogue and following
the formation of the constitutional committee in order to
continue moving the Syrian political process forward.
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
colleagues in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Ursula Mueller for her — as
always — excellent briefing. Our deep appreciation
goes to her and her staff for their great work and
commitment to providing humanitarian assistance
to the people in need. We welcome also Ms. Nujeen
Mustapha. Let me echo other delegations in ensuring
her and all people with disabilities that they are not
invisible any more — certainly not in this Chamber.
As Assistant Secretary-General Mueller highlighted,
the whole population of Syria has suffered a litany of
horrors. Let me focus on the situation of persons with
disabilities, precisely because the ongoing conflict has
a disproportionate impact on persons with disabilities.
Let me cite some estimates, which are based on the
October 2018 report of the Humanity and Inclusion
organization. There are 3 million people in Syria who
are living with permanent disabilities, a number that
increases with every month that the conflict continues.
Almost one-fourth of Syrian refugees in Lebanon and
Jordan have some level of impairment and more than
60 per cent of households have at least one member
with a disability. Those staggering numbers speak for
themselves and demonstrate that we cannot discuss the
humanitarian situation in Syria without addressing the
very specific needs of persons with disabilities. In that
context, allow me to touch upon the following issues.
The first point concerns data collection. Despite
the increasing attention being paid to persons with
disabilities in humanitarian contexts, very scarce
information has been collected. As already mentioned
by Ambassador Cohen, the lack of sufficient data on
persons with disabilities in the humanitarian context
was one of the key findings of the Arria formula
meeting on the situation of persons with disabilities in
armed conflicts, which was organized last December
by Poland, together with Germany, Kuwait, Peru and
Côte d’Ivoire.
That lack of sufficient data collection has a
clear impact on our assessment of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, I have the
following question for Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, who briefly referred to data collection in
her statement. Could she elaborate further on what
challenges she faces in terms of data collection, how
she is collecting it and what kind of impact it has on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance?

S/PV. 8515

Another issue to which we would like to draw the
Security Council’s attention is that of health services
provided to persons with disabilities. We are deeply
concerned about the dramatic deterioration of public
hospital and health facilities. Unfortunately, the attacks
on public hospitals and health facilities continue, which
means that there is no proper care being provided to
patients with injuries and as a result those injuries
may become lifelong disabilities. That is why it is
our strong belief that the Security Council should
vigorously advocate for the health and protection of
civilians, especially women, children and persons
with disabilities.
Last but not least, we reiterate our call to all sides
to strictly comply with international law and human
rights law, which means the protection of civilians and
granting unhindered access to humanitarian assistance
for the entire population is not a matter of choice — it
is a legal obligation under international law. It is our
firm belief that those responsible for violating and
abusing international humanitarian and human rights
law should be held accountable. It is also a matter of
conflict prevention. In that context, we strongly support
the ongoing work of the Human Rights Council’s
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
Allow me to also touch briefly on the situation
in Idlib and Rukban, which was also raised by many
delegations. Let me stress that the significance of the
agreement between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib
de-escalation zone as a crucial move towards avoiding
a humanitarian catastrophe. All parties to the conflict
should assure the full implementation of that agreement.
With regard to Rukban, we know that at the
beginning of February the second humanitarian convoy
to Rukban provided life-saving support to 40,000 people
living in the camp. Nonetheless, it was only a temporary
measure, sufficient for merely a month. As we approach
the end of April, it is clear that we desperately need
a safe, voluntary and dignified long-term solution for
thousands of people, many of whom have been staying
in the Rukban area for more than two years.
In conclusion, let me underline that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) remains the
only way towards peace.

19-1186915/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

Lastly, allow me to reiterate the common position
of the European Union on the reconstruction of Syria.
We think that it should commence once an inclusive
political transition is firmly under way, as we need to
support the safe return of millions of Syrians who fled
their homes.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and Ms. Nujeen Mustapha, a Syrian refugee, for their
enlightening and inspiring presentations.
Côte d’Ivoire is particularly concerned about the
precarious situation in the AI-Ho1 camp. The number
of internally displaced persons has sharply increased.
It went from more than 15,000 people in January to
around 73,000 in April, 92 per cent of whom are women
and children.
The recent floods in the country are also a source of
great concern to my delegation. According to OCHA’s
assessment, the torrential rains caused the destruction
of 14 camps, hosting 40,000 internally displaced people,
and 40 villages in Al-Hasakah governorate, with a total
of 120,000 people.
In that context, my country welcomes the measures
under way in the Rukban camp, which seek to find
durable solutions to the situation of internally displaced
persons. Between 24 March and 16 April, 4,317 people
were able to leave the camp, including 2,842 who
returned to their original homes or any other destination
of their choice after a brief stay in a collective shelter.
That encouraging return must be voluntary and safe
and respect the dignity of the displaced.
In the same vein, Côte d’Ivoire notes with
satisfaction the efforts made by humanitarian agencies
to provide food aid to 3.32 million people and
medical care to 2.4 million people. In that respect, it
welcomes the provision of assistance through crossborder humanitarian deliveries. The 906 trucks in
27 consignments from Turkey and Iraq provided relief
to an average of 150,000 people a month.
The unstable security situation in Idlib province
could compromise the delivery of humanitarian aid to
populations in need. Despite the ceasefire negotiated
by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September
2018, the province is seeing ongoing fighting. Côte
16/21

24/04/2019

d’Ivoire therefore calls on all stakeholders to uphold the
Russian-Turkish agreement on the demilitarized zone
and recalls their obligation to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We also call on the international community to continue
its support for efforts to ensure the protection of people
in distress and to meet their basic needs.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the parties to the
conflict to give priority to dialogue in the pursuit of
solutions to the Syrian crisis, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
complementary Astana and Sochi processes.
In that regard, my country welcomes the next round
of talks scheduled for 25 and 26 April in Nur-Sulatan,
the capital of Kazakhstan, and hopes that it will help to
relaunch the peace process in order to put an end to the
Syrian crisis, which has lasted too long.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing and to pay tribute to her teams on the ground.
I would also like to add our voice to those thanking
Nujeen Mustapha for such an amazing and compelling
briefing, for telling her story and for sharing it with
everyone here. I think that we all found it very moving
and that we owe it to her to try and make a reality of
some of the issues we have been talking about, such as
how to make life for the Syrian people better and bring
the crisis to an end. I will come to that in a minute, if
I may.
On the political process, I would just say that the
United Kingdom shares in full the statements made
by the representatives of the United States, France and
Poland so I will not rehearse those arguments. Instead, I
would like to ask some questions, first, of Ms. Mueller.
We are very interested in access trends. We would
like to know what the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs considers the key access
improvements in the past three months and where the
challenges still lie.
Secondly, if I may, I would also ask a question of
Nujeen Mustapha. She has come all this way to tell
us her story. We heard that there are 175,000 persons
with disabilities in Idlib alone. The story about having
to hide in the bathroom brought the situation to life
for everyone in the Council and clearly illustrated the
human cost that people in Syria are facing. What is it
that we in the Security Council could most do to help
her and all those in the situation in Syria that she faced
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8515

in Aleppo? What should it mean for us tomorrow, the
day after and in six months’ time? If there is one thing
that the Council can do, it would be very useful to get a
sense of what she would like it to be.

Mustapha for her important and moving testimony. We
believe that her remarks have not left a single Council
member unmoved. We therefore express our support
and solidarity.

I would also like to address some questions to other
speakers. I have four questions. The first one is easy. It is
to ask our Russian friends not to keep telling lies about
the White Helmets, which is a volunteer humanitarian
organization. We have had this debate in the Council
several times, and it has been proved beyond doubt that
they are not terrorists but humanitarians. That is the
first question.

We are aware that, in Syria, thousands of people are
experiencing the same situation and that their testimony
constitutes, above all, a call to action and to take
decisive measures to end this long war and compensate
the victims in order to restore peace in Syria and foster
the normalization of the political situation.

Leading on from that, we appeal to our Russian
and Chinese friends, who were talking about progress
on the ground in Syria, to support the United Nations
monitoring cross-border mission. We ask them to
support it in the Fifth Committee and to allow it to have
the funding it needs so that the cross-border assistance
can proceed, as the Council has intended and has set out.
The rest of my questions, if I may, are addressed to
the Syrian representative, who, I noticed, does not look
at women when we speak. I think that is quite interesting.
I would like to ask him a question given what we heard
from Nujeen about persons with disabilities and in
recognition of the fact that, throughout the United
Nations, issues relating to persons with disabilities
have always been non-political. They have always been
areas where every Member State can cooperate. It is not
a political issue. What are the Syrian authorities doing
to address the situation of persons with disabilities,
particularly women and girls and those in the worst
hit places, like Aleppo and Idlib? I would really like to
know the answer to that question and we hope for some
positive news.
The third question is about the lack of access for
humanitarians to Rukban camp. Thirteen children
have died of preventable causes recently. Why is it “not
possible” to allow unconditional United Nations access
to that camp?
My fourth question is to ask for an unequivocal
assurance from the Syrian authorities, through the
person of the Syrian representative today, that the
ceasefire in Idlib will be respected without qualification.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to join those who spoke
before me in expressing my delegation’s thanks to
Ms. Ursula Mueller for her briefing and to Ms. Nujeen

The Government of Equatorial Guinea remains
concerned about the escalation of violence in Syria,
especially in the north-western part of the country
where several terrorist groups and illegal armed groups
have entrenched themselves. While it is a fact that the
Syrian Government controls most of its territory and
that the situation in the province of Idlib needs to be
resolved as soon as possible, the need for the parties
to the conflict to refrain from large-scale military
operations nevertheless remains.
Concerning that governorate, which is key to the
outcome of the conflict, it is necessary that the parties
realize that any major military attack in the northwestern part of the country would not only endanger
the lives of thousands of people but also hinder the
work of humanitarian agencies. It is worth reminding
the parties that, in their counter-terrorist operations,
they must always fulfil their obligation to respect the
rights of and protect civilians, while ensuring timely,
sustained and unhindered access for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in the north-western, northeastern and all other parts of Syria.
Any further hostilities in Idlib would undoubtedly
have a devastating impact on civilians. Every effort
must be made to prevent the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas and all parties to the conflict must
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law so that civilians are spared from the
worst impact of the fighting. It is imperative that the
Security Council be more united and work collectively
to avoid further military escalation in north-west Syria.
In that regard, the demilitarized zone must be
respected so as to prevent the further mass displacement
of the population and shield schools, hospitals and
other vital civilian infrastructure. Accordingly, we
must ensure the recovery of children affected by the
conflict, including by restoring schools, improved
access to education for all, the provision of adequate

19-1186917/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

24/04/2019

child protection services and the removal of explosive
remnants of war and landmines.

own goals are far from engaged in ending the suffering
of the Syrian people.

The priority of the Security Council must be to
protect the lives of the millions of innocent civilians.
Our priority and moral duty is to ensure that the
people — most of whom are women, children and
persons with disabilities — survive. That is, however,
an extreme challenge, given the situation in the Rukban
and Al-Hol camps, which are sheltering thousands of
people subsisting in appalling conditions.

The Syrian Government asks the Governments
of those countries that support terrorism in Syria to
stop exploiting the Syrian crisis to achieve their own
political goals and not those of the Syrians. They must
also lift the economic embargo imposed on the Syrian
people and stop bombing their cities, killing civilians
and destroying the infrastructure. All of this is real
evidence of the direct responsibility of those regimes
for the suffering and forced displacement of Syrians.
They impede the safe and dignified return of the
refugees to their own country.

That is the most horrific aspect of the war, as the
needs of the population remain extremely critical in all
areas. Given such a deplorable situation, it is necessary
that a consensus be reached on the importance of meeting
the urgent and immediate needs of those displaced and
traumatized people. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing arrangements to ensure the deployment of a
third humanitarian convoy to the Rukban settlement,
although we believe that it would be better to come up
with sustainable solutions or, where appropriate, to
move people to other collective shelters.
There no longer remains any doubt as to the
urgent need to take action in Syria. The third Brussels
Conference, which succeeded in raising approximately
$7 billion in aid to fund the United Nations humanitarian
response plan for Syria and the region, attested to the
international community’s solidarity with the Syrian
people and neighbouring countries. Donors and Member
States must now urgently fulfil their commitments, as
the Secretary-General has stressed.

The Government of my country, the Syrian Arabic
Republic, has spared no effort in recent years to provide
every form of humanitarian assistance and support to
all Syrians affected by the crisis, regardless of their
locations throughout Syria. The Syrian Government
has therefore collaborated and cooperated with the
United Nations and other international organizations
working in Syria to that end, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 46/182. Far from the propaganda
and the allegations that some are trying to promote,
I would like to stress that the path to improving the
humanitarian situation is known by all and requires
the following.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic and invite
him to respond to questions.

First, we must not ignore the main causes of the
suffering of the Syrian people, namely, the practices of
armed terrorist groups and well-known Governments
that support them; the ongoing crimes committed by
the so-called international coalition, which have caused
the deaths of thousands of civilians and serious damage
to the infrastructure, including schools and hospitals;
the coercive unilateral illegal measures imposed on
the Syrian people, which must cease immediately and
unconditionally, especially in light of the fact that
their catastrophic, criminal effects on civilians and
humanitarian action are known to all.

Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to say at the outset that the Syrian
people continue to be the victims of developments in the
Security Council and the hypocrisy of certain countries
that do not want to end the crisis in Syria but prefer to
manipulate terrorism, invest in armed terrorist groups
and impose an economic embargo on the Syrian people.
Needless to say, countries that attempt to exploit the
suffering of the Syrian people in order to achieve their

Secondly, it is necessary to put an end to the deliberate
and methodical politicization of the humanitarian issue
and to stop attempts to exploit it by certain States in
order to look good. That was demonstrated recently at
the Brussels Conference, where the objective was to
pressure Syria and complicate and prolong the crisis
while associating humanitarian and development action
once again with political conditions that do not jibe
with humanitarian principles.

In conclusion, in looking forward to the next
meeting in Astana, we reiterate our firm commitment
to finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).

18/21

19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, the efforts of the Syrian State and its
allies to facilitate the return of Syrian refugees to their
country in safety and dignity must be supported. The
pledges of donors must be in line with this goal rather
than using billions of dollars to keep the refugees in
host countries.
Fourthly, there is a need to join Syrian efforts in
order to save our people in Idlib, who are living under
the threat of the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups and entities affiliated with it, which are using
the people as a human shield. There should be an end
to the recurrent aggressions of those terrorist groups
against innocent civilians in the neighbouring towns
and cities.
Fifthly, there must be an end to the suffering of tens
of thousands of civilians who live in areas controlled
by illegitimate foreign forces and militias affiliated
with them. In this regard, we note that it has been
1,820 days since the civilians in Rukban camp, which
is located in Al-Tanf area, have been living in forced
captivity by the United States and terrorist militias
associated with it. The continued suffering of those
Syrian civilians demonstrates the indifference of the
United States Administration to their suffering and
disastrous situation. We stress once again that there is
a need to put an end to the suffering of these civilians
and to close this issue definitively. The detained people
in the camp must be allowed to leave it and return to
their home regions, which have been liberated by the
Syrian Arab Army from terrorism. We note that the
Syrian Government has taken all necessary measures
to evacuate the detainees from the Rukban camp and
end their suffering. What is needed today is for the
American occupation forces to allow the camp to be
dismantled and to ensure safe transportation in the
occupied Al-Tanf area.
In conclusion, the only way to alleviate the
suffering and help the humanitarian situation is for the
known Governments to stop sponsoring terrorism and
immediately end the illegal coercive measures used to
implement nefarious agendas.
Lastly, the suffering of each and every Syrian
person, including those with disabilities, causes pain
to us. The Syrian State institutions are making every
effort to assist and support those people and others
who are vulnerable. The number of such people has
significantly increased due to the activities of terrorist
groups and crimes committed by the international

S/PV. 8515

coalition. Those difficulties have been exacerbated by
unilateral coercive measures that impede our efforts
to safely provide our people with all services and
health care. Every city in Syria has many specialized
educational institutions for persons with disabilities
and provide their services free of charge. The Syrian
Government has paid great attention to assisting
persons with disabilities.
The President: I would like to respond in my
national capacity.
The Ambassador of Syria accused members of the
Security Council of hypocrisy and a lack of concern for
the people. I would like to just say that, for Germany’s
part, we have taken in hundreds of thousands of Syrians
in Germany — one of them is sitting right here. We talk
to the people and know of their fate. We hear them talk
about the torture that they experienced in prisons in
Syria. We know about people being starved, bombed
and gassed by their own Government, as well as being
sexually violated in their homes. I just wanted to
mention that.
I would also like to say that Germany is working
on accountability. We support the Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and
we are now prosecuting the first representatives of
the Syrian regime in Germany for the atrocities they
have committed.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller to respond
to questions.
Ms. Mueller: I would like to respond to the question
raised by the representative of Poland on disaggregated
data. To ensure disaggregated data, it is very critical
to have effective humanitarian programming and to
be aware of the specific and diverse needs of people
with disabilities, because humanitarian assistance is
effective only if it is inclusive.
Humanitarian partners are now collecting
disaggregated data. Sex, age and disabilities are
aggregated into our planning estimates, and we
continue to refine our data so as to allow us to target
humanitarian programming for those most in need. We
extended the period for assessing the needs in Syria for

19-1186919/21

S/PV.8515

The situation in the Middle East

the 2019 humanitarian needs overview, as those present
know. That was released in March for this year and
provides a comprehensive overview of needs, including
for persons with disabilities.
What is important now is to see the support of the
donors to help us address those needs. While $7 billion
were pledged at the Brussels Conference to support
those in need in Syria and the region, this year’s appeal
is funded by only 8 per cent. We must therefore do
more, and we can do more. Humanitarian agencies and
the United Nations stand ready to continue providing
humanitarian assistance and protection to the people in
need in Syria.
As for the question raised by the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom on water access improvements and
challenges, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/321)
addresses the expanded access that the United Nations
has in areas under Government control. There were
over 1,200 missions deployed throughout the country
in February and March. We have two main challenges,
which I would like to highlight.
First, we have called for access to Rukban to deploy
the third aid convoy and we received information on
Monday that it is not possible, as I mentioned, which
makes that the first biggest challenge. Secondly, we
need access to send staff to the north-east to support
operations in the Al-Hol camp.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mustapha.
Ms. Mustapha: I am happy to hear so many Council
members today say that people with disabilities will
no longer be invisible. I and so many others will be
watching to make sure that those words are turned into
action. Idlib is a perfect example of where that action
should take place in order to protect all civilians. In
terms of concrete action, the Council can make sure that
people with disabilities are included in all of its work,
resolutions, programmes and funding. I would like to
ask the Council to please make sure that our specific
needs are met, especially those of women and girls with
disabilities. Today, for the first time, the Council has
given a woman with a disability a voice. My hope is that
from this day forward, this will be a regular occurrence
in the Council, so that it can hear from us first-hand and
never forget what we have talked about today. Let there
be nothing about us without us.
20/21

24/04/2019

The President: I now give the floor to members of
the Council who wish to make further statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Ms. Mueller
and Ms. Mustapha for their answers to Ambassador
Pierce’s questions. We have taken note of what they
said, and we will follow up on those points.
I believe the representative of Syria responded to
one of the three questions that we put to him. With
your permission, Mr. President, I would like to put the
other two questions to him once again, and I will repeat
them. I think almost every delegation here today raised
the issue of the situation in Rukban, and we just heard
from the Assistant Secretary-General that the United
Nations has learned from the Syrian authorities that it
is not possible for the United Nations to deliver its next
convoy. Could the Syrian representative explain to us
and to the Council why it is not possible? That is the
first question.
The second question is whether the Syrian
representative can give the Council a clear assurance
that the Syrian authorities will respect the ceasefire
that is in place in Idlib.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
was hoping that Ambassador Pierce would still be here
so that she would have the opportunity to listen to my
response. Instead, after acting like a judge and firing a
few questions at us, she simply left.
Ms. Pierce raised a question that Mr. Cohen also
touched on. As far as China is concerned, politically
speaking, we fully support the cross-border delivery
of humanitarian assistance. As for questions that are
discussed in the Fifth Committee, since budgetary and
financial issues are involved, they should be left to our
colleagues in the Fifth Committee rather than to us
on the Security Council. I nevertheless checked with
my colleague on the Fifth Committee. I was told that
consensus had already been reached on the issue in the
Fifth Committee. Accordingly, there was no issue as to
whether China supported the cross-border delivery of
humanitarian assistance or had attempted to obstruct it.
There was no such issue. The issue has been resolved,
so there is no problem. There was no need to bring it up
in the Security Council.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond to the
questions raised.
19-11869

24/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): When I used the word “hypocrisy”, I was
referring to a number of countries. They know who
they are, and they bear the main responsibility for the
humanitarian suffering in my country. The references
that you, Mr. President, made to practices such as
torture, the use of chemical weapons and so forth
demonstrate once again the deliberate politicization
of this issue and how some countries use the United
Nations to demonize and insult my Government. In
answer to the question posed by my British colleague,
today we will circulate two identical letters. I would
like to quote part of the text of the letters with regard to
the situation in Rukban and other camps.
“With respect to the situation in Rukban camp,
the Syrian Government affirms the information
already released in response to earlier reports and
wishes to stress that thanks to the approvals and
facilitation of the Syrian Government, the United
Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent were
able to send two humanitarian convoys to Rukban
camp. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
is prepared to provide the necessary support to
send a third humanitarian convoy, as long as that
convoy does not fall into the hands of terrorists,
as has happened in the past. We are prepared to do
that on condition that the convoy does not fall into
the hands of terrorists.”
The Syrian Government asserts that the only cause
of the deplorable conditions for civilians in the camp
is that the United States is occupying the land where
the Rukban camp is located. That country refuses to
dismantle the camp and is holding Syrian civilians in it
hostage. It is preventing them from returning home for
political reasons that are known to all. It is important
to bear in mind that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic had an agreement with the United Nations
to end the suffering of the civilians in Rukban camp
and dismantle it so that they could return to the homes,
towns and villages from which they had been displaced
by terrorism. A number of meetings have been held to
discuss this issue, the most recent on 22 April.
With regard to Al-Hol camp, the Syrian Government,
in cooperation with United Nations, is preparing to send
a humanitarian convoy after the necessary approvals
have been obtained. Moreover, it has facilitated access
for the International Red Cross to bring aid to that camp
and neighbouring areas. With respect to the Al-Areesha
camp, which was flooded, the Syrian Government had
been asking for the displaced persons to be evacuated

S/PV. 8515

to their villages and towns for a long time. The United
Nations did not respond to our request. If it had, that
humanitarian disaster could have been avoided.
Turning to Idlib, the civilians in towns and villages
around Idlib are suffering daily from bombings and
violations by the terrorist groups located there. Can the
Council guarantee that those terrorist groups will not
attack the civilians in the area around Idlib?
The President: I now take the floor in my capacity
as representative of Germany.
I would ask the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic if he would subscribe to the demand
under international humanitarian law that the Syrian
Government guarantee and support the safe, voluntary,
dignified and well-informed return of refugees to
their homes.
I resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, could you repeat the question?
The President: Can the representative of Syria
here today guarantee and state that his Government
will support and follow the rule of international
humanitarian law requiring it to promote the safe,
voluntary, dignified and well-informed return of
refugees to their homes?
I resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
was the first to call for the return of all refugees to their
home country, Syria. The Syrian Government was the
first to constantly call for the return of all refugees to
their homes. Those who impede their return are not the
Syrian Government. Everybody knows who it is that
is impeding their return. We support the return of all
refugees to the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President: I resume my functions as President
of the Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

19-1186921/21
