m. Raoludom adopted on tbe npom of the Ftnt Committee
security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons".
97th plenary meeting
JJ December 1979
34/85.

Conclusion of an international convention to
assure the non-nuclear-weapon States aplnst
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring
lasting security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest
threat to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the arms race,
in particular the nuclear arms race, and the threat to
mankind due to the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war,
Taking into account the principle of the non-use of
force or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations;
Deeply concerned about any possibility of the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need to
be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to develop, as appropriate,
effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution to
the prevention of the spread of nucJear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 3261 G (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Further recalling its resolution 31 / 189 C of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 69
in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue
efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session,
Recalling its resolution 33/72 of 14 December 1978,
Welcoming the in-depth consideration of the item entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons" by the Committee on Disarmament and the establishment of an ad hoe working group
under the aegis of the Committee to conduct negotiations
on the subject, 70
89 Resolution S-10/2.
70

Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I), paras. 44-Sl.

59

Noting the drafts of an international convention submitted under that item in the Committee on Disarmament,
Taking n'?te of.the report of the Committee on Dis~rmament, mcludmg the report of the ad hoe Workmg Group, 71
Noting the decision of the Sixth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, calling on the
Committee on Disarmament to elaborate the international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons during its next session, in 1980, 72
Also noting similar recommendations made in the
relevant resolution of the Tenth Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers, held at Fez from 8 to 12 May 1979,73
Further noting the general support expressed during
its thirty-fourth session for the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
1. A !firms the conclusion of the Committee on Disarmament that there is wide recognition of the urgent
need to. reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nucJear-weapon States against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons;
3. Endorses the decision of the Committee on Disarmament to continue negotiations on this subject at the
beginning of its session in 1980;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament should conclude effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons during its session in 1980, taking into account the widespread support
for the conclusion of an international convention and
giving consideration to any other proposals designed to
secure the same objective;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Conclusion of an
international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

34 / 86.

Strengthening of the security of no■-nuclear­
weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to promote international peace
and security,
Recognizing the legitimate security concerns of all
States,
Convinced of the importance of effective efforts to
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure nonnucJear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
71
72

73

Ibid., appendix n.
See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 219.
A/34/389 and Corr.I, annex II, sect. A, reaolution lS/10-P.

Assembly-Thirty-fourth Seaton
'°nuclear weapons can constitute a positiveGeneral
Recalling paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the
contribution to

the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,7 4
in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue
efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting that the five nuclear-weapon States have
recognized the significance of action to meet the concerns of the great majority of States, which have not
sought to acquire or develop, alone or with others, any
nuclear explosive devices,
Recalling that each of the five nuclear Powers has
stated its willingness to take action to affirm its support
for and to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Taking note of the various proposals and suggestions
made in this regard,
1. Notes the statements that the nuclear-weapon
States have made on assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
States with respect to the use of nuclear weapons;
2. Welcomes the report of the Committee on Disarmament,76 in which it reported on the initial consideration of and negotiation on effective international
arrangements further to strengthen the security of the
non-nuclear-weapon States;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue its efforts at its session in 1980 with a view to
reaching agreement on such arrangements and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to
the consideration by the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session of the items entitled "Strengthening of
guarantees of the security of non-nuclear-weapon States"
and "Strengthening of the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons";
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Strengthening of the
security of non-nuclear-weapon States".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

34/87.

General and complete disarmament
A

CONCLUSION OF AN INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION PROHIBITING THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING AND USE OF RADIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling the resolution of the Commission for Conventional Armaments of 12 August 1948, which defined
weapons of mass destruction to include atomfo explosive weapons, radio-active material weapons, lethal
chemical and biological weapons and any weapons developed in the future which have characteristics comparable in destructive effect to those of the atomic bomb
or the other weapons mentioned above,
Recalling its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,

Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 76 in
which it is stated that a convention should be concluded
prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and
use of radiological weapons,
Convinced that such a convention would serve to
spare mankind the potential dangers of the use of radioactive materials to cause destruction, damage or injury
by means of the radiation produced by the decay of such
material and thereby contribute to strengthening peace
and averting the threat of war,
1. Welcomes the report of the Committee on Disarmament with regard to radiological weapons 77 and,
particularly, its stated intention to continue at its session
in 1980 consideration of proposals for a convention banning those weapons;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible to reach agreement, through
negotiation, on the text of such a convention and to report to the General Assembly on the results achieved for
consideration by the Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to
the discussion by the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session of the prohibition of the development,
production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Prohibition of the
development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons".
97 th plenary meeting
11 December I 979
B
CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/91 B of 16 December 1978
on confidence-building measures,
Desiring to eliminate the sources of tension by peaceful means and thereby to contribute to the strengthening
of peace and security in the world,
Stressing again the importance of the statement contained in paragraph 93 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly 78 that it
is necessary, in order to facilitate the process of disarmament, to take measures and to pursue policies to
strengthen international peace and security and to build
confidence among States, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the need and urgency of first steps to
diminish the danger of armed conflicts resulting from
misunderstandings or from misinterpretations of military
activities,
Reaffirming its conviction that commitment to confidence-building measures could contribute to strengthening the security of States,
Aware that there are situations peculiar to specific regions which have a bearing on the nature of confidencebuilding measures feasible in those regions,
Convinced that the United Nations, in accordance
with the Charter, can play an important role in creating
Resolution S-10/2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I), sect. 111.E.
1a Resolution S-10/2.
70

1'

Resolution S-10/2.
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I).

77
