General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

172

2. All States shall make all efforts to enact or rescind
legislation where necessary to prohibit any such discrimination, and to take all appropriate measures to combat intolerance on the grounds of religion or belief in this matter.
Article 5
I. The parents or, as the case may be, the legal guardians of the child have the right to organize the life within
the family in accordance with their religion or belief and
bearing in mind the moral education in which they believe
the child should be brought up.
2. Every child shall enjoy the right to have access to
education in the matter of religion or belief in accordance
with the wishes of his parents or, as the case may be, legal
guardians, and shall not be compelled to receive teaching
on religion or belief against the wishes of his parents or
legal guardians, the best interests of the child being the
guiding principle.
3. The child shall be protected from any form of discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief. He shall
be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship among peoples, peace and universal brotherhood, respect for freedom of religion or belief of others, and in full
consciousness that his energy and talents should be devoted
to the service of his fellow men.
4. In the case of a child who is not under the care either
of his parents or of legal guardians, due account shall be
taken of their expressed wishes or of any other proof of
their wishes in the matter of religion or belief, the best
interests of the child being the guiding principle.
5. Practices of a religion or belief in which a child is
brought up must not be injurious to his physical or mental
health or to his full development, taking into account article
I, paragraph 3, of the present Declaration.
Article 6
In accordance with article l of the present Declaration,
and subject to the provisions of article l, paragraph 3, the
right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief
shall include, inter alia, the following freedoms:
(a) To worship or assemble in connection with a religion
or belief, and to establish and maintain places for these
purposes;
(b) To establish and maintain appropriate charitable or
humanitarian institutions;
(c) To make, acquire and use to an adequate extent the
necessary articles and materials related to the rites or customs of a religion or belief;
(d) To write, issue and dtssemmate relevant publications in these areas;
(e) To teach a religion or belief in places suitable for
these purposes;
(j) To solicit and receive voluntary financial and other
contributions from individuals and institutions;
(g) To train, appoint, elect or designate by succession
appropriate leaders called for by the requirements and standards of any religion or belief;
(h) To observe days of rest and to celebrate holidays
and ceremonies in accordance with the precepts of one's
religion or belief;
(i) To establish and maintain communications with individuals and communities in matters of religion or belief
at the national and international levels.

Article 7
The rights and freedoms set forth in the present Declaration shall be accorded in national legislations in such a

manner that everyone shall be able to avail himself of such
rights and freedoms in practice.
Article 8
Nothing in the present Declaration shall be construed as
restricting or derogating from any right defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenants on Human Rights.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /981

36/56.

Human rights and scientific and technological
developments 58
A

The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress is one
of the important factors in the development of human
society,
Reaffirming that scientific and technological progress is
a necessary prerequisite for accelerating social and economic development in all countries,
Noting once again the great importance of the Declaration
on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind, adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 3384 (XXX) of
10 November 1975,
Considering that implementation of the said Declaration
will contribute to the strengthening of international peace
and the security of peoples, and to their economic and social
development as well as to international co-operation in the
field of human rights.
Seriously concerned that the results of scientific and technological progress could be used for the arms race to the
detriment of international peace and security and social
progress, human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the
dignity of the human person,
Convinced that, in the era of modem scientific and technological progress, the resources of mankind and the activities of scientists should be used for the peaceful economic,
social and cultural development of all countries and for
raising the living standards of peoples,
Recognizing that the establishment of the new international economic order calls in particular for an important
contribution to be made by science and technology to economic and social progress,
Bearing in mind that the exchange and transfer of scientific and technological knowledge is one of the basic ways
to accelerate the social and economic development of the
developing countries,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
human rights and scientific and technological developments, 59
I. Stresses the importance of the implementation by all
States of the provisions and principles contained in the Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress
in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind in
order to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms
under conditions of scientific and technological progress;
2. Calls upon all States to make every effort to use the
achievements of science and technology in order to promote
peaceful social, economic and cultural development and
progress;

"See also sect. X.B.4, decision 36/413.
9
'
A/36/429 and Add. I and 2.

Vl.

173

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

-------------

3. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to take into account
in their programmes and activities the provisions of the
Declaration;
4. Invites those Member States, specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system that
have not yet done so to submit their information in accordance with General Assembly resolution 35/ l 30 A of 11
December 1980;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to give
special attention, in its consideration of the item entitled
"Human rights and scientific and technological developments", to the question of the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments··.
73rd plenary meeting

25 November 1981

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December I 978. in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities to undertake as a .matter of
priority a study of the question of the protection of those
detained on the grounds of mental ill-health with a view to
formulating guidelines,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 130 B of 11 December
1980, in which it welcomed the action taken by the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities to implement General Assembly resolution 33/
53,
Convinced that detention of persons in mental institutions
on account of their political views or on other non-medical
grounds is a violation of their human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the work being undertaken by
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities on this subject in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 33/53 and 35/130 B,
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue
its consideration of this question in the light of the action
being taken by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, with a view to
submitting a report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session, through the Economic and Social Council.

73rd plenarv meeting
25 November 1981

36/57.

Question of a convention on the rights of the
child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/166 of 20 December 1978,

34/4 of 18 October 1979 and 35/131 of 11 December 1980,
Mindful of the vital link between programmes benefiting
children and the observance of their rights, and a broader
and more comprehensive framework of over-all economic
and social development in conditions of peace,
Convinced that the fresh and necessary impetus to activities generated by the International Year of the Child should
be maintained and that the new perspectives it has created
should be followed by appropriate action in the years to
come,
Reaffirming the important role that the United Nations
Children's Fund has to play in the subject-matter concerned,

Aware of the importance of an international convention
on the rights of the child for the protection of children· s
rights and improvement in their situation,
Having in mind Commission on Human Rights resolutions 20 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978, 60 19 (XXXV) of 14
March 1979." 1 36 (XXXVI) of 12 March 1980" 2 and 26
(XXXVII) of 10 March 1981. 6 ' as well as Economic and
Social Council resolutions 1978/ 18 of 5 May 1978 and 1978/
40 of I August 1978 and Council decisions 1980/138 of 2
May 1980 and 1981/144 of 8 May 1981,
Noting with appreciation the further progress made in the
elaboration of a draft convention on the rights of the child
by the Commission on Human Rights prior to and during
its thirty-seventh session.
I. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision
1981 /144 by which the Council authorized an open-ended
working group of the Commission on Human Rights to meet
for a period of one week prior to the thirty-eighth session
of the Commission to facilitate completion of the work on
the draft convention on the rights of the child:
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to give
the highest priority to the question of completing the draft
convention;
3
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the working group in order to ensure
its smooth and efficient work:
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled '"Question of a convention on the rights of the child".
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 198/

36/58.

International Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assemblr,
Recalling its resolutions 32/66 of 8 December 1977 ..Bi
5 I of 14 December I 978, 34/45 of 23 November 1979 and
35/ 132 of 11 December 1980.
Having noted the report of the Secretary-GeneraIM on the
status of the International Covenant on Economic. Social
and Cultural Rights, 65 the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights 65 and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 65
Noting with appreciation that. following its appeal, more
Member States have acceded to the International Covenants
on Human Rights.'''
Hearing in mind the important responsibilities of the Economic and Social Council in relation to the International
Covenants on Human Rights.
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee in the implementation of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
thereto,
Taking into account the important responsibilities of the
Sessional Working Group on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic. Social and Cultural
Rights.
""Sec OJ!icial R,·rnrds of the /:'co11omic and SoC1al Council. /97/i,
Supplement No. 4 (E/1978n4). chap. XXVI. sect. A.
'"!hid. /979. Supplemc,11 No. t, iE/19791361. c·hap. XXIV. sect. A.
'•' !h,d .. /9/iO. Supplemenr Vo 3 iE/1980/13 and Corr. I), chap. XXVI.
sect. A
,., lh1tf. 198/, S1111p/e111e111 .Vo. 5 (E 1981 l:?5 and Corr. I l. chap. XXVIII,
sed A
l>--1 !\i _H,,145).

"' Resolution 221Xl A I XX I), annn
