United Nations

S/PV.5096

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5096

th meeting
Wednesday, 8 December 2004, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Baali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Algeria)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Valle
Mr. Andereya
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Trautwein
Mr. Akram
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to Central Africa,
21-25 November 2004 (S/2004/934)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-63902 (E)

*0463902*

S/PV.5096

The meeting was called to order at 9:40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa, 21-25 November 2004
(S/2004/934)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Japan, the Netherlands, Rwanda and
Uganda, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/934, which contains the report of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa, which took
place from 21 to 25 November 2004.
At the outset, I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marc de
La Sablière, head of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa, to provide a brief introduction to the
report on that mission.
Mr. de La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
had the privilege a few days ago of reporting to the
Security Council on the mission we carried out in
Central Africa. Today, at the outset of this meeting, I
will go to the heart of the matter and touch on the
recommendations the mission has made to the Council.

2

Members will find these recommendations in the report
(S/2004/934), from paragraph 47 on.
I will begin by saying that the Security Council
mission arrived at a time when in both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi there had been
action in a new phase that should lead us to the end of
the transition — that is to say, elections next year. It is
absolutely crucial for the officials in both countries to
take the necessary steps so that the transitions in both
countries are irreversible. The closer we get to the end
of the transition, the harder it is, of course — we know
this — and the more those officials have to act
decisively. But it is also crucial that in this phase the
Burundians and the Congolese receive the support of
the international community, support that is essential.
As regards the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there is an authority that brings together the
main players from the international community that
support the country, and that is the International
Committee in Support of the Transition (CIAT). It is
absolutely essential that the joint committees that were
decided between the CIAT and the Congolese
authorities be able to get to work. That is the case for
one of them; but for the two others, we recommend
that they begin working very quickly. We also believe
that the international community, on this very
important question of disarmament of the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe, which I will come back to later, has to
assist the Congolese authorities to build an integrated
army, integrated brigades. We also believe that, with a
view to elections, the international community should
help to build an integrated police force as well.
With regard to Burundi, I draw attention to
paragraph 53 in our report, where we mention the need
for financial assistance for Burundi, which should
receive disbursements consistent with their absorption
capability.
As my colleagues all know, the mission dealt
with the question of the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, relations between Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the presence of
ex-FAR/Interahamwe, and threats of intervention into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council dealt with this last issue in the presidential
statement issued yesterday, so I will not come back to
it. On this issue, the Council has simply followed the
recommendations that were made by the mission.

S/PV.5096

There is a problem we have to deal with, as emerges
clearly from the Council’s statement yesterday.
Turning to Burundi, I would say briefly that our
general impression was that the peace process is on
track, the spirit of reconciliation is quite present, and
on many items since our return the Security Council
has taken positions along the lines suggested by the
mission. The Council renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) and
expressed its intention to review measures that could
be taken with respect to the FNL against those who
would compromise the peace and reconciliation
process. Finally, the Council was also able to respond
to the Gatumba massacre. So I think that the Council
has certainly followed the path recommended by our
mission.
In conclusion, I will briefly mention the situation
in the region. On several occasions, the mission
mentioned the conclusions of the Great Lakes
Conference, which is an important political event. The
mission suggests in its conclusions and recommendations
that the commitments that were made should be swiftly
implemented and priorities should be set.
So there, in a nutshell, is a summary of the
recommendations made by the mission. We also
mention the follow-up to the mission by the Security
Council in the last two weeks, a follow-up that was
carried out quite quickly in many areas.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador de La Sablière for his introduction.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Mr. President, allow me first to
convey heartfelt congratulations on behalf of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and for
the effective way you are conducting the business of
the Council.
My delegation is honoured to take part in this
important meeting on the report of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa. My delegation is
happy that, for the second time now, the Council has
taken the initiative to travel to Central Africa. We take
this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
high quality of the contributions made by all Council
members under the leadership of Ambassador De La

Sablière, Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations. The mission came at the right time,
following the first summit of heads of State in the
framework of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, held in Dar es Salaam on 19 and
20 November 2004, which concluded with the solemn
adoption of the Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.
For the States of the region, the Declaration’s
adoption represents great hope for stability, peace and
democracy in the region. Even more, it underlines the
political will of the leaders of the region to begin a new
era of good-neighbourliness, collaboration and
cooperation in order to rebuild those countries affected
by a long period of war, to develop their economies
and to ensure the return of a pluralist democratic
system in the region, which will ensure genuine
economic, social and cultural development through
political stability.
Our study of the report of the Security Council
mission to Central Africa (S/2004/934) leads my
delegation to make the following observations. My
delegation notes with satisfaction and a sense of
encouragement that the members of the Council
recognize the progress made in the region since the
Council’s last visit, in June 2003, in particular the
efforts made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
since the June 2003 mission, especially the
establishment and functioning of all transitional
institutions, such as the Parliament, the Government of
National Unity and the integrated high command for
the armed forces and the police service, as well as the
five institutions supporting democracy and territorial
integrity. All those institutions are ready to begin
operations and consult with one another in their careful
preparations for the transparent, free and democratic
general elections to be held next year. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo wishes to reinforce that
irreversible trend in order finally to emerge from the
quagmire in which it was stuck to join the ranks of
modern democratic States that participate in the
development of universal civilization. In that context,
members of the Council were reassured at the highest
level of the State that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is determined to hold free elections in
accordance with the agreed timetable.
Unfortunately, despite the progress made and the
intensive consultations between Rwandan and

3

S/PV.5096

Congolese authorities to establish a climate of trust,
cooperation and understanding in which to peacefully
resolve any possible dispute that might arise while
tackling the problem of members of the former
Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe,
Rwanda continues to make threats towards the
Democratic Republic of Congo, thus jeopardizing all
bilateral agreements signed between Rwanda and my
country in New York and elsewhere, as well as other,
multilateral agreements. This is clearly a deliberate
attempt to prolong insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to disrupt
the transition process under way and prevent the
holding of elections, in particular by contributing to the
emergence of militias and dissident factions, which is
what led to the events of Bukavu in early June 2004.
A few days ago, immediately following the Dar
es Salaam Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes region and just
when members of the Security Council were visiting
the region and when the Summit of la Francophonie
was under way in Ouagadougou, President Paul
Kagame of Rwanda, scorning the peace efforts in the
Great Lakes, issued a declaration of war under the
pretext of pursuing so-called negative forces. He then
took the action of redeploying Rwandan troops in
certain localities of the provinces of North and South
Kivu.
My country notes that President Paul Kagame of
Rwanda has demonstrated his willingness to take the
responsibility of unleashing hostilities against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in violation of all
concluded agreements and of the principle of the
inviolability of borders, in accordance with Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
We appeal to the great sense of responsibility of
members of the Council to condemn Mr. Paul
Kagame’s arrogant and irresponsible attitude towards
the international community, as those statements were
made before the Rwandan senate barely one week after
the signing of the Dar es Salaam Declaration, which we
consider to be of historic importance in ensuring peace
in Central Africa. In that context, I stress that all
Governments of the Great Lakes region, including that
of Rwanda, committed themselves to adopt nonaggression pacts and to promoting the establishment of
a regional mechanism to establish a zone of lasting
peace.

4

The President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila, addressed
the nation in order to inform the Congolese people
about the repeated acts of aggression that our country
has suffered at the hands of Rwandan armed forces
under the command of Mr. Paul Kagame. In his speech,
President Kabila described the successive stages of the
war that Rwanda has waged against my country since
1998 under the false pretext of pursuing ex-FAR and
Interahamwe combatants in the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The President of
the Republic has demonstrated the good will of the
Congolese authorities since 1999, cooperating closely
with the Rwandan authorities and the international
community in order to eradicate those elements from
Congolese territory, in accordance with the Geneva
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 1969
Convention of the Organization of African Unity
Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa. His action was also based on the Pretoria
Agreement of 17 December 2002 and the tripartite
agreement signed by Rwanda and Uganda in New York
in October 2004. In other words, the entire legal
arsenal has been mobilized in accordance with the
norms of international law to achieve a peaceful
settlement of the crisis caused by the presence of exFAR and Interahamwe elements in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
All regions of the country, including in particular
its eastern area — the provinces of the Kivus, Maniema
and Orientale — aspire to live in peace and security
within their borders. All incursions by foreign forces,
including those of Rwanda, will require the
Government of National Unity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to strictly implement Article 51
of the Charter, which stipulates that nothing in the
Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs
against a Member of the United Nations, until the
Security Council has taken measures necessary to
maintain international peace and security.
While endorsing the Council’s presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2004/45)
issued
yesterday,
7 December 2004, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo intends to strengthen its security
measures along the Rwandan border in order to protect
the civilian population, because information coming
from the Kivus describes acts of violence, inhuman and

S/PV.5096

degrading treatment and massacres that have targeted
several thousand civilians, including women and
children separated from their families, who have been
subjected to cruelty at the hands of Rwandan soldiers.
Those soldiers are known for their legendary cruelty
and practice a scorched earth policy, destroying
everything they find in the villages and causing
massive displacements of the population, which seeks
to flee those barbaric acts and massacres. Humanitarian
personnel on the ground have also raised the alarm
about the fact that those displacements will have
serious consequences.
On the basis of that analysis, my delegation
appeals to all countries that cherish peace and justice to
lend their unwavering support to the efforts deployed
by the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on
behalf of the international community with the goal of
ensuring peace, security and the establishment of
democracy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Those efforts are most solidly supported by the
Transitional Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which pursues the sole, praiseworthy
goal of establishing in the country the rule of law and
the republican values of equality, justice and peace. My
delegation stands ready to cooperate closely with the
Security Council to attain those goals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the kind words she addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Uganda.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Seeing is believing.
Members of the Security Council delegation to Central
Africa visited the region. They saw and heard what was
going on with respect to the security situation in the
region. They have come back convinced that the region
has done a lot to promote peace and security. Their
optimism is not misplaced. I congratulate Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sablière, the head of the mission, and
all the other members of the Council delegation on
their efforts to forge close working ties with the
leadership of the countries of the region.
The countries of the region have assumed
ownership of the work to stabilize the region, as
epitomized by what is going on in Burundi. Through
bilateral and tripartite mechanisms, the countries of the

region are addressing the issues of security, peace and
development. The international community, through
the United Nations, should not only monitor closely the
implementation of those agreements and follow closely
the roles and activities of the States of the region, as
recommended in the report (S/2004/934), but also
should give help where necessary and be actively
involved. As His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni of Uganda told the delegation, close
involvement of regional States in the affairs of the
region, in close partnership with the United Nations,
has borne fruit and could serve as a model of
cooperation.
Uganda has a considerable stake in the stability
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and believes
that, in order to achieve durable peace, that country
needs a strong central Government with a strong army
to assert its authority over the entire territory. With
strong authority, issues such as the alleged illegal
exploitation of the country’s natural resources can be
controlled.
Uganda now believes that any threat posed to
neighbouring countries by negative forces in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be addressed through the existing tripartite
mechanisms, as well as through bilateral and regional
agreements, with the involvement of the African Union
where this is necessary. In that way, the sovereignty of
States of the region would be safeguarded.
I would like to emphasize a point made by my
President concerning the greater involvement of
regional players such as the parties to the 1999 Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement in the international peace
processes under way in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My country is ready to play any role the
international community may deem necessary.
On the issue of armed groups in Ituri, which are
outside the transitional process, it is important that they
be integrated in the Transitional Government. My
President has already informed the Council of the
understanding reached between him and President
Kabila on that issue. Uganda does not believe in or
condone impunity. However, caution should be
exercised here lest the vigorous pursuit of the alleged
perpetrators drive them underground and impede the
process of integration. Crime has no statute of
limitation, and those involved could, if need be, always

5

S/PV.5096

be dealt with later, once institutions of government
have been strongly established.
Lastly, the Council delegation touched on the
humanitarian situation in northern Uganda. The
Uganda Government has gone the extra mile by
offering to talk to the rebels and by declaring a
unilateral ceasefire in certain areas in order to allow
them to assemble. The leadership of the rebels has not
responded yet. It is in their interest to do so.
Otherwise, the military campaign has scored
tremendous success with scores of abducted children
rescued and large numbers of rebels surrendering.
More than 700 rebels have been trained and absorbed
into the Uganda armed forces as a sign of
reconciliation. Soon, rebel activity in northern Uganda
will be history.
I close, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I wish
you well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Uganda for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Burundi.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on the
outstanding manner in which you are presiding over
the work of the Security Council. I also congratulate
the delegation of the United States on its presidency
during the month of November.
My delegation welcomes the recent Security
Council mission to Central Africa, led by Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sablière, the fourth such visit since
2001. The report under consideration (S/2004/934),
which complements the Secretary-General’s report on
Burundi (S/2004/902), published on 15 November
2004, points out honestly and unambiguously the
progress and the challenges of the peace process in
Burundi and in the subregion.
We would like to address the most important
aspects, not only for the end of the transition of
Burundi but also for the period beyond. First, dialogue
among Burundians must continue so that the widest
possible consensus can emerge on political issues, in
particular power-sharing and the adoption of laws that

6

will govern the post-transition period. For Burundi
needs peace not only before the end of the transition,
but also after it.
Council members were correct to ask their
Burundian interlocutors during their visit if the
political provisions being prepared presaged true
stability and lasting peace after the elections. Let us
repeat once again: the more we emphasize the search
for political consensus, the more likely we are to have
lasting peace after the elections.
The international community is called upon to
encourage Burundians to build a Burundi for all and by
all. It is also called upon to encourage the future
leaders of the post-transition period to reassure today’s
sceptics by building a climate of trust and preventing
what the Secretary-General calls in his report
“recklessly pursuing a winner-takes-all strategy”
(S/2004/902, para. 62).
Secondly, the question of the Forces nationales de
libération (FNL) warrants special attention from the
Council. My delegation is pleased to observe that the
Council mission noted how concerned the Burundian
authorities are by the behaviour of leaders of that rebel
movement which spreads hatred and violence and
which is trying to derail the electoral process. The
authorities of Burundi are asking the Council not only
to support the decisions of the heads of State of the
subregion, but also to go further by promising all
necessary assistance to prevent the leaders of the
Forces nationales de libération, allied with the negative
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from
sabotaging the peace process in Burundi and disrupting
peace along the border, especially that between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
Thirdly, turning to the fight against impunity,
Burundians are still waiting for the United Nations
contribution. In that regard, we should make public the
embargoed report of the Secretariat’s assessment
mission undertaken in May with the mandate of
evaluating the timeliness and feasibility of establishing
an international commission of judicial inquiry in
Burundi. The report should be submitted to the
Government of Burundi and to the Security Council
before the end of the year, as promised, and everything
should be done to hasten the consultations that will
follow upon the report’s publication. The struggle
against impunity, the establishment of the rule of law
and national reconciliation are important to the

S/PV.5096

stability of post-transition Burundi. They must be
addressed lucidly.
Fourthly, international assistance is crucial to
financing the elections and to implementing the
reforms called for in the Arusha Agreement. Be it a
question of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration operation; reform of the security and
justice sectors; assistance for returnees and displaced
persons who wish to return home; or the reconstruction
and revitalization of the economy, we still await the
assistance promised by the lenders. Burundi cannot
solve those problems by itself. My delegation invites
the Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Burundi to visit the region and to see for
itself yet again the link between bread and peace,
especially at this crucial stage in the process of putting
the country back on track. Without substantial
humanitarian and economic assistance, poverty, disease
and unemployment are potential factors for
destabilization and could re-ignite social tensions after
the elections because, as the Security Council mission
observed, elections are not an end in themselves.
Those are the cornerstones that form the basis of
adherence to the electoral calendar and end-oftransition activities, which could augur a more
promising future for Burundi. To date, and following
the Security Council’s most recent visit, the train has
been stubbornly moving towards the station, as
witnessed by the 80 per cent registration of potential
voters in the referendum and by the onset of
demobilization at three sites. The first site is for the
voluntarily demobilized personnel of the Burundian
Armed Forces; the second is for the voluntarily
demobilized personnel of the Forces pour la défense de
la démocratie and other armed movements; and the
third is for demobilized child-soldiers. Meanwhile,
laws on the new national defence forces and the new
national police have just been adopted by the National
Assembly.
We take this opportunity to welcome the role that
has been and will be played by the United Nations
Operation in Burundi in all aspects of the late
transition process, especially action to disarm the
civilian population and election monitoring.
Reforms must move forward at the same pace in
order to create a general symbiosis and dynamic to
help Burundi overcome this crisis, the positive effects
of which will be felt beyond its borders so as long as

all the countries of the subregion are part of the
dynamic established at the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region held at Dar es Salaam on
19 and 20 November under United Nations auspices.
Our subregion needs to recover rapidly so that we can
tackle our reconstruction and development through
such organizations as the Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries, which must be reactivated, the
East African Community and others.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Burundi for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro; and
the European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Council. I would
also like to thank Ambassador de La Sablière for
leading the Security Council mission and preparing the
report that is before us today.
The visit of the Security Council mission to the
region took place at a very appropriate moment, as it
came only days after the heads of State of the core
countries of the Great Lakes Conference signed the Dar
es Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes Region. By
signing the Declaration, they have committed
themselves to jointly putting an end to the endemic
conflicts and persistent insecurity in the Great Lakes
region through dialogue and confidence-building
measures.
The European Union welcomes the outcome of
the summit as clear evidence of the preparedness of the
countries of the region to move from confrontation to
consultation and cooperation. It is now imperative that
all signatories respect the principles they have agreed
upon and start implementing them without delay. The

7

S/PV.5096

European Union acknowledges that it will be
impossible to tackle all the problems of the region at
once. Therefore, the inter-ministerial committee awaits
the difficult but important task of setting clear
priorities and sequences. The European Union
reiterates its readiness to continue its support for the
conference through the Group of Friends.
The European Union is very concerned about
reports concerning the military incursion by Rwandan
armed forces into the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which took place only days after the Dar es
Salaam Declaration was signed and the Security
Council mission had left for New York. The
threatening declarations made by Rwanda have a
destabilizing effect on the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The European
Union condemns any violation of the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
calls upon the Rwandan Government to abide by the
Declaration of Principles, to respect the sovereignty of
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to withdraw its forces. The European Union calls
upon the Transitional Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to react with restraint to avoid a
military escalation. It calls upon both countries to
resolve the crisis within existing mechanisms, such as
the Tripartite Commission and the Joint Verification
Mechanism, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
At the same time, the European Union shares the
view that the problem of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda and the former Forces armées rwandaises
(FAR)/Interahamwe should be urgently addressed. First
and foremost, the continued presence of exFAR/Interahamwe elements on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo poses a threat to the
local population. The ensuing tensions risk
undermining the Congolese peace process. The
European Union therefore calls on the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to intensify its
efforts to disarm and demobilize such elements, with a
view to their repatriation or resettlement. It also
encourages MONUC to support the Government in
whatever way it can. The imminent deployment of an
additional brigade to North Kivu will provide
additional security for the region and increase

8

MONUC’s capacity to prevent spoilers, both from
within and outside, from derailing the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Every chain is only as strong as its weakest link.
Peace and stability in the Great Lakes region will
therefore remain elusive as long as one or more of the
countries of the region has not been stabilized or
reached a stage where the peace process is irreversible.
The European Union, like the Security Council
mission, is therefore heartened by the progress that has
been made in the transitional processes in both Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In both
countries the focus is now on elections, which are to be
held next year.
The situation in Burundi is particularly
encouraging. The acceptance of the Constitution by all
parties is a major step forward towards completing the
transition period and the holding of elections, for
which a clear calendar has been established. Voter
registration is well under way.
The European Union welcomes the recent
adoption of laws on the reform of the armed forces and
the police, and calls upon the Burundian authorities to
adopt the remaining key legislation, including the
electoral code and the communal law, as soon as
possible.
Another encouraging development is the recent
launch of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. However, the continued
support of the international community for the
transitional process remains crucial for it to remain on
track.
The European Union supports the mission’s
recommendation to reflect deeper on possible ways to
effectively prevent spoilers like the Forces nationales
de libération of Agathon Rwasa from undermining the
peace process. The European Union also agrees with
the mission’s conclusion that, in order to prevent
conflict from recurring, Burundi needs international
assistance in the areas of security sector reform, DDR,
reconstruction and development.
The European Union is less optimistic about the
progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Last August, the Secretary-General outlined the
political strategy that he believed should be
implemented to reduce the role of spoilers and build
confidence in the transition. MONUC was reinforced

S/PV.5096

and further expanded to support the Transitional
Government in the implementation of the so-called
critical path. In addition, the international community
reiterated its willingness to assist the Transitional
Government. That assistance would be facilitated by
more regular contacts between the espace présidentiel
and the International Committee in Support of the
Transition, as well as through cooperation between the
Government and international actors in the three joint
commissions, which should be established as soon as
possible. However, the primary responsibility for
implementing the core tasks of the transition rests with
the Transitional Government.

both Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is also a history of widespread human rights
violations and impunity. That cycle needs to be broken,
as peace, democracy, good governance and sustainable
development are unthinkable without respect for the
rule of law. There are additional challenges to the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict societies: at the
very moment when the need for justice is greatest, the
legal structures necessary to deliver that justice may
well be absent. Efforts at the national level should,
where necessary, be complemented at the international
level through cooperation with relevant international
institutions, notably the International Criminal Court.

Elections should be held in 2005. Failure to do so
could destabilize the country. The European Union is
very concerned about the lack of progress in key areas
during recent months, most notably with regard to
legislation, DDR and security sector reform. As far as
security sector reform is concerned, the training of a
number of integrated brigades before the holding of
elections seems essential. The European Union has
supported, and is planning to support, the Transitional
Government in virtually all of those areas. With regard
to police, the European Union has provided training for
an integrated police unit. A follow-up mission will
guide the unit in the exercise of its new duties.
Additional support for police reform, as well as for the
integration of the army, is currently being considered.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of the Netherlands for his kind words
addressed to me.

The European Union is one of the main
contributors to the multi-country demobilization and
reintegration programme trust fund. With regard to
elections, the European Commission has pledged €80
million, while several of its member States have also
pledged significant contributions.
The struggle against corruption is another
important element of the transition. In that regard, the
European Union welcomes recent indications of a more
forceful approach.
The Transitional Government needs international
assistance, and the European Union is willing to do its
part. However, international assistance cannot
substitute for political will and sustained commitment
on the part of the Transitional Government. The
Government owes nothing less to its people, who are
counting on their leaders to bring them the peace they
so richly deserve.
There is no peace without justice, and there is no
justice without the rule of law. The recent history of

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Rwanda. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the
delegation of the United States for a job well done last
month. Allow me also to thank the members of the
Council for their decision to send a mission to Central
Africa in November 2004, as well to thank the leader
of the mission for presenting its report. My
Government believes that such visits to the field are
useful to enable the Council to appreciate first-hand the
challenges being faced with respect to peace, security,
poverty and underdevelopment in the region.
The mission began its visit one day after the
historic signing of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. It is my Government’s earnest
hope that the process that began in Dar es Salaam on
20 November will culminate in genuine and durable
peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region and in the wider African continent.
We welcome the determination of the heads of State
present at Dar es Salaam to respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all States in the region and
to prevent the use of their own territories for
subversive activities by armed groups. We also
welcome their strong commitment to combat genocide
in the region and to disarm and arrest the perpetrators
of the genocide in Rwanda.

9

S/PV.5096

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
that the allegations pertaining to the presence of
Rwandan army troops are false. We have thus far
deployed our troops along the common border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to counter
incursions perpetrated by former Forces armées
rwandaises(FAR)/Interahamwe from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Council members will be aware of my
Government’s concern that for 10 years the problem of
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe based on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been
conclusively addressed and, as a result, remains a
source of insecurity and unrest for Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the wider
region. Over the last 10 years, Rwanda’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity have been repeatedly violated
with relative impunity by those forces. Cross-border
attacks are very frequent. Over the last few months
alone, over 600 of those forces have been captured
while conducting operations inside Rwanda. Their
cross-border operations have caused loss of life and
property and injury to civilians, as well as destruction
of infrastructure.
Despite numerous Council resolutions, those
forces continue to live and conduct criminal activities
from within their mobilized units in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They also continue to receive
military and other supplies and to recruit, train and
brainwash a significant number of members of the
younger generation that they involve in their military
activities.
We are aware that a new plan is now on the table
regarding the disarmament of those negative forces.
However, it is my Government’s experience that it is
not absence of good ideas or new and fresh plans that
killed the old plans, but rather the lack of political will
to implement them.
My Government earnestly hopes that the problem
of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe can be rapidly and
decisively addressed by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo Government and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), so that the need for any country
in the region to take any action against those forces in
self-defense is eliminated.
My Government looks forward to the
operationalization of the Joint Verification Mechanism.

10

In that regard, Rwanda has demonstrated its
commitment by taking the necessary steps to fulfil its
obligations,
including
the
appointment
of
representatives. We look forward to the appointment of
all representatives so that the mechanism could be
operationalized in the very near future.
Concerning the situation in Bukavu and the wider
region of the Kivus, my Government would like to
express its concern about the plight of the
Banyamulenge people and other groups who are being
persecuted and marginalized. We appeal to the Security
Council to ensure that their rights and freedoms are
upheld as citizens of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and that those who have been forced to flee
their country are allowed to return home and live in
peace and dignity.
Turning to the situation in Burundi, my
Government welcomes the progress in the transition
process. My Government is encouraged by the
seriousness and resolve of the Burundian authorities to
settle the issues that are still outstanding and to respect
and maintain the electoral calendar. Rwanda supports
all measures that will ensure long-term peace, stability,
reunification, reconciliation, democracy and powersharing and justice and development in Burundi, and
will continue to support the transitional process.
The Rwandan Government believes that strong
and decisive measures need to be taken against the
Forces nationales de libération (FNL), which,
following its joint attack with the exFAR/Interahamwe
against the refugees in Gatumba, slaughtered, in cold
blood, 160 Banyamulenge refugees and has
continuously been destabilizing the country.
My Government welcomes the conclusion of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa that, as long
as the problem of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe remains, it
will be a source of instability in the region. We also
welcome the mission’s recognition that this group
poses a threat to the civilian population and
neighbouring countries and that needs, therefore, the
problem to be rapidly addressed. That is the most
critical factor for my Government — that the problem
be rapidly and decisively addressed without delay. We
indeed appeal to the Council to confirm that this
problem will be rapidly addressed.
My Government notes that in the presidential
statement issued by the Security Council yesterday, the
Council described the armed presence and activities of

S/PV.5096

the ex-FAR/Interahamwe as unacceptable. My
Government also considers the presence of those forces
in mobilized positions that pose a real and direct threat
to the security of Rwanda to be unacceptable. We also
find it unacceptable that those forces are a present and
increasing threat to Rwanda and the wider region, even
now, after the genocide.
For 10 years my Government has appealed for
this problem to be rapidly addressed. Elaborate plans
have been drawn up, including the timetables and plans
that were a key component of the Lusaka and Pretoria
agreements. While Rwanda fulfilled its commitments
under both agreements, by completely withdrawing all
of its troops from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has yet to fulfil its commitment to disarm,
demobilize and repatriate the ex-FAR/Interahamwe,
even now, five and a half years after the signing of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and three and a half years
since the signing of the Pretoria Agreement.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Council and to urge members to keep their attention
focused on this issue in order to quickly establish
peace and stability in our region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): We appreciate the decision
to dispatch a Security Council mission to the Central
Africa region. The mission encouraged the ownership
initiative of Africa for peace and security at a very
critical moment for the region, when the first summit
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region of Africa, which embodies that initiative,
was taking place. The subsequent disturbance in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
however, has seriously damaged the prospects for
achieving peace and stability in the region. I therefore
wish to discuss three points that Japan considers
important in that connection.
First, we are deeply concerned about the reported
incursion of Rwandan troops across the border of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must urgently
seek to establish the facts, since the event, if it actually
occurred, jeopardizes the efforts of the Security
Council and the international community to bring
about peace in the Great Lakes region. The

Government of Rwanda should first have recourse to
such political means as the Joint Verification
Mechanism or the tripartite mechanism to address its
security concerns.
The immediate and active cooperation of the
Government of Rwanda in getting the Joint
Verification Mechanism operational is an absolute
requirement. At the same time, the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of members of the former Rwandan Army
(ex-FAR) forces and Interahamwe in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be accelerated, and we
therefore urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to make every possible effort to
disarm and repatriate those soldiers as expeditiously as
possible, in cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the newly deploying
brigades, in particular.
Secondly, with regard to Burundi, we first of all
commend and support the role played by the Regional
Peace Initiative and the African Union in promoting
the peace process. It is important for all the parties
concerned to make further efforts to advance the
process, in accordance with the newly established
schedule, so as to enable the indirect election of the
new President to be held and, thus, the process to be
completed next April. We condemn the Forces
nationales de libération (FLN) of Agathon Rwasa for
continuing to reject the peace process and fighting
against the Forces armées burundaises. We also
strongly condemn the Gatumba massacre. Such a
tragedy must never be repeated in this region. We
welcome in this regard the intention of the Government
of Burundi, after its national investigation, to refer the
matter to the International Criminal Court. I expect
those efforts to lead to the identification of those
responsible for the massacre and to ensure that they are
brought to justice.
Thirdly, with regard to the activities of the
peacekeeping operation, it is important to note that the
Security Council mission visited United Nations
peacekeepers in both the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi to make assessments on the
ground. Based on the experience gained through that
mission, the Security Council should seek to conduct
more in-depth discussions on how peacekeeping
operations can contribute to making elections
successful in those countries and can then be drawn

11

S/PV.5096

down in accordance with a clearly defined exit
strategy.
In this connection, I must mention that the
instances of sexual abuse alleged to have been
committed by members of MONUC betray the trust
and confidence of the local population and seriously
undermine the credibility of the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole. The Secretariat must
not suppress the facts in this case. All information
should be disclosed, and strict disciplinary measures to
prevent any recurrence should be taken at once.
In closing, I cannot overstate the importance of a
regional approach to the peace and stability of the
Central African region. The Security Council should
consider how to mobilize and optimize the military,
political and socio-economic tools available to the
international community in order to promote overall
peace in the region. Japan, for its part, has actively
participated in the discussion and, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council from next year, stands
ready to discharge its enhanced responsibilities in this
regard.
Mr. Trautwein (Germany): I would like, first, to
fully align my delegation with the statement just
delivered by the representation of the Netherlands on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union. I will
therefore limit myself to a few comments.
We would like to thank Ambassador de La
Sablière and the Secretariat for preparing and leading
the mission in such an excellent way. My delegation
wishes that we could call the mission a full success.
But the reports of a major military operation by
Rwandan troops in eastern Congo and the ensuing
controversy between the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Rwanda
have demonstrated that there is a continuing
considerable lack of confidence- or simply distrust.
Yesterday’s reaction by the Council in the form of a
presidential statement should be a very clear warning
to Rwanda. The intention stated by Rwanda to conduct
a calibrated action within 14 days against members of
the former Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) forces and
Interahamwe might reignite the regional conflict, and it
seriously threatens the fragile transitional process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must also play its part more actively. In
particular, it has to do more to disarm the troops of the

12

ex-FAR/Interahamwe. Only a serious and sustained
military effort on the part of the Congolese Army will
yield success. Rwanda, in return, must offer a climate
to potential returnees in which they feel welcome and
can enjoy full political freedoms.
Although the mission dealt primarily with the
Great Lakes conflict, we had a chance to speak briefly
with President Museveni about the conflict in northern
Uganda and the ensuing humanitarian crisis there. The
Council should keep the conflict on its agenda and
encourage peaceful solutions. We welcome any attempt
on the part of the Ugandan Government to enter into a
dialogue with the Lord’s Resistance Army leadership.
In conclusion, I would like to point out a very
important aspect of this and other missions of the
Council. Although we are sometimes frustrated by
developments in the Great Lakes region, we should
always bear in mind that our efforts to achieve lasting
peace are aimed at populations longing desperately for
a normal life in a stable environment. The mission met
many courageous and dedicated persons from all walks
of life, who devote their lives to ending impunity,
building bridges between ethnic groups and bringing
humanitarian assistance to communities forgotten by
their Government and local rulers. That was, and is,
very inspiring.
Mr. Dumitru (Romania) (spoke in French):
Romania fully associates itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union.
I would like to make a few brief remarks. First, I
would like to thank Ambassador de La Sablière for the
outstanding way in which he led the most recent
mission of the Security Council to Central Africa. The
thorough grasp of the issues that he demonstrated, in
addition to his indefatigable dynamism and the
eloquence for which he is so well known, meant that
the messages of the Council were transmitted
forcefully and clearly to the various interlocutors. We
are also grateful to the countries of the subregion that
received the mission. The dialogue that was conducted
there, backed up by the views expressed today by the
representatives of the countries concerned, provide an
essential input for the deliberations that members of
the Council will continue to conduct on matters of
concern to them.

S/PV.5096

Secondly, we welcome the specific outcomes of
the mission, which again prove how this instrument
that the Council possesses can add value.
First of all, the mission stressed the ongoing
commitment of the Council to peace and security in a
key region of Africa. The direct contacts with the
stakeholders improved our understanding of the facts
on the ground and strengthened cooperation with
regional and subregional partners. The mission was
able to assess, at first hand, the excellent job done by
both peacekeeping operations deployed in the
region — the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB), as
well as the effectiveness of the activities of the special
representatives of the Secretary-General and other
parts of the United Nations presence, whose synergy
translates the Council’s mandates into action.
In view of the challenges that must be met in
order to meet the 2005 deadline for elections, we
welcome the fact that the Council mission stressed the
need for the Governments and parliaments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi to
hasten the adoption of the decisions and measures
required of them. Accordingly, Romania wishes to
reiterate that the primary responsibility of the political
leaders of Central African countries is not only to their
own peoples and countries, but also to neighbouring
peoples and States.
Thirdly, we wish to point out something that is of
particular interest to Romania, as well as to other
members of the Council. While the mission focused on
the two situations that require the vigilant attention of
the Council — those in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi — it also adopted a regional
approach. That regional approach included talks with
the Rwandese President, Mr. Paul Kagame, and the
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni; it is
crucial to resolving, in an integrated and consistent
manner, the common issues of peace and security. As
an African proverb says, everyone travelling in the
same boat has the same destination.
The fact that the Council mission had two focuses
was very important, since progress in the transitional
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi is still fragile, due both to domestic
difficulties and to negative external factors. Among
those factors, we wish to draw the Council’s attention

to the serious lack of trust that continues to prevail in
the domestic political atmosphere, among the political
leaders of groups and communities and in relations
between the main regional actors. Accordingly, we
welcome the recent Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. We take note of the fact that
confidence-building is among the priority policy
options and guiding principles mentioned in the first
section of part III of the Declaration, on peace and
security. However, it is clear that, in the light of the
discussions conducted by the Council mission and of
subsequent events related to the renewed tension
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, this priority must indeed be put into practice,
in order to overcome the currently prevailing distrust.
Fourthly, we share the broader vision of the
mission, since it called upon parties in the region to
look beyond the preparation and organization of the
2005 elections. While primary energy should be
devoted, in the short-term, to that essential goal, we
must also consider the political future of both countries
after the elections are held and after the current
transitional processes are completed. As shown by the
experience of other countries, including Romania, that
have seen successful political transitions holding
elections is not an end in itself. Obviously, stability,
peace and security will depend on what happens during
the post-electoral, post-transition phase in the political
and development areas.
There are, of course, many other lessons to be
learned from the Council’s mission to Central Africa.
We support the set of recommendations made by the
mission and systematic follow-up of these
recommendations by the Council. At the same time, the
indubitable impact on the ground prompts us to
conclude that while we should continue to plan
missions to Africa, also we must think about similar
activities for 2005 in other regions in conflict that are
on the Security Council agenda and that directly
concern the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of France for his additional
remarks, today, on the Security Council mission to
Central Africa. I take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador De La Sablière and his team for the
excellent preparation for and performance of the

13

S/PV.5096

mission. I would also like to make the following
points.
First, my delegation reiterates its support for the
nature of such missions. They offer an invaluable
opportunity for better and deeper knowledge on
specific issues and situations and directly convey the
Council’s commitment to the advancement of peace in
war-torn regions.
Secondly, Brazil is encouraged by the mission’s
progress, which its members witnessed particularly in
Burundi, but also in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the efforts being made in order to
conduct elections in 2005 according to the agreed
calendar, although we are conscious that the holding of
elections is not an end in itself. At the same time, we
also take note of the logistical concerns highlighted by
local authorities, which may delay the electoral process
in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. If necessary, new dates must be agreed upon by
all concerned parties, but a delay in the elections must
be considered only as a last resort, in order to
guarantee free and fair elections.
The mission also recognized that all progress
achieved on the political and security agendas could be
jeopardized if legitimate concerns about social and
economic development are not properly addressed. In
that regard, in considering the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Operation in Burundi, the
Council should devote further attention to the
Operation’s role in promoting and coordinating
international efforts aimed at fostering development in
Burundi.
Thirdly, I acknowledge the efforts made by the
mission to cope with the unexpected challenge posed
by the decision of the Rwandese authorities to launch,
at the time of the mission’s visit to the region, a series
of threats that could easily undermine the Congolese
peace process. In this regard, my delegation commends
Ambassador De La Sablière for his vigorous
leadership, which was responsible for a timely and
balanced response to the situation. The mission had the
opportunity to witness the concerns deriving from the
presence of foreign armed troops, including members
of the former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe, in the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council is aware of
remaining problems in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and should continue

14

to back the efforts being made by Congolese
authorities, with the support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, aimed at accelerating the disarmament and
demobilization of foreign armed troops. The
presidential statement adopted yesterday by the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda (S/PRST/2004/45)
is a further step reflecting our interest in the
establishment of peace and stability in the region.
Fourthly,
my
delegation
supports
the
recommendations in the report (S/2004/934). Because
of their pertinence and urgency, I would underline a
number of them: first, the request for the international
community to assist in the advancement of the
transition process in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including in the preparation of
elections; secondly, the need for the Transitional
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to develop its programme of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation in order to address the problems related to
the presence of foreign armed groups in its territory;
thirdly, the request for the Governments of Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
implement expeditiously the Joint Verification
Mechanism already agreed on by both parties; and, last
but not least, the recommendation that the Council
undertake a deeper reflection on the issue of the Forces
nationales de libération with a view to considering
what additional measures could be taken against those
in that movement who compromise the peace process.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by joining others in thanking Ambassador De La
Sablière for his superb leadership of the Council’s
mission. The delegation of the Netherlands has already
delivered a statement on behalf of the European Union,
and I associate my delegation with that statement.
I want to begin where my German colleague left
off. Our efforts are about peace for ordinary people.
We met impressive representatives of civil society in
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi.
I should like to make a few remarks about the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, underlining some
of the recommendations from the mission’s report
(S/2004/934). Civil society in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo clearly wants elections, and peace

S/PV.5096

through elections, in 2005. That makes essential
rigorous pursuit of the road map by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That in turn
requires the espace présidentiel to work together and
with Parliament. It also requires their collaboration
with the international community, especially the
International Committee in Support of the Transition
(CIAT). My Government considers it extremely
important that all three joint commissions of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and CIAT — that is, the commissions on securitysector reform, elections and legislation — should get
under way. We welcomed President Kabila’s assurance
to the mission, when we met him, that all three would
be up and running before the end of the year.
I should now like to make three points about the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and its
functioning. The first relates to our concern that the
issue of sexual exploitation should be gripped hard
immediately. Urgent investigation and rapid action by
the United Nations and troop-contributing countries is
essential. The second point is that it is also essential
that MONUC should use its enhanced resources
effectively. We think that that means focusing on
security-sector reform, on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
and on elections. The third point is that this is going to
be extremely demanding for MONUC in 2005. Among
other things, we would like MONUC to help catalyse
the international community’s work on security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
give early attention to the support for the election
process that MONUC and the international community
must
deliver.
We
would
welcome
early
recommendations from MONUC and the SecretaryGeneral on that point, concerning election support.
I shall now make some points about the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As our mission
report underlines, instability in that part of the country
has an impact on the whole Great Lakes region. To
address that problem, leaders in the region must
collaborate and must use their many agreed
mechanisms, not threats and inflammatory language.
The threats from Rwanda, even while the Council’s
mission was under way, were unacceptable.
As the mission’s report also observes, as long as
the problem of members of the former Rwandan
Armed Forces (ex-FAR)/Interahamwe persists in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo, it will be a source
of instability in the region. Our presidential statement
(S/PRST/2004/45) yesterday recognized that. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUC have a plan for ensuring the disarmament
and repatriation of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, and it
needs to be accelerated as much as possible. Progress
in the Kivus, but also in Ituri, therefore depends
crucially on the construction of a Congolese national
army and on DDRRR.
Turning briefly to Burundi, I wish to underline
just two points. The first is that, while Burundi faces a
demanding election schedule, the Council mission
came away confident that that schedule could now be
achieved and deserved our support, but that elections
are not an end in themselves and that attention to the
post-election political environment is essential.
Secondly, I want to underline the importance of the
issue of impunity. We look forward to an early report
from the Secretary-General in that regard.
Finally, I welcome the fact that the Council was
able to discuss with President Museveni of Uganda
ways and means to find a solution to the conflict in
northern Uganda, which has caused a grievous
humanitarian crisis. There have been some encouraging
steps in the peace process, but we are convinced that
that is a situation that the Council needs to continue to
monitor.
Mr. Mercado (Philippines): Allow me to begin
by taking this opportunity to express our
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. We would also like to commend
Ambassador Danforth and other members of the United
States delegation on their successful presidency in
November. Likewise, we join other delegations in
thanking Ambassador De La Sablière for his able
leadership of the mission to Central Africa.
There is no doubt that the Council considers
developments in Central Africa very seriously. During
the past 12 years, eight of the Council’s 24 missions
were to the region. The recent mission is but one
manifestation of this body’s continued concern over the
situation in the region. The timing and impact of the
mission take on greater significance because the
mission came on the heels of the successful convening
of the Great Lakes Conference in Dar es Salaam.

15

S/PV.5096

My delegation believes that the mission and the
Conference complemented each other, and it is in that
context that we would like to highlight the following
points.
First, just as the 11 heads of State pledged to fully
support the national processes in the region, the
Security Council and the international community
should also express the same solid support, particularly
with respect to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi. We are pleased that the transitional peace
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi have been proceeding at a brisk pace. We
therefore encourage the leaders of the Transitional
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of Burundi to accelerate their efforts to prepare for
the holding of elections next year and to persevere in
their commitment to make the peace processes
irreversible.
Secondly, aware that those leaders recognize the
need to respect the fundamental principles of territorial
integrity, sovereignty, non-interference and nonaggression, the Security Council and the international
community should continue to impress strongly on the
countries in the region that cross-border issues — such
as the problem of foreign armed combatants — must be
resolved through the available multilateral, regional
and bilateral mechanisms, in a spirit of sustained
dialogue and cooperation. The Council’s position on
the current border problem in the region was clearly set
out in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/45)
issued yesterday.
Thirdly, mindful of the importance accorded
economic development and humanitarian and social
issues, as evidenced by the preponderance of
commitments in the Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, the Security Council should exert
its influence by urging the international community —
particularly donor countries — to extend the needed
financial and technical assistance to those countries in
order to help alleviate poverty. A case in point is in
Burundi, where all the interlocutors whom the mission
met repeatedly mentioned the direct link between
peace and development, particularly the need to
address the dire poverty in the country through the
mobilization of funds necessary for economic recovery
and national reconstruction, including relief from
external debt.

16

Fourthly, my delegation reiterates its view that
the elections are not the be-all and end-all of the
process and that the post-election scenario and the
preparations for activities in its aftermath are just as
important.
The
addressing
of
post-conflict
peacebuilding issues should begin as early as possible,
if not now. The region also needs assistance for its 127
million people, who are struggling to cope with raging
conflicts, repeated and continued displacement,
drought and disease, including the HIV/AIDS
pandemic.
Fifthly, acknowledging the invitation to the
United Nations to assist the member States of the
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Security
Council should be prepared to contribute its share to its
two major peacekeeping operations in the region: the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB). My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
commend MONUC and ONUB, particularly their
leaders, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral William Swing and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Carolyn McAskie, for their
constructive roles in helping the peace processes in
their respective jurisdictions.
Finally, the Great Lakes conference ended with
the setting up of follow-up mechanisms designed to
ensure that work on implementing the Dar es Salaam
Declaration continues until the second summit is held a
year from now in Kenya. We hope that, by the time the
second conference is convened and the Council once
again visits the region, the countries will have already
implemented several of the commitments contained in
the Declaration and will have taken solid steps forward
in achieving peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
would like first of all to extend its congratulations to
Ambassador Baali and the Algerian delegation upon
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We would also like to express our appreciation
and thanks to the successful American presidency last
month under the able leadership of Ambassador
Danforth.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière for leading the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region and

S/PV.5096

for presenting its report. The mission reaffirmed the
Council’s commitment to peace and security in that
important region. I would like to take this opportunity
to make the following comments and suggestions:

FNL (Rwasa), and its cross-border links with other
extremist forces, as testified to by the Gatumba
massacre, will have to be addressed in a
comprehensive manner.

First, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the main challenge now is to continue to support the
peace process. There have been some justifiable
expressions of skepticism. Efforts should continue to
ensure that the Transitional Government begin to
function as a unified national Government and that the
parties therein abide by their commitments, especially
with regard to elections, security sector reform and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
militias.

Fifth, the deployment of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB) and the ongoing buildup of United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo should
contribute to improving mutual confidence between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi and thus enhance security and stability in the
region. Pakistan has contributed a brigade to MONUC
for the South Kivu area. That is in addition to our
contribution of a mechanized infantry battalion for
MONUC’s Ituri brigade. A Pakistani battalion has also
deployed with ONUB in Burundi’s Cibitoke Province
across the Democratic Republic of the Congo border.
The deployment of Pakistani units on both sides of the
Burundi-Democratic Republic of the Congo border
will, in our view, considerably enhance coordinated
United Nations peacekeeping action in the region.

Second, effective efforts have to be made to
disarm local and foreign armed groups, like the MayiMayi, and the Hema and Lendu militias, as well as the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe, which remain outside the
political process. Political measures to ensure a smooth
transition need to be accompanied by a strengthening
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s national
institutions and their capacity to exert State authority
throughout the country.
Third, regional stability is crucial in order to
protect and promote the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Pakistan attaches
the highest importance to respect for the principles of
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity for
all States. International borders are inviolable. In the
absence of actual external military aggression, the
threat or use of force across international borders
cannot be justified. As the Security Council’s
presidential statement has declared, Rwanda should
withdraw without delay any forces that might be in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and exercise
restraint in its actions and pronouncements. At the
same time, the problem for regional security posed by
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe also needs to be addressed. In
that regard, we suggest the development of a more
effective strategy to disarm and repatriate those groups.
The Tripartite Commission, as well as the Joint
Verification Mechanism between Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be more
effectively utilized in that context.
Fourth, the transitional process in Burundi,
despite the challenges to it, is moving forward in the
right direction. The international community must
support that adequately. However, the threat posed by

Sixth, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a root
cause of the complex threats to peace and stability in
the region. As one of our colleagues on the Council’s
mission privately observed, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is “too big, too rich and too weak”. The
illegal exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s resources motivates the militias and funds
their campaign of violence and pillage. But the major
profits of such illegal exploitation often end up in
coffers far removed from the Great Lakes region. Until
that rape of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
resources is stopped, it will be difficult to promote
peace, security and prosperity in that unfortunate
country. Until then, corruption and conflict will
continue in the region. That issue has to be addressed.
The Security Council — or if the Council cannot act,
some other United Nations organ — should follow up
on the Kassem report and investigate and identify those
involved in the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and those who finance or profit from that, thus
enabling the international community to end that
unfortunate legacy that has afflicted the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other nations for so long.
Seventh, peace and development are indivisible.
The consolidation of peace in the region requires
sustained international commitment, particularly from

17

S/PV.5096

the donor community, to support economic and social
development in the region. Without that, conflict may
be a recurring feature in the Great Lakes region.
Finally, we need to ensure ways and means to
realize the objectives and decisions of the recent
summit conference on the Great Lakes to promote
comprehensive peace and prosperity. In particular, it is
essential to put in place effective regional mechanisms
for the peaceful settlement and resolution of disputes in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for his kind words addressed
to Ambassador Baali and the Algerian delegation.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the representative of France for the
summary of the report that he has given us. I would
also like to pay tribute to him for the professionalism
he displayed as head of the Security Council mission
during our stay in Central Africa. We fully share his
analysis of the situation with respect to the recent
events that have taken place in that sub-region, and
also with respect to the peace process underway in
Central Africa. We believe that the Council’s message
was clear and expressed the willingness of the
international community to facilitate the peace process
in the sub-region. We hope that the Council’s message
in that regard was well understood.
I would simply like to make the following
comments. It seems that the most important challenges
to be addressed in both Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo consist of adherence to the
timetable for the elections and the establishment of
institutions. It also seems that the question of the
armed presence of ex-FAR Interahamwe should also be
monitored more carefully by our Council and that a
practical and urgent solution should be found by the
international community with a view to holding
peaceful elections throughout the entire territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, but
also in order to finally give Rwanda a guarantee of the
security that it needs along its border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is also crucial
that the Joint Verification Mechanism become
operational immediately, as well as the tripartite
mechanism that involves Uganda. It seems today that
the presence of ex-FAR and other armed groups must
be addressed from the point of view of their
subregional involvement.

18

The Council should also discuss further the
question of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration of ex-FAR/Interahamwe. The
principle of their disarmament and their demobilization
is now accepted, and there is no need to go further into
that. However, on the question of the threat of
genocide, we believe that we have to go beyond the
logic of the fable of the wolf and the lamb, and look at
the human rights dimension of the problem. Today, the
question of genocide is taken into account by the
international community through a certain number of
mechanisms and instruments.
In this connection, we have to adopt the approach
of individual responsibility rather than the wholesale
condemnation or demonization of a political
movement, an armed group or an ethnic group. Having
said this, we believe that finding a solution to the
question of the threat of the presence of
ex-FAR/Interahamwe should be considered within the
framework of bilateral and trilateral mechanisms that
have been set up. Parties must refrain from any
unilateral action, because it is only in this way that
they can show that they are truly committed to the
objective of stabilizing the region and thus contribute
to the efforts made by the international community to
strengthen the peace process in the region.
We also have to think further about effective
ways to combat impunity so as to discourage all those
who are thwarting the efforts of the international
community and to prevent events as tragic as the ones
that we saw in the Gatumba refugee camp. The
credibility of the Council is also at stake, because the
people in this region are impatiently awaiting the
establishment of an international commission to
investigate that crime.
We also have to deal more carefully with the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially since
this phenomenon has implications not only for security
but also for the spread of corruption. It could also have
implications on governance, once institutions have
been set up after the eagerly awaited elections.
With the international conference on the Great
Lakes region and dialogue structures already under
way at the bilateral and multilateral level, the
necessary instruments exist to restore peace to the
subregion and to establish the basis for a gradual
implementation of development plans for the

S/PV.5096

subregion. We have to encourage dialogue as well as
concessions, which are the only way of making
progress towards peace.
Furthermore, the Council should closely follow
the implementation of the conclusions of the mission to
Central Africa. A possible quarterly review, I think,
would be appropriate in order to bring pressure to bear
on the parties.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We believe that the Algerian presidency of the Security
Council deserves praise for having organized this open
meeting of the Council on the recent mission that we
carried out to Central Africa, which gives us a
possibility of assessing the results of the mission and to
think together with other Member States of the
Organization about how this Council and the United
Nations as a whole could continue working actively in
order to promote peace, stability and progress in the
Great Lakes region. Before continuing, I would like to
point out that Spain, of course, supports what has
already been expressed by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.
The Security Council’s mission to Central Africa,
led skilfully by Ambassador de La Sablière, took place
at a particularly complex time, because, on the one
hand, the key States of the region, such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, find
themselves in a crucial phase of their respective
transition processes, and on the other hand, it is also
clear that the regional dimension is taking on a
growing importance.
With respect to the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have to stress
the need for Congolese political forces to reach an
agreement that would make it possible to quickly adopt
a constitutional text as well as approve pending
legislative texts that would lead to holding elections
planned for June 2005. Furthermore, the security sector
reform and, more concretely, the establishment of
unified armed forces and the reform of the police
sector are of particular importance and are urgent at the
moment. Holding elections requires safety conditions
which can only be guaranteed through the deployment
of a sufficient number of troops from the future
integrated armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Congolese integrated forces is crucial in order to
address the instability in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular, the
provinces of Ituri and the Kivus.
With respect to the situation in Burundi and after
the agreement between the political parties on the new
constitution, priority actions include the quick approval
of pending legislative texts, respect of the electoral
calendar, as well as making significant progress in the
demobilization process. The authorities of Burundi
have to tackle all this, relying on the continued and
effective assistance of the international community.
In any case, as the Council’s mission stressed on
several occasions on their visit to the region, elections
are a necessary factor within the transition process, but
this should not be considered an end in itself. Once the
transition period is over in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Burundi, after the holding of free,
democratic and broadly participatory elections in the
scheduled timelines, we will begin a new and
important phase in which Governments that have
emerged from the elections will have to work actively
in order to promote reconciliation, peace and
sustainable development with the support of the
international community. Experience has shown us that
the period that follows the first elections after a
conflict raises significant challenges, and it is up to
everyone, in particular the victors in the election, to
place national interest before particular interests so that
they may guarantee long-term stability and progress.
With respect to the regional dimension, in recent
times, we have seen important initiatives at the
bilateral, trilateral and multilateral level among the
countries concerned. I am referring to the
establishment of the Joint Verification Mechanism
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, the completion of the October 2004 tripartite
agreement between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, as well as the signing of
the Dar es Salaam Declaration on 20 November,
following the first summit of the international
conference on the Great Lakes region of Africa. It is
crucial that the States involved, instead of resorting to
any type of unilateral action, should use those
mechanisms and provisions, both to resolve any
dispute and, above all, to promote trust and
cooperation within the entire region.

Furthermore, as the mission was able to observe
in Bukavu, the deployment of contingents made up of

19

S/PV.5096

The countries of Central Africa are facing
important challenges at both at the national and
regional levels. The political will of the States in the
region — of their leaders and their political forces —
to move forward along the path of peace, stability and
development is paramount and irreplaceable. We trust
that the Security Council will continue to provide
support to encourage the processes under way and to
help to lay the foundations for lasting peace in the
region, a necessary condition for the progress and
economic and social development of the peoples of the
region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Spain for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to start by
thanking the Algerian presidency for convening this
important meeting. I would also like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sablière, for the way he conducted
the Security Council mission to the Central African
region. The mission spoke with one voice, and there
was teamwork. The leaders of the region whom we met
were very attentive to the messages that the Council
had to deliver.
The Council mission took place at a crucial
moment, as the sustainability of peace and stability in
both Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will depend mostly on the achievements to be
reached by the main national actors and by the
international community during this transition period.
Last week, Ambassador de La Sablière spoke on the
positive developments in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as on the difficulties
facing this process in those countries.
My delegation is deeply concerned at the
developments in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In our opinion, the countries of
the region should avoid any action contrary to the spirit
of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on the Great Lakes,
which states that the countries of the Great Lakes
region “fully support the national peace process in the
region and refrain from any acts, statements or
attitudes likely to negatively impact them, including
through the media”.
When the mission visited Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo the issue of the exFar/Interahamwe was fully discussed at the appropriate

20

level, as all Council members have previously stated.
In both countries those forces were recognized as a
source of instability in the region — and they are.
There is, therefore, a common understanding on the
need to find a solution to the ex-Far/Interahamwe
issue, one independent of the perception of each of the
countries and of the Security Council. In our opinion,
the long-lasting solution to this issue should be found
through dialogue and the operationalization of the
existing bilateral and multilateral mechanisms, such as
the Joint Verification Mechanism and the tripartite
agreement, and in full respect of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of the countries of the
region.
Other factors that concur for the same objective
are the ongoing enhancement of the presence of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
east of that country; the development by the Congolese
authorities of the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement plan, to be
supported by MONUC in particular; and the ongoing
“Walungu operation”, a joint exercise of the Congolese
Armed Forces and MONUC aimed at repatriating
Rwandan armed elements.
The use of legal instruments such as an arms
embargo, and a more proactive attitude on the part of
the international community with regard to the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, which has been
referred to here very vividly by the Ambassador of
Pakistan — and we support his idea — will also
contribute to the same purpose.
The countries of the region should, therefore,
refrain from any action that may only exacerbate an
already volatile situation and fuel tension among local
communities.
Regarding Burundi, it is important that the
international community adopt a concerted position on
the FNL (Rwasa) question, in conformity with the
position of the countries of the region that classify the
FNL as a terrorist group.
Everything possible should be done to ensure that
the elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi will constitute a new source of hope
and not the beginning of another cycle of violence. It
is, therefore, important that the holding of elections not
be considered an end in itself. The question of power-

S/PV.5096

sharing in the post-electoral period should be central to
the political strategy of the two countries.
My delegation particularly appreciates the
importance given to the regional dimension in these
discussions. We are dealing with countries that have
more to share than to divide them, taking into account
their history and the traditional ties of their people.
Burundi’s request to join the bilateral and trilateral
mechanisms created by Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda deserves the
attention of the countries concerned, as well as that of
our Council.
Good examples of the past, such as the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries, are a source
of inspiration for the countries’ confidence-building
process at the present stage. In this connection, the
recommendations made by the multidisciplinary

mission to the region, led by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kalomoh two years ago, are of great
importance and require due implementation.
Finally, my delegation fully supports the
recommendations set out in the mission’s report. They
contain elements that will help our Council to continue
to work jointly with the authorities of the countries and
with the regional and subregional authorities. This will
render the usefulness of our mission more relevant and
timely than ever.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Angola for the kind words addressed
to the presidency.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

21
