UNITED NATIONS

rd
, MEETING:

1 MARCH

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . , , , , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13802) , . , . . . . . , , . . , . . . , . , , . . . , , , , . . . . , , . . . . , . , . . , . , . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2203/Rev.

SlPV.2203

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJcial Records & tha Security Courzcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions u/d
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2203rd MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 1 March 1980, at 12 noon.
presi&nf: Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

(Jamaica).

(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2203/Rev.

(S/X3802)

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings [2199th to 2202nd
meetings], I invite the representative of Jordan to take
a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber; I invite the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a
place at the Council table; and I invite the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

1)

I, Adoption of the agenda
2, The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations address,ed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13802)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Sahak
(Afghanistan),
Mr. Bouzarbia (Algeria), Mr. RoaKouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Karnil
(Indonesia), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait),
Mr, Tutfni (Lebanon), Mr. Filali (Morocco), Mr. Naik
(Pakistan),
Mr. Mansouri (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council
table; Mr. Kane (Acting Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

The meeting wus called to order at 12.20 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

( 1, The PRESIDENT:
I should like to begin by
expressing my appreciation
of and admiration for
themanner in which Ambassador Florin of the German
Democratic Republic performed his duties as President
Ofthe Council for the month of February. In a month
in which the Council was called upon to deal with a
number of very important issues, and at a time when
the international community was troubled with grave
problems and conflicts, the Council’s work benefited
from the calm and purposeful manner in which he
presided over its affairs. I am particularly grateful
for the very able manner in which he has been dealing
with the subject which has been before the Council
’ in recent days and which we will be considering today.
I
Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/13827, which contains the text
of a draft resolution prepared in the course of consultations, I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/13830, which contains the text of a letter
dated 29 February from the representative of Tunisia
to the President of the Council.

The agenda was adopted.

4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to vote now on the draft resolution contained in document S/13827.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
@) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representhtive of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13801);

5. The representative of Norway wishes to make a
statement before the vote and I call on him.
1

occupied territories to a successful conclusion. The
final status of these territories can be established only
through a comprehensive
solution negotiated
by
representatives of all the parties concerned, including
the Palestinian people. In order to achieve such a
solution, all parties must show flexibility
and refrain
from actions which may complicate the search for
peace. In this respect we deeply regret the Israeli
Government’s
policy of settlements in the occupied
territories and its decision to establish further settlements there.

6. Mr. ALGaRD
(Norway): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for
this month. We are all confident that you will discharge your duties with the same wisdom and firmness
that you demonstrated so amply under difficult circumstances in January of last year. As always, you can
count on the full support of my delegation.
7. May I also express my thanks and good wishes to
the outgoing President, Ambassador Florin of the
German
Democratic Republic, for the skilful and
constructive way in which he presided over our deliberations last month.

12. Since the draft resolution before us reflects, in
principle, the views of the Norwegian Government on
the situation in the occupied territories, we shall vote
in favour of it.

8. Once again the Council is discussing the Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories. My delegatioh’s
position on this issue was stated during the Council’s
deliberations
in July of last year [2159rh meeting].
The Norwegian Government
considers the Israeli
settlements policy to be inconsistent with international
law and the fourth Geneva Convention
of August
1949. The settlements policy is also an obstacle to
peace. During the Council’s meetings last July the
Norwegian Government joined in the Council’s appeal
to Israel to cease its settlements policy, We did so
because we feel that that policy undermines
the
ongoing negotiations and prejudges the outcome of
negotiations
on the future of the occupied territories.
We regret that that appeal has not been heeded.

13. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/13827.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
(resolution 465 (1980)).

was adopted

unanimously

14. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have expressed the wish to be allowed to speak after
the vote and I now call on them.
15. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I should like to take this first opportunity to congratulate you upon your assumption of
your duties and express our confidence that you will
perform in your present office in the same high manner
as you did on an earlier occasion. I should also like
to express our thanks to our colleague from the German
Democratic Republic for the very competent way in
which he performed his task in the preceding month,

9. The Norwegian delegation has carefully studied
the second report [S/13679] of the Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979). In our view, the
Commission,
under the most able leadership of Ambassador Mathias of Portugal, has dealt with highly
sensitive and delicate problems in an even-handed
manner, despite the many difficulties it encountered
in discharging its responsibilities.
The work of the
Commission
has served to underline the far-reaching
importance
of the matters dealt with in its report as
regards
the peaceful development
of relations
between States and peoples in the Middle East.
10. My own delegation joined with others in supporting
the invitation to the Mayor of Hebron to
appear before the Council, It must be regretted that
he was denied an exit visa and thereby prevented
from presenting his views to the Council. The decision
to bar his travelling to New York may further increase
tension in the occupied territories and further complicate ongoing negotiating efforts regarding the future
of the occupied territories,

16. As always, the Middle East is subject to many
trends and influences, some of which are contradictory
in nature. In the view of the United States, one of the
positive trends in the area is reflected in the current
series of negotiations for a comprehensive
settlement
which resulted from the historic breakthrough
at
Camp David a year and a half ago. A peace treaty
has been signed and large areas of occupied Arab
territory have been evacuated by Israel. The parties
have taken concrete steps in the cause of peace,
even in the face of issues which touch upon their
most vital national interests and on which there are,
particularly in Israel, sharp but honest differences of
view.

11. A just and lasting peace in the Middle East can
be brought about only through a comprehensive
soIution. Such a solution must be based on recognition
of the right of Israel to exist within secure and recognized boundaries and of the legitimate national rights
of the Palestinian people. Norway lent its support
to the process which has brought about the peace treaty
between Israel and Egypt. It is of the utmost importance
to bring the ongoing negotiations
on the

17. Significant as these developments are, we recognize that there can be no comprehensive
peace in the
Middle East until the Palestinian problem, in all its
aspects, is resolved. The ongoing negotiations on the
West Bank and Gaza are, admittedly,
difficult and,
even if they are successful, they will constitute only
a first step. But progress is being made and for the
first time in 30 years the core issues are being addressed seriously and, I believe, with determination.
2

lf, Everyone recognizes that the problem of Israeli
,,.tlements is one of the issues that must be dealt with.
The position of the Umted States on the question
of settlements is clear and consistent. In particular,
the United States has had occasion to state its views
both publicly and privately
Concerning
the situation
in Hebron.

outcome. AS far as our delegation is concerned, you
can expect full co-operation in your search for such an
outcome.
24. At the same time, I should like to thank the outgoing President, Ambassador Florin of the, German
Democratic Republic, for the work he did during the
month of February. I should like to say that the results
of his work are evident. The very resolution which
we adopted today is one that was by and large prepared while Mr. Florin was occupying the very responsible post of President of the Council.

19~ We regard the settlements in the occupied territories as illegal under international
law, and we considerthem to be an obstacle t0 a successful outcome
ofthe current negotiations, which are aimed at a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East,

25. The Soviet delegation considers that the discussion that we have had in the Council on the situation
prevailing in the Arab territories occupied by Israel
has been both timely and useful. All those who have
spoken-except
one representative, of course-have
once again reaffirmed that the policies and practices
of Israel in the Arab territories which were seized by
military action and Israel’s practices towards the Arab
and Palestinian population which lives there should be
decisively condemned. The numerous facts which have
been presented by the Arab representatives have
convincingly
shown that Israel, in continuing to
implant settlements in the occupied Arab territories,
is pursuing a far-reaching expansionist plan with
respect to those lands, and that fact has not been
refuted.

20, We have supported the resolution before us. We
havedone so despite reservations with regard to certain
of its provisions, which we consider to be recommendatory in character. We believe that the Commission’s report [S/13679] on the settlements is a
generally
fair-minded and objective one. We do, however, question the recommendation
in paragraph 54
of the report as to the best means to deal with the
settlements problem
in the occupied territories.
1 should also add that we do not read the reference
in paragraph 5 of the resolution to changes in the
institutional structure of the occupied territories as in
any way prejudicing the outcome of the autonomy
negotiations.
21, The basic framework for all our efforts, including
the Camp David accords, is resolution 242 (1967),
which calls for negotiations to resolve the many and
difficult aspects of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. Such
negotiations are currently under way. One of the issues
which the negotiators will have to address is the
matter of existing settlements. There are a number
of factors of a practical character that make impractical the call, in paragraph 6 of the resolution, for the
dismantling of existing settlements. Some projects are
not so easily dismantled;
moreover, whatever the
future status of the occupied territories, there will be
a need for housing and there will be a need for related
infrastructure for the inhabitants.

26. The spearhead of those Israeli actions is directed
first against the vital interests and inalienable rights of
the Arab people of Palestine. The Israeli authorities
are obviously attempting to perpetuate their control
over the Arab lands, including the Palestinian land,
in order to keep the Palestinian Arabs in the position
of exiles, in which they are deprived of their property
and their national homeland.

‘22, My delegation is pleased that the Council has
spoken unanimously on this important issue. At the
Sametime, we believe that we must all recognize that
the solution of the problem lies ultimately in the negotiating process, For our part we are committed to the
negotiations in which we are currently engaged as a
full Partner, and we are determined that they shall bring
a comprehensive peace closer to reality. In the final
analYSis,
all of us here will be judged by the contribution we make to that objective.

27. At meetings of the Council we have frequently
had occasion to hear statements to the effect that
Israel would never have dared to ignore the opinion
of the international community, the opinion of the
United Nations, which has been expressed in numerous
decisions adopted by the Organization, had it not
received support from protectors abroad. We cannot
but agree with that opinion. As recently as 25 February
in Washington, it was once again openly stated that
the United States would not permit the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State, nor would it
recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization. For
some reason, the right of the Palestinians to have their
own State in the place where they live is even regarded
as a “destabilizing factor”.

2% Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
fiotn Russian): Mr. President, first I should like to wish you every success
in Your functions this month. You have tremendous
exPerience and great tact and it is my hope that if
mstters arise that need to be resolved by the Council,
YOUwill be able successfully to bring them to a positive

28. During the discussion which took place in the
Council, we once again reaffirmed the close interrelationship between the policies of Israel in the occupied
territories and the separate anti-Arab transaction
carried out between Egypt and Israel with the active
participation of the United States. AS those who spoke
in the discussion here have stated, the plan of so3

32. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): It is my privilege and
my pleasure to congratulate Ambassador Mills on his
assumption of the presidency for the month of March.
His versatile statesmanship and graceful manner give
every assurance of most successful and constructive
Council action. He is a true reflection of friendly and
beautiful Jamaica.

called administrative
autonomy completely
ignores
the right to self-determination
of millions of Palestinian
Arabs who have been obliged to leave their homeland
and live in exile. It also completely
overlooks the
rights of the many hundreds of thousands of Palestinian Arabs who live in the occupied territories. It is
becoming more and more obvious, even for those who
harboured any doubts about this question, that the
so-called administrative
autonomy is simply a smoke
screen that will permit the perpetuation of the occupation, allow the Israeli authorities to continue their
illegal practice of expelIing the indigenous population from Arab lands and torpedo the very idea of
setting up a Palestinian State and securing peace in the
Middle East. Israel needs this, and it is needed by
its protectors in order to give the green light to those
countries that are attempting to increase the number
of their military bases in the Middle East and to
keep the entire region in a state of tension.

33. I feel in duty bound to make a few remarks
following the voting on the draft resolution presented
to the Council. I need hardly express our satisfaction
with the outcome of the voting.

29. The Soviet delegation supported the draft resolution contained in the document which is before us
today since, to a certain extent, it does reflect the
growing concern felt by the international
community
at the illegal and dangerous practices of Israel in the
occupied Arab territories.
In this text the Council
expresses its indignation at those illegal acts, requires
Israel immediately
to cease the establishment of new
settlements in the occupied lands and calls for the
dismantling of already existing settlements. I should
also like to draw attention to the appeal to all States
not to provide Israel with any assistance which might
be used in connection with settlements in the occupied
territories. It is important that all States heed this
appeal of the Council and implement it.

35. Secondly, I wish to reiterate my Government’s
deep appreciation to the Council Commission and its
Chairman, Ambassador Mathias, for their comprehension and deep concern over the ominous situation
which has arisen in consequence of Israel’s ongoing
and ever-accelerating
seizure of the occupied lands,
including Jerusalem, and for their warnings concerning
the disastrous consequences which the commission
of such horrendous acts of blatant illegality would
inevitably have on the survival of the Palestinian and
Arab peoples held captive for almost 13 years, as welI
as on the prospects of reaching the long-delayed goal
of a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

30. At the same time, the Soviet delegation considers
that this resolution which the Council has adopted does
not fully respond to the demands made by the very
serious and peace-threatening
situation created by
Israel in the occupied Arab territories. It is our conviction that in the existing circumstances the Council should more decisively and roundly condemn the
colonization being carried out by Israel and its acquisition of Arab lands. We consider that it is now time
for the Council carefully to weigh the question of
Israel’s failure to implement the resolutions previously
adopted by the Council and also to ponder steps which
would ensure the implementation
of those resolutions.
The Council should have clearly stated at least that if
the present illegal actions of the Israeli authorities
continued in the occupied territories and if those
authorities refused to implement the relevant Council
resolutions,
the Council would seriously consider
taking the necessary effective steps. Only a firm position on the part of the Council can secure the implementation
of its previous resolutions and help in
establishing a stable and sound situation in the Middle
East which will serve the interests of all peoples in
that region and the interests of universal peace.

36. Thirdly, I wish to express the profound appreciation of my Government to all those members of the
Council who have spoken out forecefully and understandingly on the unique plight which our people are
confronting both in the homeland and in exile in the
face of indescribable adversity and agony.

34. First, I wish to commend the President of the
Council for the month of February, Ambassador
Florin of the German Democratic Republic, for the
patient and exemplary manner in which he presided
over the deliberations
of the Council on this most
crucial issue.

37. Fourthly, the draft resolution just adopted unanimously by the Council, commendable
as it is in
reflecting the spirit as well as the considered judgement of the Member States, is-and I must be genuinely candid in voicing the considered judgement of the
Government and people of Jordan, not to mention that
of the Palestinian people-woefully
inadequate as a
response to and as redress in concrete terms of a
unique catastrophe, an evil confluence of prolonged
occupation lasting 13 years, relentless colonization,
and what seems to be tantamount to the permanent
dispersal of more than 2 million Palestinians.
But
it is my delegation’s conviction that this resolution
could be a landmark on the way towards translating
the collective will of the Council into concrete action
and deeds.
38. Fifthly, the Council has on previous occasions
not only deplored Israel’s illegal practices but warned
the aggressor to desist, rescind the measures of Israeli

31. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
4

illegalcolonization of the occupied lands and the
p]underingof their meagre resources, and to dismantle
theexistingsettlements. Not only has Israel refused,
with shockingcontempt, to heed the Council’s decisions;it has gone beyond that in offtcially declaring
beforethe Council on 27 February that-and I take a
Very,very serious view of this statement-:
“it is imperative that it be clearly understood that
the Jewish people and the State of Israel”-and
I cmphasizethe State of Israel-“have the right in
principle, as well as in law and in terms of national
security,to a permanent presence in Judaea, Samaris and the Gaza District” [2202nd meeting,
para. 61.

Thegauntlet has been thrown in the face of the Council, challenging its numerous resolutions on Israeli
colonization,not least its basic resolutions 242 (1967)
aad338(1973), and other relevant resolutions of the
Counciland the General Assembly as the framework
for a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
predicatedon the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force and Israeli withdrawal from the
occupiedterritories.
39. Sixthly, in view of the extreme gravity of the
officially declared determination of Israel, which has
putthe Council on notice that both the State of Israel
andthe Jewish people are determined and entitled to
whatitsrepresentative has called a permanent presence
in what he has termed Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
Strip,one would have expected the Council to tell
Israel in unmistakable terms that such a policy of
permanentoccupation and colonization would be met
by the sanctions that the Council may impose under
ChapterVII of the Charter against a declared and selfconfessedaggressor and by the aggressor’s expulsion
from the world body for having torpedoed the very
foundationsupon which the United Nations rests.
40. Today’s unanimous resolution, in my opinion,
constitutesa substantive response by the Council on
behalfof legitimacy and international law. However,
appreciativeas my delegation is of the sincere, forthright and undaunted stand which the members of the
Councilwho have spoken have taken, it is unavoidably
disconcertingto the Government and people of Jordan,
on whose behalf I have presented the complaint, to
find that the brave, sincere and forthright words of
theresolution have not as yet been matched by concrete action to stop the haemorrhage and end the
csnnibalizationof the Palestinian people on the spot.
Indeed,even before we started this debate, one of the
leadingnewspapers in Amman asked what was the use
of obtaining more verbal condemnations and more
admonitionswhen the real issue at stake was nothing
lessthan the fate and survival of a whole people.
Judgingby Israel’s practices and declared policies,
r sm sure that the Council would agree with me that
verbal resolutions, though reflecting the conscience
0f mankind, international law and basic human rights,

will be of little avail until the time comes-as surely
it will-when they are given concrete embodiment.
41. Colonization has already absorbed more than
31.4 Per cent of the total area of the tiny occupied
West Bank and Jerusalem alone, let alone the other
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, What can
I or anyone else tell hard-working farmers and other
categoriesof the population? Would the best of resolutions have restored an inch of their usurped lands or
a cubic metre of their limited water, or would it have
enhanced by one iota the chances of the Palestinian
exiles returning to their rapidly shrinking homeland?
But I should not belittle the fact that, perhaps for the
first time in the deliberations of the Council, there is
an action-oriented reference to dismantling the illegitimate Israeli settlements.This is, in my opinion,
one of the magic keys to the prospect of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peacein the Middle East.
42. I should be less than fair if I did not express
appreciation for the spirit that prompted the formulation of the resolution; but I should be a hypocrite
if I danced with joy over its adoption, however glad
I may be that it has been adopted. Our people have
been matured by monumentaladversity and know how
to distinguish between words and deeds; they have
been through such adversity for decadesand decades
on end. But they will be encouragedby the knowledge
that the highest executive organ in the world has
reached unanimous agreement as to the crux of the
issue. I wish to express my satisfaction that the
Government of the United States has joined in that
agreement, which had hitherto existed among other
members of the Council. I owe it to the Council to tell
the truth as best I can and to convey on behalf of my
delegation our heartfelt misgivings at the fact that the
resolution does not as yet provide practical and
effective measuresto safeguardthe Palestinian people
in their hour of distress.
43. However, I should like to say a few words in
conclusion.
44. Justice and freedom will always prevail in God’s
measured time over injustice and tyranny. Our people
will never, until eternity, forsake their ancestral and
hollowed soil. The fascist aggressionduring the Second
World War and the imperial Reich and its New Order
were tailored to last for a thousand years; they lasted
a handful of years. Not being endowed with any gifts
of prophecy I cannot foretell the duration of Greater
Israel’s new Reich, but I can foretell one thing: that
being inherently and monumentally unjust, it has
sown the seedsof its own undoing in its expansionist
form when the dynamics of history and eternal justice
will have run their course. We have pleaded over the
years forjust coexistence,only to be brutally rebuffed.
In fact, at certain moments, there were doubts whether
the Palestinian people existed as a people at all. The
Israelis have conclusively chosen the path of a monolithic, exclusivist existence. Time alone will reveal

machine deployed in the so-called “eastern front”
which is made up, in the first instance, of the combined
armed forces of Iraq, Jordan, Syria and Saudi Arabia,
That “eastern front” regards Judaea and Samaria as
a potential forward base and bridgehead for its sggressive designs against Israel as a whole,

to them the folly of their choice, but it is our earnest
hope that such a dangerous course will soon be
reversed for the sake of world peace, justice and the
.rule of law.
45. I trust that the Council will be closely monitoring
the outcome of its resolution and the compliance or
otherwise of the Israeli authorities.

52. Israel cannot, and will not, ignore these threats.
It will therefore relate to the resolution just adopted
accordingly.

46. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

53. The PRESIDENT:
I call upon the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

47. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, I should like
to begin by paying my warmest respects to you as
President of the Council for this month. We are
pleased to see you, as the representative of a country
with which we have the most cordial of relations,
assuming for the second time the presidency of the
Council. We are confident that you will carry out your
duties, as you did in January 1979, with all the wisdom
and skill that you have so amply demonstrated in all
your other manifold capacities within the United
Nations.

54. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, I am very pleased to see you sitting
in the Chair. We are certain that this month of March
will have a few other items dealing with this issue and
that under your prudent, wise and experienced leadership the Council will be very constructive, as it has
just proved it could be.
55. Of course we should like to extend our congratulations to Ambassador Florin, who tried his utmost and
did succeed eventually in achieving a constructive
and positive outcome of the current debate.

48. This debate was staged by its sponsors as a
diversionary and obstructionist attempt to frustrate the
ongoing peace process in the Middle East. The outcome of the debate has fully vindicated this assessment of it.

56. The unanimity that was shown just now helps to
entrench and restore our confidence in the effectiveness of the United Nations as a vehicle for peace.
Our resort to the United Nations is not selective. It
is not a matter of convenience; it is rather a question
of deep belief and commitment
to the principles
enshrined in the Charter and our strong belief that the
United Nations is the vehicle for peace.

49. A deliberate attempt has been made again to
fragment the Arab-Israeli dispute and to focus attention exclusively on one or another of the secondary
aspects taken out of context. This has been done with
conscious disregard of the broader considerations,
which, from Israel’s point of view, are crucial. As a
result, in the resolution that has just been adopted
Israel’s fundamental right to self-preservation and
its legitimate concern for its security and defence have
been ignored. The resolution is the product of a combination of various partisan interests, and of political
expediency in one form or another. It lacks all balance
and is riddled with formulations which, in their bias
and one-sidedness, can only play into the hands of the
enemies of peace in the Middle East, in both the Arab
world and beyond.

57. Naturally,
there is a considerable
distance
between the adoption of a decision and its full implementation. We know that the Charter has prescribed
the means of securing the full implementation
of all
decisions of the Council and we trust that, when the
Council considers the question of full implementation,
a unanimous vote will also be taken on methods to
secure it.
58. We have noted that among the recommendations
that have been unani,mously accepted by the Cmcil was the Commission’s
recommendation
that the
Council adopt effective measures to prevail on Israel
to cease the establishment of settlements in occupied
territories and to dismantle the existing settlements
accordingly. We believe that by this unanimous vote
the Council is called upon to take effective measures
to prevail on Israel and to secure the full implementstion of its decisions. It is no longer a question of
recommendations but of decisions of the Council.

50. Prominent
among the Arab States that reject
peace with Israel, and highly representative of them,
is Iraq. That country has just circulated its so-called
“National
Charter” as an official document of both
the General Assembly and the Council. That document
refers to Israel as a “deformed entity” and a “Zionist
entity [which] is not considered a State” [S/13816,
annex, para. 31. The document goes on to commit
Iraq to waging an all-out war against Israel and to
call upon all other Arab States to join in that war.

59. It has been said that Israel finds itself in a minority
of one, at least on the issue of settlements. The result
of the debate has shown that Israel finds itself a “zero”
on this issue rather than a minority of one. BY at least
two of the conclusions that have been accepted, and

51. Some members of the Council may choose to
ignore these and similar threats to Israel, which are
being translated on the ground into a massive war
6

perhaps more, the Council has decided that the policy
eflsrsel contributes to a deterioration of the situation
in the occupied terrrtorles and that that policy is
incompatible with the pursuit of peace. That has
become a decision of the Council by its acceptance
of the conclusions in paragraphs 45 and 51 of the
Cammission’S report.

60, There is no doubt that the Council has also
reiterated its past stand on the question of Jerusalem.
lt hasreaffirmed its resolution 252 (1968) and accepted
the recommendation contained in paragraph 56 of the
Commission’s report, which has become part of the
council’s resolution, that it urge the Government of
Israel to implement fully the Security Council resolutions adopted on the question of Jerusalem as from
1967and further desist from taking any measures which
would change the status of Jerusalem. That is a clear
statement that the Council considers Israel to have
violated and disregarded those resolutions. But that
wasno secret: the representative of Tel Aviv here had
earlier announced that his Government rejected the
resolutions of the Council, notwithstanding Article 25
of the Charter.
61. With reference to paragraph 7 of the resolution,
concerning assistance to Israel, although the wording
is, “specifically in connection with settlements”, we
realize and we know that not a single State says that
its assistance is earmarked for settlements in Jerusalem
or in Hebron. We also know that those same States
realize that, by contributing to the aggressive policy
of Israel, they are also directly contributing to Israel’s
violations of United Nations resolutions and of the
Charter-whether specifically or otherwise-because
giving Israel F-16s and F-l%, cluster bombs and
billions of dollars necessarily encourages it to pursue
the very policy which the Council has just strongly
deplored.

62. The representative of the United States has reaffirmed that his country believes in negotiations as a
path to peace. I wish only to remind him, Mr. President, through you-because
I cannot remind him
directly or he might lose his job-that
the General
Assembly adopted resolution 3375 (XXX), which calls
for a meeting within the framework of the United
Nations of all the parties concerned, including the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative
of the Palestinian people, on the basis of resolution 3234
(XXIX), which defines and affirms the rights of the
Palestinian people. If that is not calling for negotiations
within the framework of the United Nations, then what
is it? ,
63. When that resolution was brought to the attention of our National Council in March 1977, it unanimously agreed that the resolution represented a positive and constructive step towards the attainment
of peace in the area. But unfortunately, some States
thought they could work outside the United Nations,
because it was not convenient for them to negotiate
within the framework of the Organization and they
thought they could negotiate on their own, Those
States therefore started bilateral approaches which
could not be conducive to peace. I should like simply
to remind the representative of the United States that
this framework, the United Nations, remains the only
one for negotiating peace; that all endeavours to attain
peace can be made within that framework; that the
formula is there and that the United States should only
respect the resolution that 1 mentioned.
64. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers
on my list. The Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose ut 1.15 pm.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde
entier.
Informez-vous
auprts
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes
del mundo.
Con&e
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
e : Nations

dipositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas.

83s61462-Augast

19862,425
