A /74/PV.26

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

26th plenary meeting

Monday, 4 November 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Young (Belize),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (А/74/324)
Reports of the Secretary-General (А/74/325 and
А/74/326)
Draft resolution (А/74/L.8)
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): First and foremost, my
delegation wishes to state that Myanmar’s participation
in the debate on this agenda item should not be in
anyway construed as Myanmar’s recognition of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) or its jurisdiction
over my country, Myanmar, which is not a party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Paragraphs 38 to 40 and 43 to 45 of the ICC
report (see A/74/324) present an account of the ICC
Prosecutor’s illegitimate attempts to open a case
against Myanmar and obtain authorization for an
investigation into the alleged deportation of members
of the so-called Rohingya people from Myanmar to
Bangladesh. Following the case built by the Prosecutor,
on 6 September 2018 Pre-Trial Chamber I decided
that the Court may exercise jurisdiction over the
alleged deportation to Bangladesh of the so-called
Rohingya people from Myanmar, a State not a party
to the Statute. Furthermore, the Prosecutor requested

Pre-Trial Chamber III to authorize an investigation
against Myanmar.
The Government of Myanmar strongly rejects the
ICC’s ruling of 6 September 2018. The ruling itself is
the result of faulty procedure and is of dubious legal
merit. My delegation would like to reiterate our firm
position that Myanmar is under no obligation to respect
the ruling of the Court, since it has no jurisdiction over
Myanmar. Nowhere in the Rome Statute does it say that
the Court has jurisdiction over a State that is not a party
to the Statute.
It is obvious that the Prosecutor has disregarded
the legal merits of the Myanmar Government position
as well as its determination and efforts to resolve
the present humanitarian problems in Rakhine state,
particularly in terms of the repatriation of displaced
persons. What the Prosecutor is attempting to do
is to override the principles of respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. She has blatantly
acted in contravention of the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and recalled in the
preamble to the Rome Statute.
The Prosecutor has built her case with politically
motivated intent and emotional self-interest. Her
request for an investigation does not include the
atrocious crimes committed by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army (ARSA) against Hindus and other
ethnic people in Rakhine. She deliberately omitted the
undisputed fact that the Army’s actions precipitated the
mass displacement. In addition, the Prosecutor relied

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34974 (E)

*1934974*

A/74/PV.26

heavily on human rights reports that contain factual
errors and unsubstantiated narratives.
The issue of Rakhine is neither one of religious
persecution nor of an act of deporting a group of people
out of the country. The Government of Myanmar
strongly rejects its labelling by anyone as a crime
against humanity or ethnic cleansing. It is in fact a
political and economic issue involving cross-border
migration that has been going on since colonial times,
when the British brought in people from Bengal,
primarily from the Chittagong region, to Rakhine.
There was also another wave of mass migration across
the border during the Bangladesh independence war
in 1971.
The immigration problem in Rakhine was also
exacerbated by poverty, the absence of the rule of
law, and insecurity. There have long been deep-rooted
tensions, mutual mistrust and fear between the local
ethnic communities and the migrant community. The
democratic Government of Myanmar attempted to
solve the long-neglected problem by setting up the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State led by the late
Kofi Annan. On the day the Commission presented
its recommendations, ARSA launched multiple armed
attacks on dozens of security posts in northern Rakhine,
precipitating a humanitarian crisis in the form of a
massive exodus of people to Bangladesh.
People have never been deported from Rakhine
to anywhere. ARSA was the real culprit behind the
massive displacement. The Government of Myanmar
is working hard in cooperation with Bangladesh, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. With the
help of our friends in the region, it is also working to
ensure the voluntary, safe and dignified repatriation of
people displaced from Rakhine.
The threat of ARSA is a major impediment to the
repatriation of displaced persons and the restoration of
security, peace and harmony in Rakhine. Despite the
intimidation and threats posed by ARSA, so far over
400 people have returned of their own free will and
under their own arrangements. We welcome the return
of all verified former residents to Rakhine. We will
continue to work to procure the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of displaced persons, in accordance
with the signed bilateral agreements and arrangements
concluded between Myanmar and Bangladesh.
2/28

04/11/2019

With regard to the issue of accountability,
Myanmar is determined to seek accountability for all
crimes committed by anyone, anywhere in the territory
of Myanmar. Following the 2016 and 2017 ARSA
terrorist attacks in Rakhine, we set up an independent
commission of inquiry to investigate allegations of
human rights violations. The commission is preparing
its report and will submit it to the President, along with
recommendations for further action. We are willing
and able to address the question of accountability.
The Court’s overextended application of
jurisdiction challenges the fundamental principle of
legal certainty and is contrary to accepted principles
of public international law. It has created a dangerous
precedent and erodes the moral authority of the Court.
My delegation firmly rejects some Member States’
unlawful call for a referral of Myanmar to the ICC, and
in particular that of the representative of Canada in her
statement in this Hall earlier today (see A/74/PV.25).
We also seriously question the true intention and
sincerity of those supporting the ICC Prosecutor’s
dubious decision to bring Myanmar before the ICC,
when she herself is currently facing a formal complaint
that could see her suspended from duty for allegedly
committing serious human rights violations and crimes
against humanity during the rule of the 1994-2002
military dictatorship in her own country, the Gambia.
Finally, my delegation wishes to put it on record
that Myanmar dissociates itself from the adoption of
draft resolution A/74/L.8.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statement delivered this morning by the observer of
the European Union (see A/74/PV.25). I would now like
to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
I would first like to thank Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji,
President of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his inspiring briefing this morning. The practice
of presenting the Court’s annual report to the United
Nations (see A/74/324) is a good opportunity to
re-emphasize the common core values of these two
organizations, both of which play an important role
in protecting the interests of humankind and should
cooperate closely, wherever appropriate, in supporting
the cause of peace and justice.
There have been truly impressive achievements in
the area of international criminal justice over the past
two decades. The ambitious project of creating a general
19-34974

04/11/2019

and permanent criminal court has paid dividends
beyond a mere deterrent effect. The broader Rome
Statute system has changed the way the world has come
to respond to the most serious crimes. The existence
of the ICC has been a catalyst for passing relevant
domestic legislation and consolidating national justice
mechanisms in accordance with the complementary
character of the Court. Moreover, there is mounting
evidence that international justice can support peace
and reconciliation by sidelining those who seek to
undermine the peace process and by offering victims
a much-needed public recognition of the suffering they
have endured.
The Court’s continued heavy workload over the
reporting period and the extended geographic scope of
its activity confirm that the international community
remains a firm supporter of international criminal
justice and the Court’s role in ensuring a rulesbased global order. At the same time, we are seeing
a widening gap between the Court’s aspirations at
its founding and some of its results, which makes it
vulnerable to attacks and undermines its authority. In
the current volatile political context, with populism
and xenophobia on the rise, we cannot afford to let
new doubts take root or question the relevance of this
institution. Now is the time for strengthening the Court
to ensure its effectiveness and legitimacy.
We should not forget that the ICC is actually an
organization of limited competence, circumscribed by
its founding treaty and its reliance on State support
at operational, political and financial levels. We
must therefore move away from idealistic discourse
and start thinking about the Court with the existing
challenges in mind. Against that backdrop, we support
the ongoing efforts aimed at reviewing the Court’s
judicial and managerial functions, including by
means of an independent assessment aimed at kickstarting a State-driven reflection on how to redress
the shortcomings in the ICC’s functioning. At such
a galvanizing moment for change, we would also
encourage the Assembly of States Parties to boldly
fulfil its oversight responsibilities.
The promise embodied by the Court to address the
impunity gap for the most serious crimes cannot be
fulfilled without State cooperation. In this context, we
would like to reiterate Romania’s support for the Court
and add our voice to the calls for enhanced cooperation
between the States Parties and the ICC, including by
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

responding promptly to the requests transmitted by
the Court.
The fight against impunity requires a synergetic
global justice system in which national, regional,
international and hybrid institutions coexist and are
mutually reinforcing. The ICC was conceived as a
court of last resort for the worst and most difficult
cases. Enabling local justice mechanisms to address
international crimes is still the most effective
way of combating impunity. As a focal point for
complementarity, Romania has persistently called for
renewed attention to support for national proceedings,
including by mainstreaming the Rome Statute concepts
into relevant assistance programmes dedicated to the
development of the rule of law.
Addressing international crime almost always
raises sensitive topics and creates political hurdles.
However, a culture of the rule of law, accountability
and trust cannot be developed if egregious crimes are
left unaddressed. We remain committed to raising
awareness of the Court’s mandate, defending the
impartial and independent conduct of its functions,
fostering its improved performance as a judicial
institution by improving the nomination and election
processes for the judges and the Prosecutor, among
other things, and encouraging the widest possible
participation in the Rome Statute.
Mr. Oña Garcés (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, for his
briefing (see A/74/PV.25) on the report of the Court on
its activities during 2018 and 2019 (see A/74/324).
We also welcome the draft resolution on the report
of the International Criminal Court introduced today
by the Netherlands (A/74/L.8), of which Ecuador
is a sponsor and which we hope will be adopted
by consensus.
Ecuador has consistently defended the role of
the International Criminal Court in the maintenance
of international peace and justice and the defence
of the rule of law and as an essential component in
conflict prevention and reparation to the victims of the
most serious crimes. In the General Assembly today
we reiterate our support for the Court as a unique
mechanism for combating impunity, and we call on all
States to lend their support so that it can effectively and
concretely exercise its jurisdiction over persons with
3/28

A/74/PV.26

respect to the crimes considered the most serious by the
international community.
For Ecuador, the progressive universalization
of the Rome Statute and the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court is an inalienable goal.
Beyond situational political considerations, it is vital
that we make progress towards an authentic universal
criminal justice that guarantees that impunity will be
combated and ensures that those found responsible will
be punished. It is clear that it is possible to effectively
try crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and crimes of aggression, which are subject to
the complementary jurisdiction of the Court, if States
adhere universally to the Statute and provide the
cooperation the Court requires.
However, as we have already pointed out,
universality means not only that all States are party
to the Rome Statute but that the Court can investigate
all crimes against humanity taking place in the world
today, wherever they are committed, without double
standards and beyond the reach of political or economic
interests that can mean that similar situations are
measured by different yardsticks. In this regard, we
recognize and support the unflagging work of the
Court, whose procedural load has included a total
of 27 cases, involving 45 suspects or accused, since
it began operations, as well as the Prosecutor of the
Court, whose work has contributed to the issuance of
new arrest warrants during the reporting period and the
continuation of pending proceedings. We encourage the
continuation of the ongoing open investigations into the
11 situations and pending preliminary examinations.
Ecuador incorporated non-applicability for actions
and penalties for crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes, forced disappearance of persons
and crimes of aggression into its 2008 Constitutional
and domestic criminal legislation. In our country,
none of those crimes are subject to amnesty or a
statute of limitations, which is fully consistent with
the foundation of the Rome Statute, the fight against
impunity. A few weeks ago, with the same commitment,
Ecuador submitted its instrument of ratification of the
amendments to the Rome Statute relating to the crime
of aggression and signed the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
I would also like to reiterate our position on the
principle of the complementarity of the Court. It has
4/28

04/11/2019

special importance for us as a mechanism that enables
States to cooperate in their fight against impunity and
is a uniquely important ingredient in strengthening
national capacities. Through its complementarity, the
International Criminal Court provides support for
national legislation. It is not a substitute for it.
It is essential to ensure that the Court has the
funding it needs to enable it to meet the mandates in the
Rome Statute, especially at a time when its caseload,
the investigations in the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Court’s overall workload have increased. It is also
essential to strengthen the mechanisms for obtaining
resources and mobilizing the international community’s
cooperation for the Trust Fund for Victims, given that
the Fund supports the work of the Court on such inherent
elements of justice as the protection of and reparation
for victims of crimes covered by the Rome Statute.
My delegation would like to express its support
for the efforts of the United Nations system to improve
its channels of cooperation with the Office of the
Prosecutor and other organs of the Court, and we call
on Member States to provide every possible support
for the implementation and enforcement of orders
issued by the relevant authorities of the International
Criminal Court.
Finally, my delegation would like to pay special
tribute to the work of the Registry of the Court, as well
as the secretariat of the Assembly of States Parties,
whose efficiency and effective work in coordination
and support have made it possible to achieve its results.
Ms. Durney (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile appreciates the comprehensive report of the
International Criminal Court on the activities of the
Court between 1 August 2018 and 31 July 2019 (see
A/74/324).
We take note of the activities of its various organs,
including their judicial and prosecutorial proceedings
and the steps taken by the Registry of the Court during
that period. My delegation would like to highlight the
fact that despite the limited resources available to it,
the Office of the Prosecutor has been able to take on
an intense amount of activity, as evidenced by the
10 preliminary examinations and 11 investigations
currently under way. My country supports and is a
sponsor of draft resolution A/74/L.8.
As on other occasions, my delegation would like
to highlight Chile’s commitment to strengthening
19-34974

04/11/2019

international criminal law, as demonstrated during the
negotiations that led to the establishment of the first
permanent international criminal court. Today, as it
did in Rome in 1998, Chile advocates the existence of
a robust and effective International Criminal Court.
Twenty-one years after the Court’s founding, it is a
source of great satisfaction for our country to hear
the progress that it has made towards strengthening
international criminal justice, which aims to respond to
the terrible suffering that humankind may experience
as a result of the most serious kinds of crimes.
Today we consider it essential to reiterate the appeal
to all States to cooperate fully with the investigations
and prosecutions of the Court and contribute actively
to helping it overcome the challenges and criticisms
it faces. I shall now turn to some aspects of the report to
which my delegation would like to pay special attention.
I would first like to refer to the first-instance
judgments relating to crimes within the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court. During the
reporting period, the Court issues some acquittals
and a conviction. We have the utmost respect for the
impartiality of the Court and the fact that it administers
justice at the international level in way that reflects
a commitment to due process and the principle of
equality of procedural means.
We also want to emphasize that the Court exercises
its jurisdiction in delicate situations that require
enhanced cooperation with States parties. This aspect
is related to another key element of the international
criminal justice system that is incorporated in the Rome
Statute, which is the principle of complementarity.
States parties must exercise their jurisdictional
competencies in a way that is consistent with the
principle of complementarity provided for in the
Rome Statute, in order to assume their responsibility
for prosecuting and trying the crimes defined in the
Statute.
With regard to the cooperation between the Court
and the Security Council, we believe it is crucial to
improve their dialogue, coordination and joint action,
since the blessings that the Rome Statute seeks to
safeguard — peace, security and the well-being of
humankind, as expressed both in its preamble and
enshrined among the purposes of the United Nations set
forth in Article 1 of the Charter — should be reflected
in a collective response to the grave implications of
inaction in the face of impunity and recurring behaviour
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

that flies in the face of the international legal order. In
that regard, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
report of the Court addresses this matter and supports
its call for strengthening international cooperation
aimed at ending impunity for atrocity crimes. As we
pointed out last year, special attention must be paid to
ensuring the Security Council’s effective follow-up of
situations that it refers to the Court (see A/73/PV.28).
With regard to the treaty matters referred to in
paragraph 90 of the report of the Court, my delegation
considers it important to note that in 2016 Chile ratified
the amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute and
to the creation of article 8 bis following the 2010
Kampala Conference. We currently have a bill pending
in the Senate of the Republic of Chile that is aimed at
incorporating into our domestic legal system criminal
definitions corresponding to those amendments that
pertain to certain war crimes and to the definition of the
crime of aggression. We are also grateful to the Court
for providing us with support from professionals from
its Registry in the examination of our draft cooperation
law, the objective of which will be to effectively
implement the provisions of the Rome Statute related
to the activities of our internal bodies.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its appreciation
for the crucial work of the Trust Fund for Victims,
which must be equipped with the means to carry out
its work of ensuring reparations and assistance in order
to provide physical and psychological rehabilitation
support to victims and to provide material support to
the survivors of crimes that fall within the jurisdiction
of the Rome Statute. Furthermore, my delegation
reiterates its appreciation for the work carried out by
the secretariat of the Assembly of States Parties, whose
functional independence and structural integrity are
central to ensuring the effective work of our countries
and their participation in the system.
Finally, we reiterate our commitment to the
universality of the Rome Statute and our full confidence
in the importance of the role of the International
Criminal Court in fighting impunity and preventing
acts that shock the conscience of humankind and
threaten international peace and security. We reiterate
our concern about the withdrawal of two States from the
Rome Statute, but we hope that we can all continue to
work to ensure that such situations can be reversed and
that adherence to the Statute will gradually increase
among members of the international community.
5/28

A/74/PV.26

Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): In
the past few years we have seen an increase in attacks
on international institutions and multilateralism in
general. The International Criminal Court (ICC) has not
been spared, even if it represents a central achievement
of multilateral diplomacy and a milestone in the
development of international law. However, in a context
where atrocities continue to be committed around the
globe and where States still fall short of sufficiently
combating impunity for the most serious crimes, the
ICC is more necessary than ever. It is therefore crucial
that States reaffirm their commitments to the rulesbased international order and to the Court.
The ICC’s mandate is to hold powerful individuals
accountable for committing very serious crimes under
international law. It therefore does not come as a
surprise, though it is no less regrettable, that the ICC
is regularly subjected to political attacks. The fact is
that all States are obligated to prosecute and punish
atrocities, and the Court can intervene only if they
are unable or unwilling to do so. Before criticizing the
Court, States should therefore first take on their own
responsibilities. The Court is independent and bound
only by respect for the rule of law. It cannot become the
target of political pressure. In this regard, Switzerland
reiterates its continued and principled support for the
ICC. We are resolute in our defence of an international
order based on the rule of law.
The ICC was created to fight impunity, contribute
to sustainable peace and help victims. As detailed in
the report before us (see A/74/324), the ICC is carrying
out its role. It has been conducting preliminary
examinations and investigations on situations in every
region of the world and it has rendered judgments.
Switzerland would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Court, its staff and all who support the institution.
Every
institution
should
be
continually
strengthened. The ICC should also become more
efficient and effective. An independent expert
assessment of the ICC, which should be launched
shortly, will be essential to ensuring its success. States
parties must always respect the independence of the
Court and preserve the founding principles of the Rome
Statute, including during the assessment process. They
also have the responsibility of nominating and electing
only the most qualified officials to the ICC, as well as
of cooperating fully with the Court.
6/28

04/11/2019

It is also important to ensure that the ICC is able
to address current forms of criminality. It is therefore
crucial to ratify the amendments that pertain to war
crimes and the crime of aggression. I want to highlight
Switzerland’s proposed amendment to the Rome
Statute to include the war crime of using the starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare in domestic armed
conflict. The amendment aims to close a legal gap and
respond to an urgent need, given that almost all ongoing
conflicts are domestic in nature. Switzerland strongly
encourages all States parties to support the proposed
amendment so that it can be adopted at the upcoming
session of the Assembly of States Parties.
In the light of the numerous challenges that face us,
we must reaffirm our collective commitment to ending
impunity for the perpetrators of the most heinous
crimes and bringing justice to victims. Our support for
the ICC and its mission must not weaken.
Mr. Park Chull-Joo (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for his comprehensive briefing
(see A/74/PV.25) on the report of the Court (see
A/74/324). My delegation also commends the joint
efforts of the Presidency, Chambers, Office of the
Prosecutor and Registry of the Court in helping to end
the impunity of the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community.
We cannot overemphasize the significant role that
the ICC has played in sustaining the three pillars of
the United Nations — peace and security, development
and human rights. Ensuring criminal justice for
the perpetrators of heinous crimes that shock the
conscience of humankind is part and parcel of the rule
of law, which provides a solid basis for the successful
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 16.
Recognizing the remarkable progress the Court has
made on its path to ending impunity, I would like to
discuss some points on which my delegation places
great emphasis.
First, as an international court, the ICC cannot
sustain itself without the active cooperation of multiple
stakeholders, especially the States parties to the Rome
Statute, at each and every step of the process. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea supports the view that
the ongoing discussions of the review of the ICC should
be driven mainly by States parties to the Statute, in
close cooperation with the ICC and related entities.
19-34974

04/11/2019

Secondly, the success of our fight against impunity
hinges not only on adequate cooperation but also on
the universal application of the Rome Statute. Greater
participation by States parties to the Statute would
undoubtedly lead to stronger support for the Court. New
ICC member States would be investing not only in the
protection of their territories and their people but also
in the protection of future generations and the creation
of a more just world. We need to raise awareness on the
fact that ratification of the Statute does not equate to a
concession of sovereignty, in the light of the principle
of complementarity.
The Republic of Korea, together with Australia,
co-hosted an ambassador-level side event on 7 June
for the universality of the Rome Statute in the Pacific
region, with the participation of the President of the
Assembly of States Parties, Mr. O-Gon Kwon. We
also supported the universality event hosted by the
President of the General Assembly in Vanuatu in May.
In addition, on 29 October, we hosted an ambassadorlevel universality event for the Asia-Pacific region in
Seoul, during the visit of the Registrar of the ICC. The
Republic of Korea will continue to be committed to
enhancing the universality of the Rome Statute, and we
hope that these events will provide valuable insights
into our joint efforts along these lines.
Last but not least, next year will see an important
event, the election of the next ICC Prosecutor. The
Republic of Korea appreciates the leadership and
dedication of the President and Vice-Presidents of
the Assembly of States Parties, who have adopted the
terms of reference and who made up the Committee on
the Election of the Prosecutor and its panel of experts
within the timeline we prescribed. Next year, after
the submission of the Committee’s final report, the
President of the Court, in consultation with his Bureau,
will undertake a consultation process with a view to
identifying a consensus candidate among States parties
and civil society. We look forward to once again seeing
leadership and dedicated efforts in the consultation
process for electing a qualified ICC Prosecutor.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea has been a
staunch supporter of the ICC since its inception and
will continue to be an important part of the concerted
efforts of the international community to ensure
that the ICC is a responsible, universal and efficient
institution for ending impunity for the perpetrators of
the most serious crimes against humanity.
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

Mr. Guillermet-Fernández (Costa Rica) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation thanks Judge Chile
Eboe-Osuji, President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for the report on the activities carried out
by the Court during the 2018-2019 reporting period
(see A/74/324).
Costa Rica aligns itself with the joint statement
to be made by the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein, Ambassador Christian Wenaweser,
immediately following this statement, which I am
making in my national capacity.
This has been a difficult year for the Court, not only
because of the volume of work it took on, as detailed
in Judge Eboe-Osuji’s briefing this morning (see A/74/
PV.25), but because it was subjected to attacks both on
its jurisdiction and the legality of its work. In addition,
Court officials were subjected to measures taken
against them. In the period in question, we also saw
that some of the outcomes of the Court’s activity left
some feeling displeased and provoked criticism from
multiple directions. These results, which were worse
than expected, overshadowed the Court’s good work, a
product of the tireless efforts of its personnel.
Although we all agree that the Court has filled a
void in the international criminal justice architecture,
all of these issues lead us to reflect and ask whether this
is the Court that we visualized two decades ago when
we proudly concluded our discussions and approved
the Rome Statute. But today, as we did then, we must
give our full support to the institution and its staff in
order to avoid weakening its important role in the fight
against impunity for the most heinous crimes. That is
why my country believes this to be the right time for an
evaluation, an idea that has been gaining momentum in
recent months.
We agree that this review should be carried out
by a group of independent experts, who will indicate
objectively and professionally the areas where the
Court should be improved and propose changes where
required. This approach is within the framework of the
Rome Statute, without prejudice to the fundamental
role of the States parties and its decision-making
body, the Assembly of States Parties. For the sake of
transparency and participation, the review process
must take into account the views of civil society and
non-governmental organizations. We are approaching
a time of important personnel changes in the Court,
including the election of judges, a new Prosecutor and
7/28

A/74/PV.26

a new President of the Assembly of States Parties, all
which will take place in 2020. It is therefore important
to have a preliminary result from the review prior to
these changes so that we make the appropriate decisions.
Costa Rica would like to emphasize its absolute
support for the International Criminal Court
and its commitment to continuing to support its
universalization, independence and integrity so
that together with the other States parties and with
the support of the international community, we can
guarantee respect for and fulfilment of international
justice. We must remember that the International
Criminal Court is a court of last resort and was not
created to replace domestic courts. The responsibility
for prosecuting and investigating crimes committed
under their jurisdiction rests primarily with the
justice systems of each State. However, seeing as that
is not always the case, the complementarity of the
ICC is an essential part of the international criminal
justice system.
When the jurisdiction of the Court is activated,
States parties must comply with the inalienable
responsibilities emanating from the Rome Statute,
for example by providing the required support to
the prosecutor’s investigations, facilitating access
to evidence and fulfilling their obligation to execute
arrest warrants in force. We must also bear in mind that
a lack of cooperation not only prevents perpetrators
from being brought to justice but denies victims the
protection and justice they call for and deserve.

04/11/2019

this year Costa Rica hosted a visit by two officials of
the Court’s Registry, which strengthened links with the
various national institutions called on to cooperate with
the work of the Court so as to harmonize and ensure an
effective response when requested by The Hague.
I should not conclude without highlighting a very
important point in the report presented to us this
morning, which is the Trust Fund for Victims and the
dual function it has been fulfilling, both in terms of
reparation and assistance. With regard to reparations,
we understand that collective as well as individual
reparations are being made. With regard to assistance,
we are very pleased that a mechanism has been developed
to identify the beneficiaries. Equally noteworthy are
the medical assistance activities for victims of sexual
violence and psychological rehabilitation for those who
have suffered traumas such as mutilation, amputation
or burns. That reflects the importance and the role of
the International Criminal Court not only in applying
international criminal law but also for the victims of
mass atrocity crimes.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The International
Criminal Court (ICC) is a central institution for ensuring
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. Firmly anchored in the principle of
the primary responsibility of States, which is usually
referred to as the principle of complementarity, the
Court has jurisdiction over genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and the crime of aggression.

In recognition of that obligation, Costa Rica
enacted a law on the promotion of cooperation and
judicial assistance with the International Criminal
Court that came into force in February. Those norms
seek not just to regulate and apply the provisions of the
Rome Statute but above all to cooperate with the Court.
The new law includes aspects such as giving shelter to
traumatized victims in the country or witnesses who
may be at risk. It also provides for receiving in Costa
Rica those who are subject to an interim release order
issued by the Court while they are being investigated,
and those who are finally released will be able to
remain in the country, with their basic needs covered.
Lastly, we will cooperate in implementing judgments,
aware that the International Criminal Court does not
have permanent detention centres.

Even a cursory look at the discussions here at
the United Nations makes it clear how much we need
this institution. Several United Nations bodies have
concluded that the crimes committed against the
Rohingya population in Myanmar were the result
of genocidal intent. The conflict in Syria has been
characterized by the commission of crimes against
humanity, a systematic and widespread attack on
the country’s civilian population for more than
eight years. Numerous conflict situations, the most
shocking probably in Yemen, are characterized by
blatant disrespect for international humanitarian law,
resulting in widespread war crimes. The provisions
of international law governing the use of force, a
cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations, are
being violated by various States under the watch of the
Security Council.

Furthermore, in its commitment to strengthening
the work of the International Criminal Court, in July of

More than 20 years after the adoption of the Rome
Statute, the success of the founding treaty of the

8/28

19-34974

04/11/2019

International Criminal Court is impressive. Nearly two
thirds of the States Members of the United Nations have
accepted its jurisdiction, which is far more than the
number of States that have accepted the International
Court of Justice’s compulsory jurisdiction. A third of
States parties to the Rome Statute have also ratified
the ICC’s amendments on the crime of aggression. The
Court is active in 21 countries and in all regions and
has had an impact in many others that are not under
its direct scrutiny. It is capable of having an enormous
impact simply by the sheer reach of its jurisdiction, as
was the case with the situation in Colombia. And for
the many victims of atrocity crimes around the world it
is a beacon of hope, an ever-present statement that the
most serious crimes are of concern to the international
community as a whole and, in short, that we who are
assembled in this Hall care.
The sad reality, of course, is that very often
we do not care enough, at least not in a manner that
manifests itself through collective action. Even in
the most obvious cases where the crimes committed
threaten international peace and security, the Security
Council has failed to make use of its competence to
refer situations to the International Criminal Court.
Such a referral with respect to Syria was vetoed five
years ago (see S/PV.7180). In the cases of Myanmar
and Yemen, it has not even been discussed, let alone
formally proposed.
But the full picture is more complex. The referrals
that the Council has made, on Darfur and Libya,
were not backed up by political support and relevant
measures for ensuring cooperation, so they have had
a very limited impact. While the political change in
the Sudan also shows that it is important to create the
basis for making accountability a policy option, it is
certainly true that at best the Council’s referrals have
been a mixed blessing for the International Criminal
Court. In the current political climate, any thinking
about how best to frame future Council referrals is
most likely to be an academic exercise. Nevertheless,
supporters of the ICC should still look at the modalities
that should be applied by the Council when considering
referrals. Relevant ICC activities are mandated by the
United Nations and should therefore be financed from
United Nations resources.
While the need for support for the International
Criminal Court is obvious, it is nevertheless very much
an institution that is under pressure, for various reasons.
On the one hand, there is a trend to undermine or even
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

undo some of the big multilateral achievements of the
past decades. In the attempts to erode a rules-based
international order, the ICC is an obvious prime target.
It is also an institution that has lived through political
adversity before and emerged successfully. It can do
so again, but that requires genuine political backing
from the vast majority of States assembled in this Hall,
which have accepted its jurisdiction and pledged their
cooperation. Some of the most powerful States have
decided to stay outside the Rome Statute system. It may
be a long time before they view the Court differently.
We share the frustration expressed by others about
aspects of the Court’s performance. We want to see a
Court that is more effective and efficient, well managed
and able to communicate the powerful message
reflected in the Rome Statute. We are confident that
positive change is possible if States parties work with
the Court in a way that includes all of us who support
it. We are also encouraged by the positive dynamic that
has been created over the past few months and hope
that important steps can be taken in the near future to
move this discussion forward. There is no reason to
wait, and we cannot afford to do so.
But even a significantly improved Court will not be
able to take on every impunity crisis, if only because
of the lack of universality of its jurisdiction. In such
cases, there must be no complacency and no exclusive
focus on creating ICC jurisdiction, which is very often
an elusive goal. The Assembly showed almost three
years ago that alternative paths to accountability exist
when it established the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011,
an accountability mechanism that has since been
replicated for the situation in Myanmar. There is
much room for creative thinking and developing other
accountability models on the basis of the principle of
complementarity. Justice for the most serious crimes is
not just something that we owe to the victims as a small
acknowledgement of their individual and collective
suffering, but also an indispensable element in securing
sustainable peace and peaceful societies. As much as
anything else, our political investment in justice is an
expression of our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
I also have the honour to deliver an additional
message on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica,
9/28

A/74/PV.26

Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Iceland,
Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland
and my own country, Liechtenstein, all States Members
of the United Nations that are strong supporters of
the ICC and its mission to end impunity for the worst
crimes known to humankind.
Our delegations will join the consensus on the
draft resolution before the Assembly today (A/74/L.8)
because we strongly believe in the work of the ICC. We
have decided to sponsor the draft resolution because
it includes many important points and because we
want to express our commitment to the Rome Statute
system. However, we would also like to point out what
we consider to be a significant deficiency in the text to
be adopted later.
We would like to stress that as a bare minimum
the resolutions that the Assembly adopts should always
include technical and factual updates. We are therefore
making this statement to highlight a number of major
international law developments that have taken place
in recent years that have sadly been omitted from the
draft resolution. Such developments include the historic
activation of the ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression, the adoption of amendments to add three
new war crimes to the Rome Statute, and important
cooperation between the ICC and the recently established
Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar.
The historic significance of these developments must
not be left out of relevant resolutions.
The ICC is a major achievement in the development
of international law, and its States parties continue to
develop international law even in a tough political
climate, which should be reflected and applauded.
Two years ago, States parties to the ICC adopted three
new amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute on
war crimes. Those three new war crimes make the use
of microbial, biological or toxin weapons, weapons
that injure by fragments undetectable by X-rays and
blinding laser weapons a crime in both international
armed conflicts and armed conflicts not of an
international character.
The ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression
came into effect in July of last year, marking the first
time that humankind has had a permanent independent
international court with the authority to hold individuals
accountable for their decisions to commit the worst
forms of the illegal use of force. And this year, States
parties are gearing up to enable the ICC to prosecute
10/28

04/11/2019

the intentional starvation of civilians as a war crime
in non-international armed conflicts. Such progress
illustrates the value of the Rome Statute system, to
which two thirds of the States Members of the United
Nations belong.
The omissions in this year’s draft resolution are
significant. But even if the developments were of more
limited relevance, we would still want to see a General
Assembly resolution reflect them. Whether for the ICC
or any other issue, we must not allow the Assembly to
adopt texts that are not factually updated.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to begin our statement by expressing
our gratitude to the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, for his
briefing (see A/74/PV.25) on the report of the Court
(see A/74/324), which details its administrative and
judicial activities and which has been submitted to the
General Assembly in accordance with article 6 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court and paragraph 28
of resolution 73/7.
My delegation would like to highlight the twentyfirst anniversary of the Court’s founding treaty, the
Rome Statute, which took place on 17 July, and we
underscore the importance of the Court’s mandate
to the international community, as well as that of
strengthening the international criminal justice regime.
We are pleased that the International Criminal
Court continued to maintain a high workload over the
past year. The period was characterized by intense
activity and many important events in the pretrial, trial
and appeals stages of the Court’s proceedings and in the
investigations and preliminary examinations carried out
by the Office of the Prosecutor. We firmly believe that
the International Criminal Court plays a fundamental
role within the Rome Statute system of international
criminal justice, which aims to end impunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community and also helps to prevent them.
With regard to the reparations mandate of the Trust
Fund for Victims, we appreciate the fact that it is playing
a more important role in the work of the Fund. We want
to highlight the three cases that are in the reparations
stage with respect to the various crimes that in different
ways cause damage to victims, their families and the
communities affected. Where individual reparations
are concerned, we believe it is important to design
19-34974

04/11/2019

an administrative selection mechanism, as well as to
identify the beneficiaries. El Salvador also welcomes
the initiatives carried out at the international level on
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
16, such as the Humanity against Crimes campaign,
which is an important effort aimed at enabling the
international community to join forces to combat
atrocity crimes.
We are aware that the International Criminal Court
has had great achievements in the past few years, but we
also recognize that much remains to be done and that
the path ahead is full of challenges and opportunities in
advancing the process we have undertaken, which will
open doors for the prosecution of serious human rights
violations and the possibility of trying those who have
committed crimes under the Rome Statute. In the light
of the foregoing, our country calls on States to adhere to
the Kampala amendments, and we especially welcome
the activation in July 2018 of the Court’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression, based on the decision
adopted by the Assembly of States Parties in New York
in December 2017, which reinforces the jurisdiction
and competence of the International Criminal Court.
As part of our commitment to the international
community and the International Criminal Court,
and with the aim of strengthening our normative
and operational structure, we have launched internal
initiatives, in line with our national legislation, with
a view to ratifying the Agreement on the Privileges
and Immunities of the International Criminal Court, as
soon as possible, as we believe that this instrument will
facilitate the achievement of its objectives as well as
the discharge of its functions.
Finally, I want to conclude by reiterating our
country’s deep commitment to and support for the
work of the International Criminal Court, and we urge
those who have not yet ratified the Rome Statute and its
two amendments to continue their processes of analysis
with a view to achieving full universality in the near
future in order to promote justice and accountability at
the global level.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): My remarks today are
aimed at complementing the statements delivered by
the observer of the European Union this morning (see
A/74/PV.25) and by the representative of Liechtenstein
a moment ago.
I want to thank the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing this morning
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

on this year’s report of the Court (see A/74/324), and
to welcome the intense level of the Court’s activity
during the reporting period, with 11 situations under
investigation by the Prosecutor, 10 ongoing preliminary
examinations and three trial proceedings.
Cyprus remains a staunch supporter of the
Rome Statute system. The ICC continues to be the
centrepiece of the global system of international
criminal justice and an essential institution for
promoting an international rules-based order, ensuring
accountability and attaining sustainable peace through
reparative justice. Despite the difficulties it has
encountered and its inherent limitations, the Court
has made significant progress since its establishment,
including by opening 27 cases involving 45 suspects
or accused persons, conducting investigations into
11 situations and reaching the reparations stage in three
cases. We have also witnessed the historic activation of
the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of aggression
and the amendment to the Statute to add three new
war crimes, thereby extending the criminalization of
the use of certain weapons to non-international armed
conflicts. In addition, States parties will soon consider
another important amendment to the Statute, which will
seek to allow prosecutions in relation to the intentional
starvation of civilians in non-international armed
conflict. Cyprus supports that amendment because we
recognize that even though starvation as a method of
warfare is prohibited under international humanitarian
law, there is a gap in ensuring accountability for this
atrocity crime.
For the Court to achieve what it was created to
achieve, it has to constantly evolve and improve. It must
remain an independent and credible judicial institution
whose work is of the highest standard. It must edge
closer to universality with each passing year, and it
has to find its rightful place within the international
system and benefit from synergies with the United
Nations and other institutions with similar objectives.
We are keenly aware of the many challenges still
facing the Court, such as the 15 arrest warrants and
requests for surrender that remain unexecuted to this
day and the withdrawal of one State party to the Rome
Statute during the reporting period. They are objective
challenges that reflect an increasingly complex
international environment, and we must persevere in
order to overcome them. But not all of its challenges
are beyond the Court’s control. It is the Court’s own
responsibility to maintain a high standard in its judicial
11/28

A/74/PV.26

work, as well as with regard to its independence and
integrity. It is also the responsibility of States parties
to help safeguard the Court’s credibility by presenting
and voting for candidate judges of exceptional skill
and quality.
International criminal justice was the one pillar
missing from the architecture of the global order that
we built after the Second World War. Nearly 75 years
later, we are still trying to embed international criminal
justice in a comprehensive accountability framework
that not only reliably administers justice but also deters
the commission of egregious crimes by both States and
individuals. Today’s reality makes it clear that we have
a long way to go for that to happen. The jurisdictional
and impunity gap resulting from the Court’s lack of
universality is not an excuse. The Rome Statute made
the necessary institutional link with the existing
international collective-security system by among
other things ensuring the possibility for the Security
Council to refer cases to the Court when the exercise
of its jurisdiction is otherwise not possible. The
Council must refer all such cases to the Court, because
sustainable peace is simply not possible without justice
and because the victims of atrocity crimes deserve
nothing less.
For the quintessential battle between the rule of
law and the rule of might to have the desired outcome,
we must recognize the rightful place of the ICC in the
global rules-based order as the vehicle for delivering
criminal justice at the international level. The United
Nations remains instrumental in consolidating the
Court’s standing as an indispensable institution of that
global order. We firmly believe that only full support
and cooperation, synergy and complementarity between
these two teleologically convergent institutions can
enable them both to fulfil their mandates.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Eboe-Osuji, the President of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his
comprehensive presentation, and to welcome the report
of the Court (A/74/324).
Georgia aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union (see
A/74/PV.25), and I would like to add the following
comments in my national capacity.
Achieving universality and further strengthening
cooperation with the Court are key factors that can
enable the ICC to work effectively to end impunity
12/28

04/11/2019

for the perpetrators of the most egregious crimes
that threaten international peace, security and wellbeing. I want to reaffirm our continuing support
for a strong and effective ICC with the potential to
send a powerful message that will be heard by both
victims and perpetrators. We believe that the role of
the ICC is to complement rather than replace existing
national judicial systems. The primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute crimes remains with
individual States.
Last year marked the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Rome Statute of the ICC, and several
commemorative events were held to celebrate that
milestone worldwide, including in my country, Georgia.
In recognition of our excellent cooperation with the
Court, we hosted the ICC high-level regional cooperation
conference, entitled “Opportunities for cooperation
and exchange of experience at 20 years of the Rome
Statute”. Since ratifying the Rome Statute, Georgia
has harmonized the relevant pieces of its domestic
legislation with the provisions of the Rome Statute,
enacted a stand-alone law to establish a flexible legal
regime exclusively for cooperation with the Court and
concluded special cooperation agreements to facilitate
the investigation process. Most recently, in January,
the Government of Georgia and the ICC concluded
an agreement on the enforcement of sentences. Under
the agreement, people convicted by the ICC may serve
their prison sentences in Georgia if it is so decided by
the Court and accepted by the Government of Georgia.
The Georgian penitentiary system has thereby joined
the limited number of systems designated by the ICC
for sentence enforcement, demonstrating the Court’s
confidence in its high standards.
We strongly support the initiatives that are most
crucial to enabling the Court to meet current challenges.
They include reaching agreement on the activation of
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which is a
milestone achievement and a historic opportunity for
the international community. Since 2017, Georgia has
voluntarily contributed to the Trust Fund for Victims
for the benefit of victims and their families worldwide,
and in December of last year Georgia’s Deputy Minister
of Justice, Mr. Vazha Lortkipanidze, was unanimously
elected to represent Eastern Europe at the Trust Fund.
Georgia welcomes the Court’s efforts to investigate
alleged crimes in the context of the situation in
Georgia. We have been providing relevant materials to
19-34974

04/11/2019

the Court in accordance with our obligation under the
Rome Statute, and will continue to do so.
Georgia is grateful to the ICC for opening an office
in Tbilisi in 2017, the first ICC field office outside
Africa. The ICC investigation of crimes committed
in Georgia during the Russian aggression in 2008
represents the first time that the Court has ever entered
Europe’s legal geography. It also serves as a litmus test
for the Court’s efforts to uphold the values of the Rome
Statute. The Government of Georgia stands ready to
continue working with the ICC to ensure that more than
a decade after the alleged crimes occurred, they can be
effectively investigated and justice is served, because
the victims of those heinous crimes deserve no less.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union (see A/74/PV.25) and joins others in
thanking the President of the International Criminal
Court for introducing the report (see A/74/324) today.
I would like to make two additional points in my
national capacity.
I first want to reaffirm Italy’s strong support for
the International Criminal Court and its activities.
I cannot emphasize enough the importance of the
principles and purposes that inspire the Rome Statute
system, including the impartiality and independence of
the Court, as well as the continuing relevance of the
binding norms of international law that are codified in
the Rome Statute. These are fundamental achievements
for the international community as a whole, and we
must cherish them. The report introduced this year
proves that the Court is a solid institution that is
making progress on a number of situations and cases.
Italy supports any steps undertaken in cooperation with
the Court to improve its efficiency and effectiveness,
as long as they do not encroach on its impartiality
and independence.
Secondly, I would like to remind the Assembly that
the Court is a judicial body of last resort that operates
only in cases where national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to prosecute. The primary responsibility for
prosecuting and adjudicating the most heinous crimes
lies with States, in particular, through their national
judicial institutions. Our task is to work together through
capacity-building, technical assistance and other forms
of cooperation, including judicial cooperation, which
will enable domestic jurisdictions to discharge their
primary function of bringing justice to victims of the
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

most heinous crimes. We believe that the completion
of the International Law Commission’s work on crimes
against humanity is an important step in that direction,
and Italy will cooperate constructively with a view to
transforming the draft articles into a convention, as well
as with all international efforts aimed at facilitating
horizontal judicial cooperation.
Italy will continue to lend its support to the Court
in the fight against impunity and in strengthening
accountability measures for the most serious crimes.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is grateful for the report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) (see A/74/324) and
for Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji’s briefing on it (see A/74/
PV.25). We are grateful to him for his leadership of
the Court.
We want to express our commitment to the
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes
of international concern, which is undoubtedly an
essential step towards maintaining peace and the rule
of law at the international level. We recognize the work
it has been doing, evidenced by the cases currently in
process, the conclusion of some cases and the start of
new investigations, all of which reflect the Court’s
fulfilment of its mandate and the consolidation of the
principle of international criminal justice.
Venezuela was one of the first countries to sign and
ratify the Rome Statute. We are pleased that last year it
marked the twentieth anniversary of the establishment
of the Statute as well as the activation of the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, in an
affirmation of the importance of international law and
criminal justice. We consider cooperation to be one of the
fundamental pillars of the Court’s proper functioning,
and we recognize the importance of the principle of
complementarity in safeguarding the priority of national
courts with respect to the investigation and prosecution
of crimes under the Rome Statute. Accordingly, we
urge State parties and non-State parties to cooperate
in such areas as the execution of arrest warrants, the
surrender of defendants, the presentation of evidence,
the relocation of witnesses, the protection of victims
and the enforcement of sentences, among other things.
As a party to the International Criminal Court,
Venezuela supports its work and endorses its activities
as long as they strictly adhere to the Statute and
thereby ensure that they are not used for contrary
13/28

A/74/PV.26

04/11/2019

purposes. The application of justice by any Power and
its subordinates must be depoliticized, transparent and
non-selective. In this regard, we reject the opening
of a preliminary examination by the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Court against the constitutional
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, at
the request of a group of countries that in various ways
have stated that they are seeking to overthrow him. The
argument this is based on is the existence of systematic
violations of the human rights of demonstrators during
the opposition’s violent protests in April 2017.

tribunal for combating impunity and prosecuting
persons who commit the most serious crimes when
the State concerned is unable or unwilling to do so.
We also support its universalization, independence,
integrity and transparency in order to ensure that those
responsible for such crimes are brought to justice,
regardless of their nationality.

We believe that this examination represents a
legal attack, as it seeks to override the work of our
national courts in investigating and prosecuting those
allegedly responsible for the crimes committed during
the protests. Nevertheless, our country reaffirms its
commitment to collaborating with the Prosecutor by
providing her with the information she requires so that
she can verify that our judicial system has been focused
on uncovering these facts from the beginning.

My delegation would particularly like to emphasize
its strong belief in the legitimacy of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its full confidence in the
impartiality and integrity of its judges and Prosecutor.
We thank them for their courage and work in the service
of international justice.

The International Criminal Court is not a body
created to replace national courts. Rather, as article
1 of the Rome Statute states, it is complementary to
the national criminal jurisdiction of any State party
to the Statute. The States continue to reserve the right
and duty to initially prosecute and try individuals
responsible for the most serious crimes committed
against humankind.
It is striking that the group of countries that accuse
Venezuela of systematically violating the human rights
of its citizens should remain silent in the face of the
ongoing practices of aggression and violent intimidation
by the United States against other countries and judges
of the International Criminal Court. We condemn the
use by the United States of its power to classify the
Court as illegitimate and to threaten its judges with
sanctions if it initiates criminal proceedings against
the United States military and allied countries.
The ICC is a tribunal created to provide universal
justice and prosecute people for the perpetration of the
most serious crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and now the crime of aggression.
Consequently, its jurisdiction is unique, independent,
transparent, impartial and based on its own legal
framework, which is the Rome Statute, adopted by the
countries that endorse it.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
Court and recognize it as the only international
14/28

Mr. Kingston (Ireland): Ireland associates itself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the European
Union and its member States (see A/74/PV.25).

I want like to thank the International Criminal
Court for its annual report to the United Nations
(see A/74/324), covering the period from 1 August
2018 to 31 July 2019, which outlines a year of activities
encompassing a number of developments in relation to
many aspects of the Court and its work. I also thank
President Chile Eboe-Osuji for his thorough briefing on
the report and the work of the Court (see A/74/PV.25).
As always, the Court’s annual report to the United
Nations provides us with a very useful overview of
its work, and in particular shows how it complements
that of the United Nations. The activities with which
the Court has been engaged during the reporting
period cover an ever-increasing range of judicial and
prosecutorial activities with a wide geographical scope.
Good progress has been accomplished in a number of
these situations, which is to be welcomed.
Notwithstanding the progress, however, the range
of issues dealt with by the Court over the reporting
period also shows us the many challenges that the Court
continues to face. The Court operates in a complex
environment and seeks to carry out its investigations
and prosecutions in the most difficult of circumstances.
As always, Ireland remains ready to assist the Court in
dealing with those challenges. We will do what we can
to enable the Court to carry out its mandate as fully
as possible.
Ireland believes in the rule of law as an essential
element of a sustainable future, in accordance with
Sustainable Development Goal 16. Furthermore, we
strongly believe in the value of multilateralism systems
19-34974

04/11/2019

that are committed to the rule of law. As our President,
Michael D. Higgins, said in his address to the Assembly
in September,
“It is multilateralism ... that has enabled us to
develop mechanisms for conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The progress
made in the development of international law is a
testament to the significant steps for humankind
that we can take when the international community
works in harmony.” (A/74/PV.6, p.27)
Ireland is firmly of the view that the ICC, as a
permanent criminal court that sits at the heart of a
system of international criminal justice, can only
enhance the prospects for peace and security in the
world. Its focus is on a list of crimes that are of such
serious concern that they are to be accepted as such by
the international community as a whole. It is accepted
that the commission of these crimes can threaten
international peace and security. The ICC seeks
accountability for the perpetrators of such crimes and
promises justice for the victims of such crimes. Last,
but far from least, it seeks to prevent the commission
of those crimes. For all of these reasons, Ireland is
committed to the ICC and to its future development.
One strand of the ICC’s work that deserves
particular mention is the work of the Trust Fund for
Victims, which is critical in responding to the needs
of victims who have experienced the horror of atrocity
crimes. The annual report highlights the developments
regarding the Fund’s reparations mandate and its
ongoing work under its assistance mandate. Ireland
will make a further contribution to the Fund this year,
and we encourage others to consider doing the same.
A significant portion of the annual report is also
focused on the ongoing cooperation and assistance
essential to its functioning that the Court receives from
the United Nations and its entities and from numerous
States, international organizations and civil society. It is
heartening to see the many areas of cooperation that are
working well, notwithstanding the ongoing challenges.
Ireland should be counted among the countries that
provide ongoing cooperation to the Court.
We note how the Court particularly values the
support it is given by the United Nations system.
Ireland fully recognizes the importance of the existing
relationship and links with the United Nations at all
levels, and we would like to see such links being
strengthened further. For example, increasing the
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the ICC would significantly contribute
to the international community’s response to atrocity
crimes. The Council has the power to refer situations
to the ICC. We believe that this power should be used
consistently, and we strongly support the political
declaration on the suspension of veto powers in cases
of mass atrocity and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct on Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. The Council could also play
an enhanced role in dealing with non-cooperation with
the Court, in particular in relation to referrals that the
Council itself has made to the Court.
Ireland is seeking election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the 2021-2022
term, and if elected, we will seek to encourage the
Council to support the work of the Court as part
of the international community’s efforts to secure
accountability for atrocity crimes.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
achieving the universality of the Rome Statute. In many
of the current crisis situations throughout the world,
the Court does not have jurisdiction. The need for a
more effective international criminal justice system is
clear. We urge the international community as a whole
to support the Statute and to work for its universality.
Ireland remains firmly committed to the rule of law
and to building an effective international criminal
justice system. We have a responsibility to make sure
that institutions such as the ICC, which we have set up
in furtherance of those principles, will succeed.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): My delegation
welcomes the opportunity to deliver this statement
in the context of agenda item 73, entitled “Report of
the International Criminal Court”, in accordance
with the 2004 Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In welcoming the President of the ICC, Judge
Chile Eboe-Osuji, to New York, I wish to pay tribute
to him and the staff of the Court for their unwavering
service and commitment to international criminal
justice. I thank the President of the Court for briefing
the General Assembly (see A/74/PV.25) on the annual
report of the Court on its activities in 2018 and 2019
(see A/74/324), and the Secretary-General for preparing
it. As a sponsor of draft resolution A/74/L.8, we also
thank the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
for introducing it this morning.
15/28

A/74/PV.26

The report clearly indicates that the Court was
intensely engaged on many substantive issues and had
a high workload during the reporting period, including
the issuance and enforcement of two arrest warrants,
the holding of a confirmation-of-charges hearing in
one case and the conclusion of trials leading to the
conviction of one person and the acquittal of two
accused on all charges. Those acquittal decisions are
now subject to appeal. We have also taken note of the
number of situations in which the investigations by the
Prosecutor remain open.

04/11/2019

and organizational performance. Significantly, the
strategic plans must drive the process of closing the
impunity gap.
Sierra Leone attaches great importance to the
work of the ICC and the effective functioning of the
Rome Statute system. We therefore affirm our strong
and continuing commitment to the Court and our
unwavering belief in the necessity of its complementary
role within the Statute system.

On more specific matters, my delegation notes with
appreciation the notable jurisprudential developments
cited in the report, particularly the Appeals Chamber
judgment on the question of cooperation. In the
seventeenth meeting of the Assembly of States Parties,
Sierra Leone called for the increased use of judicial
means to resolve differences of interpretation of the
Rome Statute in order to preserve the integrity and
independence of the Court.

The adoption of the Rome Statute has significantly
transformed the landscape of international criminal
justice, especially with respect to transitional justice
in conflict and post-conflict societies, of which
Sierra Leone’s recent history exemplifies the role of
accountability as a fundamental building block for the
consolidation of peace and the pursuit of economic
and social development. Sierra Leone’s experience
with the Special Court, a hybrid criminal tribunal, has
deepened and consolidated our abiding commitment
to the effectiveness of international criminal justice
through ownership and partnership at the domestic
and international levels. Strengthening and protecting
the integrity of the Rome Statute system and the
effectiveness and independence of the ICC therefore
requires the collective will of the States parties,
cooperation with the United Nations and continued
robust support of civil society.

We acknowledge that a judicial decision brings
about a measure of legal certainty. The outcome may
not be universally accepted, but the judicial mechanism
has importantly been used to address a difficult
question. In the same light, we will continue to closely
monitor the progress of the appeal of the decision
of Pre-Trial Chamber II to reject the request of the
Prosecutor for authorization to investigate the situation
in Afghanistan.

It is against that backdrop on 17 July that the
Mission of Sierra Leone joined the Permanent Missions
of Argentina, Ecuador, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Senegal and Spain, as well as Parliamentarians
for Global Action, in sponsoring a high-level event
here at the United Nations entitled “The crucial role of
international criminal justice in achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 16”, in which the President of the
Court participated.

My delegation further notes with appreciation the
issuance of the Court-wide strategic plan for the period
from 2019 to 2021 and the strategic plans of the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Registry in July. We commend
the efficiency in the simultaneous issuance of the three
plans and the external consultations. Consultations in
New York, where all States parties have representation,
are necessary and indispensable for the legitimacy of
the Court in all State-led processes. We look forward to
the full actualization of the 10 strategic goals, clustered
into three categories of judicial and prosecutorial
performance, cooperation and complementarity,

Accordingly, we welcome the 17 high-level and
technical events organized during the reporting period,
in particular the retreat to promote dialogue with
African States parties held in Addis Ababa, with the
close cooperation and participation of the Office of the
Legal Counsel of the African Union. The involvement
of more than 600 participants and 140 States and other
entities in the cooperation events within the reporting
period is laudable. We believe that there is room for
greater cooperation and synergy among States parties
and non-State parties and entities to further strengthen
the Court and the Rome Statute system.

We welcome the geographic spread of the
investigations and examinations, which illustrate the
global focus of the Court. At the heart of the Court’s
work are the victims, on whose behalf we have this
accountability system. Accordingly, we welcome the
participation of 13,391 victims in the cases before the
Court during the reporting period.

16/28

19-34974

04/11/2019

In closing, notwithstanding the challenges and
threats to the Court, Sierra Leone remains firmly
committed to the Court’s mandate and to its status as
an independent and impartial judicial institution. This
commitment is for the victims. We want to underscore
that the ICC and the Rome Statute system are not
against any actor but rather that the Court acts for
the victims on the basis of complementarity. In that
regard, my delegation would like to acknowledge and
commend the Trust Fund for Victims in providing
assistance and enabling the increased participation of
victims in trial sessions of the Court, as well as the
payment of reparations.
Finally, Sierra Leone fully supports the vision of
the Court as it strives to be a universal, responsive,
flexible and resilient organization with a consistent
drive towards continued improvement.
Ms. Mägi (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union and
its member States (see A/74/PV.25).
Estonia would like to thank the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for his presentation
of the annual report (A/74/324) and his ongoing service
to the Court. We greatly appreciate this debate with
the President about the activities of the Court during
the reporting period, which also serves as a great
opportunity for States to join in expressing their
common support and commitment to the ICC.
As a long-standing supporter of the ICC, Estonia is
committed to promoting respect for international law
and the rules-based international order. We would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate that the ICC is an
essential tool for fighting impunity and contributing to
peaceful societies and that it has a crucial role in the
maintenance of a world order based on rules and values.
We acknowledge with appreciation the fact that the
reporting period was marked by intense activity and
many important developments in the Court’s pretrial,
trial and appeals proceedings, and in the investigations
and preliminary examinations conducted by the Office
of the Prosecutor.
The report gives an honest overview of the
heavy workload that the Court is facing through
situations under investigation by the Prosecutor,
ongoing preliminary examinations and trials, and the
many missions in the framework of investigations or
preliminary examinations. The number of cases and
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

situations before the ICC and the rising number of
communications demonstrate that there is wide trust in
it, which is testimony to the good work that it has done.
The increasing workload, however, creates
challenges for the ICC in its efforts to remain efficient
and effective. We welcome the concrete initiatives
taken by the ICC in reviewing and streamlining its
administrative and judicial processes and maximizing
the use of available resources. We also encourage
all States parties to the Rome Statute to fulfil their
financial obligations to the Court and to continue
their efforts to strengthen it and enhance its efficiency
and effectiveness in cooperation with the ICC and other
stakeholders.
We are glad that concrete steps are currently under
discussion in the Bureau of the Assembly of State
Parties and will also be brought up at the upcoming
Assembly. At the same time, we continue to stress the
importance of the impartiality and independence of the
ICC, its judges and the Prosecutor.
As indicated in the report, the arrest and surrender
of individuals subject to the Court’s warrants remains
a critical challenge. The ICC has undertaken initiatives
in that regard, and we acknowledge its launch of a social
media campaign, creation of a webpage and publication
of a booklet. The effectiveness and efficiency of the
ICC in fulfilling its mandate inevitably depends on
States’ full cooperation with the Court. We would like
to recall that it is the primary duty of States to prevent
and respond to international crimes, and we stress
that the ICC complements national courts rather than
replacing them.
We further welcome the fact that the report pays
attention to the Court’s dialogue with the Security
Council, and we support the views expressed that a
structured dialogue between the Court and the Council
on matters of mutual interest, both thematic and
situation-specific, could improve the implementation
of Council referral resolutions and enhance the fight
against impunity.
We would also like to recall that the Security
Council has to uphold and promote international
law by responding decisively to grave violations of
international law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law. It is the prerogative of the Security
Council to refer a situation to the ICC, which can
promote accountability in countries where grave
17/28

A/74/PV.26

crimes may have been committed but where the Court
lacks jurisdiction.
The ICC plays an important role in delivering
justice to victims. We also need to do more to offer
important protection for victims and witnesses that
have suffered or witnessed crimes. We want to express
our appreciation and support for the continued work of
the Trust Fund for Victims in offering reparations for
victims of the most serious crimes, their families and
communities. The report contains a call to States by the
Trust Fund for Victims to make voluntary contributions
for the benefit of victims and their families. We are
glad to report that Estonia has regularly contributed to
the Trust Fund and that we have recently decided to
increase our contribution considerably. We encourage
States, whether they are States parties to the Statute
or not, and other donors to consider making voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund.
The universal acceptance of the Rome Statute
remains a challenge to the international community.
As indicated in the report, the number of State parties
is currently 122, and there were no new ratifications
of the Statute during the reporting period. At the same
time, we are glad that some progress has been made
in ratifying amendments to the Statute, including the
amendments on the crime of aggression. We continue
to call on all the Governments that have not yet ratified
the Statute to do so. We should continue and intensify
our efforts to make the Statute become a truly universal
treaty. In this context, the ICC, in cooperation with
States, also plays an important role in its own promotion
and in the universalization of the Rome Statute.
Estonia remains committed to continue working
together with all partners to further the work of
the ICC and strengthen the system of international
criminal justice.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia is grateful for the report on the activities of the
International Criminal Court (see A/74/324), which we
were briefed about this morning (see A/74/PV.25) by its
President, Judge Eboe-Osuji, to whom we express our
full support for his important work.
As a pacifist State and promoter of a culture
of peace in its primary commitment to respecting
international law, Bolivia adheres to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of complementarity and cooperation that the
18/28

04/11/2019

Organization maintains with the International Criminal
Court. Bolivia takes due note of the jurisdictional
activities carried out by the Court, which demonstrate
the efforts it is making to resolve the cases before it,
as well as the tasks it is undertaking to consolidate the
Court’s complex institutional nature and improve its
effectiveness and efficiency in tasks performed by its
various components.
The progress that the Court has made in
resolving its cases is notable, as is the increase in new
investigations, which could lead to a greater caseload
at a pace that will gradually consolidate the principles
of international criminal justice. In this regard, we
note the strategic plan of the Office of the Prosecutor
for the 2019-2021 period, which takes into account
good practices, the challenges it faces in carrying out
its work, and the establishment of strategic goals to
optimize its endeavours. We hope that they will be fully
implemented and that periodic reviews will examine
both the practices and internal procedures of the Office
of the Prosecutor to achieve greater effectiveness and
quality in its investigative and procedural work.
The discovery of truth through the gathering of
evidence and witness testimony in very diverse cultural
contexts is a complex task that requires both the full
cooperation and complementarity of the judicial
systems of the States that are requesting the Court’s
jurisdiction and the support of the United Nations in
cases that are referred by the Security Council. In this
context, we point out the need for greater coordination
and follow-up by the Council in cases referred to the
Court, as well as the effective use of the measures
adopted by the Council through its subsidiary bodies to
meet the Council and the Court’s shared goals.
Twenty years after the signing of the Rome
Statute, the Court has demonstrated an excellent
capacity for resolving complex cases in sensitive
areas. The scope of the Statute continues to be tested
today. Overcoming the difficulties of launching an
unprecedented model of universal criminal justice is
a painstaking task. It is therefore important to bear in
mind that the International Criminal Court is part of a
global undertaking involving all States. In that regard,
we stress the importance of cooperation in responding
diligently to the Court’s requests for assistance and
arrest warrants issued by it in the discharge of its
mandate and its jurisdictional duties. It is in just such
situations that the idea of universal criminal justice
assumes relevancy and demonstrates the imperative
19-34974

04/11/2019

A/74/PV.26

need to continue to insisting on achieving the
universality of the Rome Statute.

observer of the European Union (see A/74/PV.25), with
which my country fully associates itself.

This year the Plurinational State of Bolivia has
participated in and followed with special interest the
timely and necessary initiatives of the working groups
of the Assembly of States Parties aimed at reforming
and strengthening the Court and the scope of the
Rome Statute, which reflect the Court’s experiences
in its initial phase, address the shortcomings that
limit its effectiveness in the fight against impunity
and strengthen the universality of international
criminal justice.

I would also like to thank President Eboe-Osuji
for his comprehensive briefing (see A/74/PV.25) on the
annual report of the International Criminal Court (see
A/74/324). The report demonstrates that the past year
was marked by a growing workload and significant
jurisdictional developments.

We continue to closely follow the reviews and
recommendations issued by the panel of experts
at the Assembly of States Parties on such sensitive
issues as governance, complementarity, investigative
effectiveness and judicial independence. Our
delegation to the working group in The Hague has
participated actively in facilitating discussion on
the issue of revising the mandate of the Court’s
independent oversight mechanism, which provides
indispensable assistance to the Assembly of States
Parties and the organs of the Court in areas related
to administrative effectiveness and transparency.
During these deliberations, it is also considering the
scope of its competency to address integrity-related
issues concerning elected officials and former officials
effectively and authoritatively, the principles of ethical
conduct, disciplinary procedures and alternative
mechanisms to guarantee the independence and
integrity of the Court’s judicial function.
Lastly, it is necessary to reiterate that we cannot
let those who have committed or continue to commit
atrocities that shock the conscience of humankind to
enjoy impunity. For this reason, it is imperative to ensure
that not only the States party to the Rome Statute but the
international community in general spares no effort in
its cooperation. We reiterate that all States, regardless
of whether they are party to the Rome Statute, are
primarily responsible for taking action and facilitating
the Court’s work. The International Criminal Court
faces the challenge of developing its competencies to
be able, together with every State, to effectively and
independently carry out its mission in line with best
practices, based on cooperation and complementarity,
and thereby ensuring its full effectiveness.
Mrs. Telalian (Greece): Allow me to add a few
remarks to the statement delivered earlier today by the
19-34974

Greece has always firmly believed, and continues
to believe, that the International Criminal Court
and the Rome Statute are key actors in the quest for
accountability for the most horrendous crimes and
their deterrence and for the establishment of lasting
and sustainable peace in conflict-torn countries,
objectives that are also shared by the United Nations.
We would therefore like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our strong support for the Court, as well as
our commitment to joining the efforts to protect its
independence and immunize it against any external
pressure or interference.
It goes without saying that in order to fully achieve
those objectives, the Court must first and foremost
become truly universal. In this respect, we note that
while the Rome Statute, as a treaty, has enjoyed broad
success, large parts of the world still remain outside
the Court’s jurisdictional reach, and almost one third of
the States Members of the United Nations have not yet
joined the Statute. We therefore renew our call to States
that have not yet ratified the Rome Statute to do so at
the earliest opportunity.
As the report of the International Criminal
Court demonstrates, the success of the Court in the
fulfilment of its mandate is a collective responsibility
and requires multi-stakeholder engagement. The
need for full and effective cooperation with the
Court cannot be overemphasized. In that regard, we
would like to share the concerns expressed in the
report about the outstanding arrest warrants against
15 individuals. Furthermore, while acknowledging
and appreciating the crucial support and cooperation
that has been extended to the Court by United Nations
senior leadership and several United Nations entities,
including in the field, we regret the fact highlighted in
the report that the Security Council has not answered
or acted in any substantive way on 15 findings of
non-cooperation in connection with its referrals to the
Court. We therefore reiterate our call for a structured
dialogue between the Court and the Council in order
19/28

A/74/PV.26

to improve the implementation of referral resolutions
through effective follow-up.
The celebration last year of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute
gave us an opportunity not only to take stock of the
achievements of the Rome Statute system over the past
two decades but also to reflect on the challenges that
the Court faces in the fulfilment of its groundbreaking
mandate. Some of them are long-standing issues, while
others have appeared more recently. We are about to
take a major step this year towards addressing those
challenges by setting the parameters for a thorough
review process with the aim of strengthening the
operation of the Court and the Rome Statute system and
enhancing their overall functioning. We believe that
this is a timely exercise, given that a new Prosecutor
and six new judges will be elected at the end of 2020.
Greece is ready to closely follow the relevant
developments and join the efforts to ensure that a
meaningful, transparent and comprehensive review
process, including by independent experts, will be
conducted in accordance with the Court’s statutory
framework and in full respect for judicial and
prosecutorial independence.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): My delegation appreciates
the reports of the Secretary-General (A/74/325 and
A/74/326) submitted to the General Assembly in
accordance with article 6 of the Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We are also grateful to Judge
Chile Eboe-Osuji, the President of the International
Criminal Court, for the report before us today (see
A/74/324). We applaud the President and his team
for their exemplary execution of the activities of the
Court during the reporting period. We also appreciate
the Court’s tireless efforts to carry out its mandate
as an independent judicial institution charged with
investigating and prosecuting individuals for the most
serious crimes of international concern — genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
We are deeply committed to the ICC, whose
establishment we recognize as one of the great
advances of international law. The Court’s function of
ensuring accountability for grave crimes is vital to the
maintenance of lasting international peace and security.
To strengthen its ability to effectively discharge
that crucial responsibility, the Court relies on the
cooperation of States, international organizations and
20/28

04/11/2019

civil society, in accordance with the Rome Statute and
international agreements concluded by the Court. That
cooperation is critical to ensuring proper investigations,
the execution of outstanding arrest warrants, the
surrender of persons, the protection of witnesses, the
enforcement of sentences and the enhancement of
the Court’s credibility as an effective tool for ending
impunity and helping to prevent future crimes.
The Nigerian delegation considers victims a
critical component of the justice system and believes
that efforts must be made to bring about healing if
they are to have the necessary closure. In that regard,
Nigeria commends the Trust Fund for Victims, created
in 2004 by the Assembly of States Parties pursuant
to article 79 of the Rome Statute to support and
implement programmes that address harm resulting
from genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
and crimes of aggression.
A cursory look at the Court’s journey since its
establishment unquestionably shows that the Court
has endured numerous difficult times and challenges,
many of which have threatened its existence as an
international court. However, we commend the Court
and its States parties for the resilience and capacity
they have shown in weathering so many of the storms
that the Court has gone through during those years
and for the fact that it has recorded such tremendous
achievements despite all the odds. Among others, those
achievements include the number of cases that the
Court has handled and is still handling, the number of
high-profile convictions it has recorded so far and the
recourse to justice that it has provided for victims of
atrocity crimes worldwide.
Also worthy of commendation is the reminder that
the Court has consistently sent to States parties that
so many of the ugly events of the twentieth century,
including those that took place during the two World
Wars, no longer have a place in the international legal
order, and that those who ignore the warnings and
stubbornly and with impunity perpetrate evil will have
nowhere to hide. But the fact is that the fight against
impunity and atrocity crimes is still far from being won.
The sanctity of human life is still being desecrated and
banned weapons are still being used to commit mass
murder, while perpetrators go unpunished. Meanwhile,
victims’ lives are ravaged and their peaceful communal
coexistence is broken.
19-34974

04/11/2019

It is understandable that the tasks ahead of
the Court are enormous and daunting. Nigeria
renews its unwavering commitment to cooperating
unconditionally and continually with the Court to
ensure that the perpetrators of heinous crimes have no
hiding place and are expeditiously brought to justice.
Nigeria is currently being examined by the Court
regarding eight potential cases, including six against
Boko Haram terrorists and two against the military.
It is on record that Nigeria has fully cooperated and
will continue to cooperate with the Court in its efforts
to unravel the facts and get to the bottom of the
cases, in line with the principle of complementarity.
Nigeria has demonstrated beyond an iota of doubt
that it is capable and willing and indeed is arresting,
investigating, prosecuting and convicting perpetrators
of heinous crimes, where the facts of a case warrant it,
in fulfilment of our primary national jurisdiction over
Rome Statute crimes.
Several meetings have been held between officials
of the Government of Nigeria and the team from the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC, where questions
were asked and answered and documents, including
classified documents, were submitted in line with
our obligation under the Rome Statute’s article 86, on
cooperation. Our cooperation with the Court is born
of our strong belief in respect for the rule of law and
human rights and our firm commitment to the sanctity
of fundamental freedoms at the international and
domestic levels, which is intrinsic to the objectives
sought in establishing the Court. Nigeria will therefore
work to safeguard the integrity of the Rome Statute
and its cornerstone principles. Nigeria also commits
to strengthening and defending the ICC’s judicial and
prosecutorial independence, including by ensuring a
proactive, fair, informed and transparent search and
selection process for the next ICC Prosecutor. In that
connection, the July 2018 visit of President Muhammadu
Buhari of Nigeria to The Hague to take part in the
celebrations of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Rome Statute, and our unprecedentedly
formidable delegation, which included senior military
officers, to the seventeenth session of the Assembly
of States Parties, is testimony to the importance that
Nigeria attaches to the Court.
In the past few years Nigeria has had its fair share
of extremist terrorist activities, committed by Boko
Haram in the north-eastern region of the country.
Nigeria has also made great strides in degrading and
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

decimating Boko Haram terrorists and collaborating
with the United Nations and other international
partners to improve service delivery and enhance
protection measures, both in communities and areas
where civilians seek refuge. However, it must be
underscored that unlike conventional warfare, in which
enemies can be easily distinguished by their uniforms,
the fight against terrorism anywhere in the world is
unconventional and asymmetrical. Terrorism thrives
on hit-and-run combat, typified by surprise aggression,
brutal militancy and clandestinity. Many members of
the Nigerian military have made and are still making
the supreme sacrifice in this difficult fight.
Nevertheless, the Nigerian military has strict rules
of engagement, and its armed forces are adequately
briefed on them. The Government takes all allegations
of human rights and other violations against military
personnel extremely seriously and thoroughly
investigates them, and, when they are credible, has
brought some members of the military to trial. We
therefore want to reassure the Court and States parties
that we remain fully committed to our obligations
under the Rome Statute.
As the 2018 African Union Anti-Corruption
Champion in Africa, Nigeria was called on to champion
the cause of exploring the possibility of subsuming
cross-border corruption within the ambit of article 5 to
make it a crime under the Rome Statute. The proponents
of the idea argue that cross-border corruption is as
serious a crime as genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and the crime of aggression.
They argue that more people have probably been
killed by cross-border corruption than as a result of the
other crimes mentioned in articles 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the
Rome Statute. This idea is in line with the Nigerian
President’s speech on the issue at the twentiethanniversary celebration of the adoption of the Rome
Statute, in July 2018 at The Hague, and Nigeria takes
it seriously. It is hoped that the ICC, in the near future,
will expand the reach of accountability to include
cross-border corruption.
In conclusion, we want to urge all States that have
not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court as a matter of deliberate
State policy, so that it can become a universal treaty.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset I want to stress that my delegation
21/28

A/74/PV.26

04/11/2019

dissociates itself from the consensus on resolution 74/6,
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”.

each of our countries is primarily a national process
with full national ownership.

My country’s position vis-à-vis the International
Criminal Court (ICC), with all due respect for the
jurists working in it, remains based on a rejection
of the injudicious and suspicious trend among the
Governments of some Member States of attempting
to broaden the concept of an international judicial
mandate in an illegitimate and distorted manner. It is
also based on our rejection of unwise practices by those
same Governments, as well as United Nations bodies
and committees that deal with the concepts of justice
and accountability, which work selectively and in an
unbalanced manner to ensure that there is no impunity,
leading to greater discord within the United Nations and
to infringements on the sovereignty of States as well as
their national responsibilities and juridical mandates.

We find strange, and indeed deplore, the statements
by some representatives of States parties to the Rome
Statute that call for greater effectiveness in the ICC’s
work and an expansion of its role and mandate to
encompass the situations prevailing in some States.
However, certain representatives have neglected to
state here that their Governments signed bilateral
agreements with a particular State in order to grant its
military forces immunity from the mandate of the ICC.
Surely the two are contradictory.

As members may recall, the Syrian Arab Republic
was one of the first States to contribute effectively to
the negotiations on the Rome Statute, which created
the ICC and among the first to sign the Statute. Today,
however, after many years, when we look at the current
status of the work of the Court and its Statute, we
unfortunately see a body that from the outset was fated
to be able to confront only weaker States and utterly
unable to confront States with military, economic and
political influence. In fact, all of us here are aware of
the impossibility of implementing the latest Kampala
amendments on the crime of aggression, because by
their very nature those amendments were the subject
of political deals.
The latest report of the International Criminal
Court on the item under consideration (see A/74/324)
shows that for more than 30 years the ICC has been
unable to exercise its presumed jurisdiction except in
27 cases, mostly in a single geographic region, with one
or two exceptions, proving that equitable and honest
international criminal justice is still far from a reality.
We are practical and know that we live today in a world
of economic and political polarization, a world where
major States with economic, political and military
influence attempt to control working procedures and
decision-making mechanisms, both internationally and
at the United Nations. We utterly reject any attempts
to link the work of the ICC and Goal 16 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We stress that
justice for all and the promotion of the role, status and
position of the national, legal and juridical bodies in
22/28

My country, Syria, rejects the attempts made by the
representatives of certain States to refer the situation in
Syria to the ICC or to deceptively promote the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria (IIIM). Let me stress from this rostrum that
the Syrian Arab Republic will go forward with its
political process despite all obstacles and challenges.
This Syrian-owned and -led political process will deal
with issues of transitional justice and accountability
through national Syrian legal and judicial bodies, not
an aberrant body based in Geneva that gathers socalled evidence without any respect for what is known
in criminal justice as the chain of custody of evidence.
I shall not speak for much longer, but I would like
to ask my colleagues to look at documents A/74/518,
A/74/108, A/73/562, A/72/106 and A/71/799. They are
some of the letters sent by the Permanent Mission of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly concerning what
is referred to as the IIIM. I want to refer specifically to
the document A/73/562, to which we attached a legal
study entitled “Wrongful acts cannot be promoted
or legalized”. That study, and the aforementioned
documents, clearly illustrate the serious legal
shortcomings undermining the General Assembly’s
process in adopting resolution 71/248, which created the
so-called IIIM. As a result, from a legal and procedural
point of view, any information or evidence that the
so-called IIIM may gather, consolidate, maintain or
analyse cannot be the basis for any legal or judicial
process in the future, especially considering that the
mandates given to the mechanism are not specified in
terms of time, geography, controls or standards.
I therefore call on Member States that respect the
principles of the Charter to do the right thing and refrain
from recognizing the so-called IIIM. I call on them to
19-34974

04/11/2019

dissociate themselves from cooperation with it, because
it is an aberrant body that departs from established
United Nations frameworks. I call on Member States,
especially this year, to resist the attempts by some
delegations to involve the United Nations and impose
on it the burden of financing this illegitimate body
through the regular budget. Today the States that have
supported and financed this mechanisms through
voluntary funding for two years would like to unload
that burden by making it the responsibility of the States
Members of the United Nations, which this year is facing
one of the most serious financial crises in its history, as
the Secretary-General has admitted. Any such act on
the part of certain States is irresponsible, and we call
on the rest of the Member States to confront it.
In conclusion, I have a proposal for the various
Governments that are trying diligently to ensure that
an international criminal jurisdiction prevails over
States’ own judicial mandates. Today in the world there
are tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters, who
came to Syria, together with their families, from more
than 100 States. They include thousands of European
citizens from States whose Governments refuse to
repatriate them, ignore their situation and are trying
to evade their national responsibility for holding them
accountable and working to rehabilitate and reintegrate
them in their original communities. We suggest that
those Governments shoulder their responsibilities
both nationally and internationally by getting to work
immediately on repatriating foreign terrorist fighters
and their families who are citizens of their countries. A
refusal to do so is legal and political hypocrisy, because
it represents neglect of their national legal and judicial
obligations while instead working to promote unilateral
and controversial concepts such as that of universal
criminal jurisdiction and its imposition within the
framework of international law.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
notes with appreciation the comprehensive report
(see A/74/324) presented by the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on its activities
for the period from 2018 to 2019. We commend the
ICC and the Office of the Prosecutor for their efforts
to ensure justice and accountability around the world.
We also appreciate the work done by the Bureau of the
Assembly of States Parties and its designated co-focal
points in New York and The Hague in implementing its
plan of action for promoting the universality and full
implementation of the Rome Statute.
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

We strongly support mainstreaming the ICC in the
United Nations system. With a view to acknowledging
the ICC’s potential contributions to international peace
and criminal justice, it is critical that the Court’s
mandate and competence be recognized in the relevant
discussions and resolutions at the United Nations. We
appreciate the increased level of engagements and
cooperation between the United Nations and the ICC
through the exchange of information, the provision
of services and facilities, judicial assistance, the
appearance of United Nations staff members before the
Court to give testimony, and field support. The Court’s
focus on highlighting the relevance of its mandate
to Sustainable Development Goal 16, particularly
its launch of a social media campaign entitled
“Humanity against crimes” in support of that Goal, is
worth mentioning.
The Court and the Security Council play different
but complementary roles in addressing the gravest
crimes of concern to the international community,
which have the potential to destabilize international
peace and security. In order to promote accountability
in countries where grave crimes may have been
committed but the Court lacks jurisdiction, the Security
Council has the prerogative to refer a situation to the
Court. In cases of such referrals, active follow-up is
necessary to ensure cooperation between the Court
and the Council, especially with regard to the arrest
and surrender of individuals who are the subject of
arrest warrants. We recognize the need for ensuring
adequate resources for the Office to carry out its work
in cases referred to it by the Security Council. As a lead
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
we will continue to extend the necessary cooperation to
the Court in mission areas where our peacekeepers and
military observers are deployed.
While appreciating the Court’s numerous initiatives
to ensure equitable geographical representation and
gender balance in the recruitment of its staff, we
underscore the importance of giving due consideration
to the participation of developing countries. One of
the most compelling narratives that has emerged from
the Court is the significant number of victims it has
supported through reparations and the Trust Fund for
Victims. Sustaining the flow of resources to the Trust
Fund and other mechanisms is critical.
Bangladesh takes note of the progress that has been
made with the investigations and judicial proceedings
in relation to the ICC’s situation countries. We are
23/28

A/74/PV.26

glad to hear that so far the Court has opened 27 cases
involving 45 suspects or accused, and has conducted
investigations into 11 situations. I appreciate the
updates provided in the report on the ICC’s judicial and
prosecutorial activities in 13 situation countries this
year, including Myanmar.
As the Assembly will be aware, Bangladesh is
currently hosting 1.1 million Rohingya who were forced
to leave Myanmar as a result of the atrocities committed
against them there. The prolonged crisis is now in its
third year, yet not a single Rohingya has been able to
return to Myanmar, owing to the lack of safety, security,
freedom of movement and a favourable environment
in Rakhine state. We believe that accountability and
justice for the crimes committed against them would
be a critical measure for building confidence for their
safe, voluntary and sustainable return.
I thank the Prosecutor for initiating the ICC judicial
process to address the crime of alleged deportation
committed against the Rohingya people of Myanmar.
We are encouraged by the subsequent Pre-Trial Chamber
I ruling that the Court may exercise jurisdiction over
the crime against humanity of deportation if at least
one element of a crime within the jurisdiction of the
Court or part of it was committed in a State party
to the Statute. On 4 July, the Prosecutor requested
authorization for an investigation of the situation. The
matter is currently pending a decision from Pre-Trial
Chamber III. Meanwhile, pursuant to our obligation as
a State party to the Rome Statute and as host to deported
Rohingya, Bangladesh has been providing a great
range of assistance to the Prosecutor and to the Victims
Participation and Reparations Section (VPRS) of the
ICC in reaching out to the Rohingya victims in Cox’s
Bazar. Bangladesh has also provided the necessary
cooperation to the ICC Registry, including the VPRS
team and the Office of the Prosecutor, in the preliminary
examinations in Cox’s Bazar. We have already signed
a memorandum of understanding with the ICC to
facilitate the investigation of the case of the forced
deportation of Rohingya and subsequent proceedings.
It is unfortunate, however, that Myanmar continues
to reject the ICC ruling in an attempt to deny welldocumented atrocities and the resulting deportation of
Rohingya, things that actually happened and are beyond
denial. This cannot be seen as a jurisdictional issue or
something to do with the persona of the Prosecutor. It
is something much larger and quite fundamental to the
upholding of the global legal order.
24/28

04/11/2019

Our priority is to ensure the voluntary return of
the Rohingya to their homes in Rakhine state in safety,
security and dignity. We will continue our engagement
with Myanmar to make that repatriation happen. We
hope that the work of the ICC will help to create an
environment in Myanmar conducive to the return
of the Rohingya. In that regard, Bangladesh, as a
country committed to ending impunity for war crimes,
genocide, crimes against humanity and crimes of
aggression, will remain actively engaged with the ICC
to uphold the rule of law around the world.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji,
the President of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for the report on the activities of the Court
for the 2018-2019 period (see A/74/324), as well as
the report on the implementation of article 3 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court (A/74/325).
I reaffirm Peru’s commitment to international
law, the promotion and protection of human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, which we
view as fundamental components for building peaceful
and inclusive societies. We are also committed to
strengthening a rules-based order as a cornerstone
of multilateral action in tackling threats to peace
and security, with full respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
are embodied in the new approach to sustainable peace
promoted by the Secretary-General. We realize that
accountability and access to justice are fundamental
to that objective, which is why my country supports
all initiatives aimed at ensuring that the perpetrators
of serious violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law are held accountable.
Against a current global backdrop marked by
conflict and humanitarian crises, the Court needs strong
political support from the international community and
determined cooperation from States parties more than
ever. At a time when various States are questioning the
role of the Court, Peru firmly believes in its validity
and in the values underpinning the Rome Statute.
In that regard, and in keeping with our fight against
impunity domestically and externally, Peru has joined
with five other countries under article 14 of the Statute
to request that the Office of the Prosecutor open
an investigation into the crimes against humanity
committed in Venezuela since 12 February 2014, with
19-34974

04/11/2019

a view to determining whether one or more specific
persons should be prosecuted for such crimes.
In the Security Council, Peru continues to
advocate for closer relations between the Council and
the International Criminal Court. In that regard, we
stress that the Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, and the
jurisdiction of the Court over the most serious crimes,
must be understood and implemented as complementary
and interdependent tasks. However, we regret that
the Council has not maintained a standing, coherent
and systematic commitment regarding the referral of
situations to the International Criminal Court. We must
correct such shortcomings. In that regard, we welcome
proposals aimed at establishing specific procedures
for the Security Council to follow up on cases of
non-compliance with orders issued by the Court. We
also reiterate our concern about the Court’s financing,
especially with regard to cases referred by the Security
Council. We must find ways to ensure predictable
financing that enables the Court to properly examine
all cases submitted to its jurisdiction.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our
conviction regarding the important role of the
International Criminal Court in preventing impunity
and helping punish those responsible for the most
serious atrocities. Peru has learned first-hand that
implementing accountability mechanisms is the best
way to prevent the recurrence of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
to achieve lasting peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): At the outset, I would like
to thank the International Criminal Court (ICC) for its
annual report to the United Nations (see A/74/324) and
the President of the ICC for his presentation of the main
issues in the report (see A/74/PV.25). I also want to
express our appreciation to the host country of the ICC
for promoting the Court and its role during its tenure on
the Security Council.
Almost 75 years ago, in response to the horrors
of the Second World War, including the Holocaust,
humankind established the United Nations and its
Court, the International Court of Justice. It established
its first criminal courts and adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Geneva
Conventions. It did all of this to save future generations
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

from the scourge of war and to honour the pledge
made then — “Never again”. But history had taught
us that in the absence of accountability and with the
persistence of double standards, atrocity crimes would
happen again and again. The idea of a universal court
to sanction grave violations of these rules existed at
the time, but bringing it into being took another halfcentury. The ICC was established to help end impunity,
deliver justice to victims and prevent the recurrence of
crimes. That long-gestating achievement deserves to be
supported and protected.
Those who think we are immune from the horrors
that humankind experienced 75 years ago are deeply
and dangerously mistaken. Everywhere around us
we are reminded of the persistent power of hatred, of
the continuing denial of others’ humanity and of the
disregard for life, liberty and legality. Impunity fosters
criminality and criminality festers in the absence
of accountability. Accountability is as much about
providing justice for the victims of past crimes as it is
about sparing possible victims of future crimes. There
are those who want to take us back to a time when there
was no international court to judge those responsible
for war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
the crime of aggression, or when international courts
would judge the vanquished and spare the victors, or
when the powerful would judge whether a situation
merited a measure of justice on a case-by-case basis.
We oppose justice that is denied, delayed or selective.
How can we explain to future generations that we
lived in a time when judges were attacked and criminals
shielded? We cannot. And we must therefore act to defend
the Court and its independence in order to enable it to
pursue its noble objective undeterred by threats. How
can we explain that at a time when knowledge and the
circulation of information have reached unprecedented
levels, we continued to ignore the commission of
such horrific crimes anywhere around the globe? We
cannot. And we should therefore act with consistency
and promote universal adherence to the Rome Statute,
including the Kampala amendments on the crime of
aggression. How can we justify delays in providing
justice to those who need it most, while crimes continue
to claim new victims every day? We cannot. And we
should therefore pursue the objective of improving
the speed, efficiency and effectiveness of preliminary
examinations, investigations and prosecutions.
We are deeply concerned about the fact that after
five years of preliminary examination of the situation
25/28

A/74/PV.26

04/11/2019

in the State of Palestine, investigations have yet to
be opened, despite the overwhelming information
available about ongoing crimes, which should have
required immediate attention, not delay. The State of
Palestine provided jurisdiction to the Court through a
declaration under paragraph 3 of article 12 of the Rome
Statute, as well as through a referral. It has spared no
effort in cooperating with the Court, providing it with
all the requested information and cooperating with the
Prosecutor and her Office. We remain committed to
supporting the Court and to advancing its mandate and
role, and we hope it will do so in a timely manner when
it comes to the situation in Palestine.
We joined the Court informed by our experience
of the cost of impunity, a cost that our people endure
in their flesh. But we also did it to save others. We
joined it seeking justice, not vengeance. We call on the
international community never to become numb to the
horrors taking place anywhere around the globe. Life
is sacred, and if humankind forgets the value of any
life, it does not deserve to be called humankind. No one
should take lightly the assault against the multilateral
rules-based order. We should always remember the
origins of this international system and that if we lower
our guard or do not continue to sustain our immune
system, we are vulnerable to a resurgence of the evils
that caused and continue to cause terrible suffering
across the world.
In conclusion, the Court has a primary responsibility
not to us, the States parties, but to victims everywhere.
It has a duty to work relentlessly to advance justice. It
has an obligation to be a power for holding perpetrators
accountable and to be a force of deterrence. The State
of Palestine will continue supporting it in delivering on
that sacred mandate.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/74/L.8, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
26/28

draft resolution A/74/L.8: Albania, Andorra, Austria,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, El Salvador, the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Nigeria, North Macedonia, San Marino,
Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/74/L.8?
Draft resolution A/74/L.8 was adopted (resolution
74/6).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Giordano (United States of America): The
United States has historically been and will continue
to be a strong supporter of meaningful accountability
and justice for victims of atrocities through appropriate
mechanisms. The perpetrators of atrocity crimes must
face justice, but we must also be careful to recognize
the right tool for each situation.
I must reiterate our continuing and long-standing
principled objection to any assertion of the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) over
nationals of States that are not parties to the Rome
Statute, including the United States and Israel, in the
absence of a Security Council referral or the consent
of those States. We also want to reiterate our serious
and fundamental concerns about the ICC Prosecutor’s
proposed investigation of United States personnel in
the context of the conflict in Afghanistan. The United
States remains a leader in the fight to end impunity and
supports justice and accountability for international
crimes, including war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. The United States respects the decision
of those nations that have chosen to join the ICC, and
in turn we expect that our decision not to join or place
our citizens under the Court’s jurisdiction will also be
respected. Accordingly, the United States dissociates
itself from the consensus on resolution 74/6.
Mrs. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have shared our views on the activities
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) repeatedly
and in detail. The past year, unfortunately, has been
cause for even more pessimistic assessments. We are
19-34974

04/11/2019

disappointed that the text of resolution 74/6, on the
report of the ICC (see A/74/324), has once again been
updated only technically. A stock resolution such
as this one does not reflect the true state of affairs
in or relating to the Court. How can new parties be
welcomed to the Rome Statute when States are not only
not joining it but actually withdrawing from it? On
what basis can the resolution affirm the role of the ICC
in ensuring the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the establishment of sustainable peace and the
development of nations?
We are well aware of the terrible situation in Libya.
In what way has the activity of the ICC helped that
country emerge from crisis?
Even greater doubts about the appropriateness of
such language in the resolution arise in connection
with the Court’s decision of 6 May on the existence of
a norm of customary international law whereby a Head
of State does not have immunity before a competent
international court. That decision runs counter to
judicial practice and opinio juris, which, as we know,
form the basis of customary law.
Another interesting verdict was presented to us on
12 April. The Court told the international community
straight out that under certain conditions, justice can be
disregarded. The interests of victims and the gravity of
crimes are secondary categories for the ICC. The main
criterion is the so-called interests of justice. From now
on, in the interests of justice, the ICC has the right not
to open an investigation if, first, it has doubts regarding
the feasibility of the investigation given the active
non-cooperation of the interested parties, for example,
through the introduction of personal sanctions against
members of the Court and the Prosecutor, and, secondly,
if there are budgetary limitations. However, neither a
limited budget nor dubious prospects for cooperation
are preventing the ICC from expanding its jurisdiction
without grounds and pulling States that are not party to
the Rome Statute into its orbit. The situation with the
supposed deportation of the Rohingya is an example
of that.
There are many arguments about the current
contribution of international judicial organs to the
fight against impunity. The International Criminal
Court displays all the shortcomings of international
justice without any of its benefits. That is particularly
obvious against the backdrop of the high hopes that the
international community had for it. In that connection,
19-34974

A/74/PV.26

I have a question. How long will the General Assembly
continue under the illusion that the ICC is a good thing
and that everything it does is right? While the desire
of States to combat the most serious crimes under
international law is completely understandable, at this
point it is now clear that the ICC is not a fit instrument
for achieving that goal.
We also want to point out that the ICC is
unfortunately being used by a number of countries
as an instrument for political manipulation in order
to cover up crimes they are committing or have
committed. For instance, the delegation of Ukraine told
us about its cooperation with the Court, making absurd
accusations about my country that are part of the
political propaganda put out by Ukrainian media and
have no connection to reality. We hope that Ukraine’s
cooperation with the Court includes information on the
systematic and serious crimes committed by its armed
forces against the civilian population of south-eastern
Ukraine, and that it will also shed light on the horrific
events surrounding the people who were immolated in
a fire at Odessa’s trade union building in 2014.
As for the statement by the representative of
Georgia, we would suggest that Georgia focus its
cooperation with the Court on the crimes committed by
the Saakashvili regime against the civilian population
of South Ossetia. I would like to remind the Assembly
of the well-known fact that the events of August 2008
were the result of an attack by the Saakashvili regime
on the peaceful city of Tskhinvali.
It is important not to lose one’s common sense
and to make an honest assessment of any situation one
may find oneself in. The resolution that has just been
adopted does not reflect objective reality and does not
take into account the position of States that are not party
to the Rome Statute, or even those that are party to it.
My delegation therefore cannot support the resolution
and dissociates itself from the consensus on it.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position on adoption.
I shall now call on those delegations that have
requested to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I would like to remind members that statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first statement and five minutes for the second,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Georgia.
27/28

A/74/PV.26

Mr. Mikeladze (Georgia): I would like to
respond to the explanation of position provided by the
representative of the Russian Federation.
The Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has been conducting a
preliminary examination of the situation in Georgia
since 2008, including the alleged war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Georgia that
year. In January 2016, the ICC’s Pre-Trial Chamber
I authorized the Prosecutor to proceed with the
investigation of the situation in Georgia, focusing

28/28

04/11/2019

on alleged crimes committed in the context of the
international armed conflict that broke out as a result
of the Russian aggression. In that regard, we call on the
Russian Federation to cooperate with the Office of the
Prosecutor as part of the ongoing investigation.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

19-34974
