S/2021/783

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 10 September 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8851st meeting of the Security Council
convened on 8 September 2021 under the agenda item entitled “Uni ted Nations
peacekeeping operations: United Nations transitions”. The interventions of the
briefers and Council members will be published as an official record of the Security
Council (S/PV.8851).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for the
8851st meeting, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements,
copies of which are enclosed: Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Germany, Guatemala, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan,
the Peacebuilding Commission, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Slovakia,
South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates. These
statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council in accordance with
the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security
Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and
reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8851.
(Signed) Geraldine Byrne Nason
President of the Security Council

21-12904 (E)

041021

*2112904*

131021

S/2021/783

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
Let me begin by congratulating Ireland for assuming the presidency of the
Council in this important month. I also thank the Irish presidency for convening
today’s important and timely debate on peacekeeping and transitions.
I thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping is not limited to military operations only. With the
evolution of conflicts and their protracted nature, peacekeeping operations have
embraced multidimensional activities ranging from institution-building to the
promotion and protection of human rights.
As reflected in the twin resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
peacekeeping operations form an integral part of the United Nations whole -of-system
response to conflicts, including their prevention. Peacekeepers play a critical role in
sustaining peace by laying the foundation for peacebuilding initiatives in various
conflict-affected countries. In order to ensure that the impacts of peacekeepi ng
operations are durable, a smooth transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding is of
fundamental importance.
As the top troop- and police-contributing country, Bangladeshi peacekeepers are
making an important contribution in ensuring a smooth transitio n. Their contributions
are characterized primarily by unarmed and peaceful activities, such as community
engagement, infrastructure development, and capacity-building of national
institutions, including in the security sector. These activities contribute t o
strengthening the capacity and resilience of the host country to sustain peace and
prevent the escalation and relapse of conflict.
For instance, Bangladesh co-leads (with Italy) the Group of Friends on Leading
Environmental Management in the Field to support the implementation of the United
Nations environmental strategy for peacekeeping. The peacekeepers, through their
engagements in protecting the environment and waste management, strive to leave a
positive legacy in the host societies.
Let me share some specific thoughts on how to ensure an effective and
sustainable transition.
First, while setting the mandates of a peacekeeping mission, adequate
importance should be given to the requisites of transition on the basis of the nature of
the conflict and its impact. As such, the initial mandate of a peacekeeping operation
should focus on transition and equip the missions with the required resources.
Second, institution-building and training should be emphasized in the context
of transition. The peacekeeping operations should facilitate the building of effective
national institutions in the host country that will also strengthen the national
ownership in the peacebuilding process.
Third, the transition process would not facilitate sustainable peace in the post conflict region unless people from all sectors are included. In this regard,
implementing the women and peace and security agenda and the youth , peace and
security agenda can play a vital role in ensuring the full and effective participation of
women and youth in peacebuilding.
Fourth, effective coordination and coherence among all the stakeholders,
especially within the United Nations system, during and post-transition period is
2/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

essential, as emphasized in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities. Equally
important is the coordination among other stakeholders such as international financial
institutions, non-governmental organizations, local and community organizations and
regional and subregional organizations.
Fifth, predictable and sufficient funding for the peacebuilding process can help
the transition and post-transition development endeavours. In this regard, the
Peacebuilding Fund can play a significant role to ensure sustaining peace.
Sixth, the use of technology can help in many aspects that can positively
influence the transition. Effective coordination, awareness-building, and the
protection of civilians as well as the peacekeepers can be addressed more efficiently
with the help of digital technologies. Implementation of the strategy for the digital
transformation of peacekeeping can play an instrumental role in this connection.
Finally, we cannot overemphasize the primacy of politics in ensuring a
successful transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Therefore, all stakeholders should engage in a coordinated and coherent manner in
forging political solutions to the conflicts, including by addressing the ir root causes.
The main purpose of peacekeeping operations is to transfer a conflict-affected
society into a resilient and self-sustained one that is capable of withstanding setbacks
and prevent a relapse of conflicts. It is therefore of critical importa nce to ensure an
effective transition.

21-12904

3/55

S/2021/783

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the
United Nations
Firstly, Belgium underlines the importance of sustained Security Council
engagement to reinforce the political process of countries in transition. In a transition,
the role played by national authorities is crucial. When a peacekeeping operation
transfers its tasks back to national authorities, they should be in a position to take full
ownership. This should take place in close coordination with the United Nations
resident coordinator’s country team and donor countries, taking into account the
Sustainable Development Goals. Capacity must be sustained in government systems
and human resources, in critical peace and security assets and among civil society
actors. This transition will require a fundamental rethink of how development
programming is prioritized, designed and delivered.
Belgium stresses the need for increased cooperation, notably between United
Nations and European Union missions. The United Nations country team and the
European Union, in a Team Europe approach, should improve the coherence and
complementarity of actions undertaken during the transition period on the basis of
joined-up contextual analysis and risk assessment such as the United Nations common
country analysis and the European Union early warning systems. Multidimensional
common analysis and planning are key in ensuring the aforementioned
synchronization between United Nations peacekeeping drawdowns and the ramping
up of national and regional capacity-building efforts.
Any sustainable transition plan must be accompanied by a phased financing
strategy to avoid an expectation gap – where different actors assume that the other
will pick up the tab for sustaining critical peace and security interventions postwithdrawal. Such a financing plan must ensure clarity about who will pay for what
during the transition and how the different revenue streams will change over time, as
the host Government progressively takes on more responsibility. The Peacebuilding
Commission, via its Peacebuilding Fund, has a central role to play in this financing
strategy.
In order to operationalize an inclusive, gender-responsive, coherent and
complementary transition, Belgium underlines the usefulness of establishing a
humanitarian-development-peace nexus task force in the transition theatre comprising
all relevant actors in view of regular exchanges of views. In this light, Belgium
welcomes initiatives such as the joint review of gender-responsive peacekeeping
transition by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women).
Finally, taking a step back in the peacekeeping process, in order to achieve
focused, inclusive peacekeeping mandates with realistic objectives, Member States
must engage in an exercise of collective strategic thinking well in advance of the
mandate renewal drafting process and with inputs from various expert groups.
Translating clear political direction into action implies a focus on strategic objectives
and benchmarks to assess progress and inform transition planning. Indeed, Belgium
stresses the importance of defining, from the start, a peacekeeping operation exit
strategy conditioned on contextual benchmarks. Furthermore, it is important that
lessons learned from previous peacekeeping transitions are incorporated into this
process. Where there is significant unfinished peace programming and the ongoing
need for good offices, the United Nations should consider mandating a special
political mission to follow up on a peacekeeping withdrawal.

4/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
I commend the President for bringing to the fore of the Security Council such a
fresh perspective to the debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Brazil recognizes Ireland’s solid credentials and ample experience on the matter,
attributes that will unquestionably prove instrumental as you shepherd the Council’s
discussion on peacekeeping reform through the lens of transition.
Peacekeeping operations are a valuable instrument at the service of the United
Nations – and the international community writ large – in its goal of maintaining and
preserving international peace and security.
However, peacekeeping operations were not designed to last indefinitely. An
interim arrangement by definition – conceived to help a given society out of armed
conflict and transition into a situation whereby armed conflicts subside and political
stability starts to take root – peacekeeping operations ought to transition themselves
into forms of multilateral engagement more suitable to post-conflict situations.
In that light, the United Nations must be endowed with both the tools and the
political animus to know how to be a catalyst for peacekeeping to evolve into
peacebuilding and, eventually, for peacebuilding to bring about sustainable peace.
One such instrument is special political missions, whose ultimate objective is to
avoid the resumption of armed conflict.
Generally authorized under the purview of Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, special political missions offer a roster of peaceful solutions to assist
with peacemaking, peacebuilding and sustaining peace activities, spanning from
mediation and the offer of good offices to providing advice to national authorities and
strengthening State institutions.
There are contemporarily positive examples of such modality being deploy ed in
the aftermath of the termination of peacekeeping operations: Haiti (United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti) and the Sudan (United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan) are two such cases, having left somewhat of a
blueprint for future transitions from complex peacekeeping to a more purely
peacebuilding presence elsewhere.
It must be borne in mind, however, that a hasty transition – from peacekeeping
operations to special political missions or from peacekeeping operations to a lighter
presence in the form of United Nations country teams – whereby the conditions are
not yet ripe for a full withdrawal of blue helmets might prove counterproductive. This
scenario is one which the Security Council must be permanently attentive t o and
anticipate whenever possible. Natural limitations as to the types of mandates that can
be attributed to special political missions and shortcomings in their financial
mechanism make it imperative that transitions are not triggered prematurely.
Brazil remains a strong advocate of closer dialogue between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. As an incoming Council member, Brazil
has set fostering a stronger coordination between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission as one of its top priorities in our next term as a non-permanent member.
It is our understanding that the Peacebuilding Commission is uniquely
positioned to advise the Council on tackling the root causes of conflicts – especially
extreme poverty, lack of human development, and humanitarian crisis – as a means

21-12904

5/55

S/2021/783

to create the conditions for the guns to silence and political stability and enduring
peace to speak louder.
During the transitions from peacekeeping to a more civilian presence of the
United Nations on the ground, this role is even more latent. The Peacebuilding
Commission and its members should be consulted – and its advice be taken into
consideration – whenever the Council is set on determining the withdrawal of a given
peacekeeping operation, in line with Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/27.
The multilateral peace and security architecture is a work in progress – and
perhaps it will always be. Perfecting transitions of peacekeeping operations into other
forms of multilateral presence favouring the consolidation of peace in a post -conflict
situation is a task that the Security Council must take on.

6/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Chile wishes to highlight the role of the United Nations Security Council as the
most relevant forum for global multilateralism in the area of international peace and
security, considering that its resolutions are binding and therefore, if worst comes to
worst, can involve the use of force under Chapter VII of the San Francisco Charter of
the United Nations.
The Security Council must be updated to the current international system,
marked by global power shifts, in a context defined by globalization and its
consequence of interdependence, which has led to drastic changes in conflicts, many
of which are essentially intra-State and asymmetrical in nature.
Chile reaffirms its commitment to peacekeeping operations, one of the most
visible tools of the Security Council and, of course, of the United Nations, to respond
to situations that threaten international peace and security.
Peacekeeping operations should consider integrated and inclusive work in the
field, that, at the same time that it articulates and harmonizes the pillars that make up
the United Nations system (development, human rights, and international peace and
security), allow collective inter-agency efforts among the various actors that are
working to build a sustainable peace.
In that regard, civil society plays a crucial role in peacebuilding and transition
processes, supporting the building of trust among local communities and building
institutions for the long term.
Chile maintains that the Security Council, when deciding to deploy
peacekeeping operations, should consider multidimensional mandates and long -term
strategies, with the objective of avoiding setbacks in the peacebuilding process and
promoting national ownership. We must not forget that many countries emerging from
major conflicts, a few years after signing a peace agreement, resume hostilities; this
situation was the central consideration in the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005.
In turn, in considering the relevance of the work of peacekeeping operations, it
is important to work continuously to ensure the due protection of civilian, police and
military contingents deployed in the field, faced with the increasing attacks they have
suffered in recent years. Thus, the discussion on safeguarding contingents should lead
to an in-depth examination of the ways in which the protection offered to
peacekeeping personnel can be improved, through various mechanisms which in turn
must be constantly monitored in order to ensure their effectiveness.
We also wish to stress the essential role of women in progress towards lasting
peace, understanding that their active participation in peacekeeping operations fosters
greater diversity and improved decision-making, leading to increased operational
efficiency and consolidation and stabilization in conflict zones.
Along the same lines, our country maintains that the role that women play in
local communities and the social fabric, as protagonists in conflict prevention and
halting spirals of violence, should be recognized.

21-12904

7/55

S/2021/783

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to thank Ireland for convening this open debate.
Thank you to the speakers and representatives of the Secretariat for their status
report on the various peacekeeping operations deployed.
We have taken note of the results achieved in conflict resolution, as well as the
challenges to the fulfilment of their respective mandates.
Colombia recognizes peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding processes as
effective tools to prevent and resolve conflicts and support political transitions.
They are the legitimate expression of global action to preserve the collective
good of international peace and security.
Such operations should neither replace the responsibility of States to address the
causes of conflicts nor to respond to them.
Effective development, monitoring and periodic adjustment of their mandates
should take place through dialogue between the receiving State, the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council, the General Assembly and regional organizations, in
addition to troop- and police-contributing countries.
This should be a collective effort in which we are all called to cooper ate around
a common objective: achieving a stable and lasting peace.
Colombia especially highlights the mandate given to special political missions
under the women, peace and security pillar, as stipulated in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).
We also commend Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and
security and its essential contribution to the development and monitoring of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.
We have stressed the need for specific resources for peacebuilding processes in
the world.
We believe that through the multilateral fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme, which includes contributions from the Peacebuilding
Fund, peacebuilding initiatives have been developed which are essential for the
success of multilateral action.
I would like to make three points in that regard:
1.
There is a need for coordinated action between international organizations
and national institutions to obtain results in the most effective way possible.
2.
It is important for the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions to respond to the realities and context of each country. There is no
single formula and they should be subject to the particular characteristics of each case.
3.
The Peacebuilding Commission should make progress in its strengthening
process, as well as its advisory role to the Security Council.
I would like to conclude my statement by reiterating the value of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding processes in building societies that are
increasingly prosperous, in which development, respect for democratic principles and
enjoyment of human rights are fundamental pillars.
8/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex VI
Statement on behalf of the Nordic countries by the Permanent
Representative of Denmark to the United Nations, Martin
Bille Hermann
I have the pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries,
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
Over the past weeks, the entire world has watched in shock as the situation in
Afghanistan unfolded. The heartbreaking developments serve as a crude reminder of
the importance of getting transitions right. We welcome this timely debate on United
Nations transitions and the opportunity to discuss how we can collectively ensure that
peace is sustained in the short and the long term.
The importance of integrated, context-specific and flexible transition planning
can hardly be overstated. However, we must also recognize that the groundwork for
a transition should be laid long before a drawdown of peacekeeping efforts is
expected. As Under-Secretary-General Lacroix has noted, we should think of all
peacekeeping operations as being in transition. This calls for flexible mandates that
focus on wider objectives rather than specific tasks. It also requires the Security
Council to maintain a dual focus on facilitating political solutions while ensuring that
peacebuilding for the longer term is “baked into” the way th at peacekeeping
operations do business. This entails prioritizing initiatives that seek to strengthen
national and local capacities and resilience by building robust institutions, supporting
human rights and promoting democratic governance, the rule of law and
reconciliation, in addition to empowering local actors, in particular women and youth.
Lasting peace must be inclusive, and the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in political decision-making and peace processes is paramount.
Unfortunately, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated
vulnerabilities in fragile settings and risks reversing transitions. We must therefore
deploy holistic, conflict-sensitive responses to the pandemic which prioritize
prevention and integrate peacebuilding.
Building durable peace cannot be undertaken by one actor alone. Partnerships
are paramount. Peacekeeping or political missions must work with the United Nations
country teams on the ground. The United Nations Transitions Project offers s upport
within the United Nations system to plan and manage transitions in a proactive,
integrated and forward-looking way. Furthermore, coordination is needed with
regional and subregional stakeholders and organizations, the World Bank and other
international financial institutions, international and national civil society
organizations, bilateral donors and private and other stakeholders. The work done
with support from the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund provides us with good
examples of how multiple actors can be brought together to deliver peacebuilding
through a joint approach. Also, at the intergovernmental level, stronger linkages
between the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and Security Council must be
promoted.
When a United Nations peacekeeping mission draws down, the United Nations
country team on the ground will need to step up to safeguard the hard -fought peace
gains. It rests on all of us to ensure that the resident coordinator and country team
have adequate resources, capacities and planning in place. Ensuring adequate, flexible
and predictable funding during transitions must be a priority.
In closing, we all know peacekeeping operations require massive investments.
We simply cannot afford to lose the return on these investments. The international
community, including regional actors, must resolve to stay engaged in the days,
months and years after United Nations peacekeepers have left.

21-12904

9/55

S/2021/783

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to congratulate Ireland for the manner in which it is conducting the
work of the Security Council for the month of September, and for organizing this
debate under the agenda item on United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We appreciate the address by the Secretary-General, as well as the statement by
Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, former President of Liberia, and the distinguished speakers
invited to this open debate of the Security Council.
The work of peacekeeping personnel is vital to the implementation of the three
pillars of the United Nations, taking into account the objectives of protection of the
civilian population and lasting peace.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated many of the
challenges faced by United Nations peacekeeping missions, and therefore we must
respond to the major difficulties encountered by the United Nations Blue Helmets by
providing better conditions for meeting the objectives inherent in their activities.
We take this opportunity to refer to some aspects that define the position of
Ecuador with respect to the transition of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
bearing in mind the role of the Security Council in this area:
1.
Transitions in peacekeeping operations are long-term processes that
should consider an overall political strategy that guarantees the security and
protection of personnel and applies a gender perspective to peacekeeping activities.
This requires a sustained commitment by the United Nations system as a whole.
2.
We stress that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
3.
It is essential that the United Nations system as a whole has the capacity
for evaluation of conflict situations and effective planning and management of
peacekeeping operations in order to give a timely response to any Security Council
mandate.
4.
Success of peacekeeping operations should be based on the respect for
such basic principles as the consent of the parties, impartiality and non -use of force,
except in self-defence and in defence of a mandate authorized by the Security
Council.
5.
Changes to the mandate of an active mission should be based on an
exhaustive and timely evaluation by the Security Council, in consultation with troop contributing countries through the mechanisms prescribed in Security Council
resolution 1353 (2001) and Presidential Note S/2002/56 of 14 January 2002.
6.
We underline the value of the initiative on action for peacekeeping and the
resulting commitments on the part of States, and the policy of zero tolerance against
sexual abuse and exploitation, and we believe that it is one of the most appropriate
mechanisms for institutional strengthening of peacekeeping operations.
7.
We reaffirm the obligation of Member States, under Article 17 of the
Charter, to contribute to the expenses of the Organization, taking into account
the special responsibilities of the permanent members of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace and security.

10/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

8.
It is important to continually strengthen and improve coordination and
coherence among activities for peacekeeping, peacebuilding and maintenance of the
three pillars of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, at all
stages of a conflict and, in particular, during the preparations for the transition and
drawdown of peacekeeping missions.
9.
Exhaustive planning and early coordination between the host country and
the relevant partners must precede any transition process, in order to ensure an
appropriate transition towards lasting peace and sustainable development, while
guaranteeing the most efficient and effective distribution of functions, responsibilities
and resources.
10. It is appropriate to ensure the primacy of politics in conflict resolution and
the supporting role of peacekeeping operations therein; as well as clear, focused,
prioritized and achievable mandates by the Security Council, matched by appropriate
resources.
11. We recognize the essential role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution and emphasize the need to strengthen their full participation in the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
Ecuador will continue to support peacekeeping missions, in order to contribute
to peaceful and negotiated solutions leading to sustainable and lasting peace
processes. We hope that the resolution proposed by the Irish presidency, of which
Ecuador is a co-sponsor, will be adopted and will provide additional and important
guidance on the matter.

21-12904

11/55

S/2021/783

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the Irish Presidency for convening this important open
debate that offers a platform for discussion of the challenges facing the United
Nations in ensuring effective transitions to guarantee the consolidation and
maintenance of peace.
It also welcomes the informative statement by the Secretary-General on the
reform of peacekeeping activities, as well as the updated information on efforts under
way to ensure that peacekeeping activities provide an adequ ate response to the
challenges to international peace and security.
The holding of this open debate is appropriate at a time when peacekeeping is
facing a broad range of challenges exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and its multidimensional impacts.
El Salvador recognizes the complexity of the context in which transitions are
taking place, and the importance for the United Nations of maintaining those
processes as a priority by dedicating efforts and resources to understand the key
aspects impacting their effectiveness, with a view to continuing to improve their
planning, implementation and monitoring.
From its experience with its peace process and the challenges it is currently
facing, El Salvador recognizes the importance of the implementation of transitions
that are integrated, coherent, sustainable and under national ownership and
leadership. For that reason, El Salvador would like to highlight four elements it
considers to be key to the strengthening of such processes:
First, El Salvador believes that the role of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations is particularly relevant to the effectiveness of the transition process. The
design and deployment of such operations – which are by definition meant to be
temporary – should be part of a broader strategy of support to viable political
processes and flexible solutions in the field and a long-term view.
Second, with regard to the development of transition processes, El Salvador
underlines the importance of building a strategy with clearly defined priorities and
responsibilities among the United Nations, the receiving State and the various
regional and local actors. El Salvador believes that the support of the international
community in the implementation of such a strategy is key.
Third, El Salvador points out the value of consultations which take place with
the troop- and police-contributing countries to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as their perspectives are key to the analysis
of the situation on the ground and the evaluation of the conditions under which the
transition will take place.
Lastly, El Salvador believes that the role of the Peacebuilding Commission is of
the highest importance as a platform to allow the countries to debate the ir priorities,
opportunities and challenges, and for the coordination of United Nations activities
and mobilization of support to peacebuilding efforts.

12/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atske-Selassie
We thank the Republic of Ireland for organizing this important open debate on
“United Nations peacekeeping operations: transitions”. We commend the decision to
bring light to this important subject matter.
I would like to recognize the presence of António Guterres, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the former President of Liberia, and
Mary Robinson, the former President of the Republic of Ireland, in the meeting
and thank all the briefers for their useful insights on the matter of peacekeeping and
transition.
Peacekeeping itself is a temporary mechanism to help the host countries face
urgent security threats and prevent causalities of civilians. The peace and security of
people and states are determined by the strength and ability of the state institutions
and local capabilities to fend against threats and ensure sustainable peace.
Managing transitions from peacekeeping to regular national peace and security
arrangement requires us to support the engendering of national institutions. This in
turn requires sufficient investment on national priorities, as determined by the
countries themselves. Working with regional and subregional organizations is also an
imperative to ensure a successful transition after the completion of peacekeeping
missions.
My country has taken part in peacekeeping missions since the operationalization
of the concept in our international system. We take pride in the solidarity that we
established with host countries and communities in places where we deployed our
men and women in uniform.
In our experience, we have witnessed the need to supplement the core
peacekeeping functions with economic, social and security sector support to
communities and the host States. To this end, quick-impact projects and other
infrastructure projects that outlive the peacekeeping missions play a pivotal role.
In parallel with peacekeeping missions and the ancillary projects, peacekeeping
missions must incorporate reconstruction plans. This requires prope r comprehension
of the context in the host countries and the adoption of a reconstruction policy that
prioritizes the needs of the people on the ground.
It is also overly critical to avoid any negative environmental, political and
security footprint from peacekeeping missions. In this regard, we commend the work
being done by the United Nations to reduce the environmental footprint of United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
Although it occurs in a complex political context, we also see a need to
recognize the political footprint created in the form of undue interference in the
internal and external affairs of the host States. Peacekeeping missions should not
create longstanding political strings that curtail the independence of host countries
and undermine their ability to manage their security threats.
In addition to intra-State conflicts that draw peacekeeping operations, we also
have inter-State disputes where our troops prevented wars. In this regard, the
peacekeeping mission in Abyei is a contemporary example. In peacekeeping missions
like the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, transitions from
peacekeeping operations have a peculiar feature.

21-12904

13/55

S/2021/783

Peace in such circumstances depends on the attainment of a mutually acceptable
solution for the contention. The identification and implementation of permanent
arrangements is necessary to curb a relapse of conflicts and reversal of achievements
by the peacekeeping missions. For this to be attained, the States concerned must show
political commitment and make good-faith efforts to implement their treaty
obligations.
In such circumstances, we see a great role that could be played by the United
Nations in reinvigorating treaty frameworks and incentivizing countries to live up to
their commitment.
Peacekeeping missions are also deployed in countries that went through an
experience that ravaged their national institutions. Transition from peacekeeping
missions in these contexts requires fitting preparation. In this regard, missions like
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in Somalia shall be given a
non-rushed and proper conclusion.
In order to preserve our achievements, we must manage the transition with extra
care that looks beyond the apparent donor fatigue. Well-tailored support to the host
Government and the national security forces until they attain a reasonable level of
readiness to take over is necessary.
Missions like AMISOM and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur that are hybrid missions with admirable coo rdination between
the United Nations and the African Union enabled coordinated peacekeeping
operations. Among several other benefits, this hybrid format ought to bring a smooth
transition.
In these two missions we learned the need to enhance efforts to r ealize practical
United Nations-African Union coordination at all stages, including the entry, stay and
exit of the missions. Without effective coordination, we will inevitably continue to
experience a vacuum whereby intercommunal and other conflicts unrav el, nullifying
the achievements and sacrifices of peacekeepers.
Causes of and factors for conflicts do not disappear with the expiry of the tenure
of peacekeeping missions. Mostly, these factors remain underground, interacting with
one another and adding to the complexities of security challenges.
Therefore, pragmatism is requisite for successful transitions from peacekeeping
missions. We shall recognize that successful transition is an outcome of parallel
projects of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and reconstruction. To this end, national
readiness and regional involvement are critical elements.

14/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
Fiji congratulates Ireland for its presidency of the Council in September. Fiji
expresses its gratitude to Ireland for convening this Security Council open debate to
focus attention on peacekeeping transitions. The transition from peacekeeping to a
sustainable peace has been one of the most difficult challenges for United Nations
peace operations.
To build and sustain peace is to invest time, resources and effort in addressing
the root causes of conflict. It requires a whole-of-United Nations system approach to
ensure that these pillars are equally addressed.
These discussions by the Security Council are timely. They coincide with the
much-awaited report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations at 75 and
beyond. This report may signal how Member States may wish to take forward some
of the practical considerations arising from today’s Council debate on peacekeeping
transitions.
Peacekeeping allows time for development and politics, and the space to take
hold. How political processes and development interventions are supported and
enabled during the peacekeeping phase are a crucial part of peacekeeping operations.
If peacekeeping is not broadening political engagement and enabling inclusive
development, it is not realizing its full potential. Yet oft en, these core objectives are
poorly supported in peace operations. This needs to change. Focusing only on the
peace and security pillar will be counterproductive to building and sustaining peace
efforts.
Fiji acknowledges the reforms in the United Nations system’s peace
architecture, aimed at building coherence and integration in preventing, building and
sustaining peace around the world. An important development over the past several
decades is more agile and more integrated peace operations.
It is precisely when a peacekeeping mission begins its drawdown period that the
stresses and strains on political and developmental intervention are often most
intense. Rushing transitions for political and financial reasons can be
counterproductive and lead to a whole new cycle of conflict. Peace and development
gains must not be wasted in hasty decisions to draw down peacekeeping missions. A
well-coordinated United Nations system-wide approach is a primary starting point for
transitions. It is heartening that the United Nations development system reforms that
support a more coordinated United Nations system-wide response are showing
positive results, and this needs to be supported and strengthened.
Another important market and test for successful transition will be the level of
inclusion, especially of women in political and development spaces, and inclusion in
overall peacebuilding, mediation and conflict management.
Fiji would like to highlight the following.
The role of the Security Council is crucial to peacekeeping transitions.
Transitions of peace operations should be based on well-designed benchmarks rather
than timelines. Political commitment from the Council is needed to ensure that
transitions are not rushed according to a political timeline. Effectiv e transitions need
integrated benchmarks covering the pillars on peace and security, development, and
human rights. The Council needs to have access to all relevant information from
across the United Nations system to be able to chart better peacekeeping t ransitions.

21-12904

15/55

S/2021/783

We welcome and support the more extensive integration of the role and work of
the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting peacebuilding, mediation and conflict
reduction interventions. These should be a core part of development interventions a s
well. The Commission plays a critical role in complementing efforts to build and
sustain peace in post-conflict countries.
The Security Council should acknowledge and respond to new global
challenges, especially climate change and its impact on peacekeeping transitions.
Climate change is a threat to security, it is a threat to political processes, and it is a
threat to livelihoods and stability. Mainstreaming climate action into peace processes
and across peace and development interventions remains chall enging but a task that
must be tackled head on.
Peacekeeping transitions need to establish early integrated planning and
coordination that are inclusive of all stakeholders, including women and minorities
in such societies. This will be crucial to the extent to which the host country takes
ownership of the transition and of support and implements priorities required for
building and sustaining peace. Political endorsement and early ownership by the host
country is needed for a smooth transition, as most of the gaps left by the peacekeeping
mission will need to be taken over by the host country.
The importance of predictable financial support to successful transition and
post-transition is essential. Peacekeeping missions leave a large gap when they draw
down. Funding will be predictable if there is international political commitment to
transitions and post-transitions. The Security Council should continue to discuss posttransitions to ensure that there is political commitment to provide the necessary
support over a longer time frame. A relapse in conflict will be much costlier to resolve.
Finally, the continuous support of subregional, regional and international
organizations is crucial in the long term during transition and post -transition.
Regional organizations have an interest in national and regional stability, so their
continuous political engagement and support are important. The support of
subregional and regional organizations should complement the work of the United
Nations system, bilateral donors and international financial organizations.

16/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
Germany welcomes the initiative by the Irish presidency to hold an open debate
of the Security Council on transitions in the context of peacekeeping reform and the
broader discussion on the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
As the multitude of protracted crises and recurring conflicts worldwide show,
achieving and consolidating peace is a long and complex endeavour that requires
continued and multidimensional support. With its multiple tools and instruments –
from its peacekeeping operations and its political missions and special envoys to its
peacebuilding initiatives and projects – the United Nations is well placed to provide
crucial and continued support throughout this process and fulfil its aspiration of
building and sustaining peace.
In contexts of ongoing violence, peacekeeping missions can and should play a
central role in creating an environment in which confidence-building initiatives and
projects can be implemented and intrasocietal dialogue and reconciliation can begin.
This requires a sufficiently robust mandate with an adequate number of sufficiently
equipped peacekeepers. Only then are they able – where mandated – to ensure the
protection and enable the work of civil society organizations that focus on addressing
the root causes of conflict and on building peace. Women-led organizations, youth
and minorities need particular protection and attention in order to be able to contribute
to building a more peaceful and inclusive society.
For peacekeeping missions to successfully pave the way for a sustained peace,
a strong, sufficiently staffed political element is also needed in order to activ ely
support local peace actors, elevate the voices of local communities and civil society
and maintain a close link with other United Nations-supported activities, that is,
projects funded via the Peacebuilding Fund. In its presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/27, the Security Council acknowledges this need to adequately resource
the peacebuilding component of peacekeeping missions to enable sustainable
peacebuilding activities.
In addition, as recent transitions in the Sudan, Haiti, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire
have shown, it is essential that peacekeeping missions are well equipped not only with
an appropriate mandate and staffing but also with significant funding for
programmatic activities for the most pressing needs in the situation, including on
safeguarding human rights, security sector reform and good governance, including
supporting the capacity-building of host State rule of law institutions such as the
police, as well as justice and corrections.
The ongoing transition from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) is a case in point, a challenging process
that Germany played a key role in shaping through the penholdership in this Council
that we shared with the United Kingdom. This involved both laying the conceptual
framework for this transition with key stakeholders and our ongoing support for
UNITAMS.
In this context, I would also like to highlight the State liaison function concept,
implemented starting from 2018 until the end of UNAMID in 2020. It has proved to
be a vital tool to increase the cooperation of the peacekeeping operation with the
United Nations country team and to pave the way towards transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and, therefore, could serve as a blueprint for future
transitions.
21-12904

17/55

S/2021/783

Current missions such as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
or the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic clearly remind us that the protection of civilians and the
prevention of human rights violations by the parties to the conflict remain a key
element of peacekeeping operations, without which a successful transition to other
instruments and efforts towards a sustained peace are bound to fail. The civilian
population’s safety and security need to be our lodestar throughout, and in particular
in transitions where the mandate and “muscles” of a peacekeeping mission need a
follow-up through other means.
It should also be stressed that host Governments need to fully respect their
obligations under the respective status-of-forces agreements to allow the
peacekeepers to fully implement their mandates.
While peacekeeping missions form the basis and precondition for restoring
peace in specific, particularly challenging country contexts, other elements of the
broader peacebuilding architecture have a different yet equally important role in
ensuring a successful path towards a lasting peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission has, since its inception, gained in r elevance,
helped to develop detailed, country-specific strategies towards peace and issued
numerous recommendations to the Security Council and other United Nations forums.
As the informal coordinator between the Council and the Commission during its last
membership of the Council, Germany has contributed to strengthening the link
between these two central pillars of the peacebuilding architecture. The invitation of
the Chair of the Commission to brief the Council constitutes an important tool to
further increase their cooperation and focus it on the specific context of transitions.
The Peacebuilding Fund plays an important role in channelling funding to help
support and consolidate peace in specific country contexts. Its multitude of peace
support projects throughout the world complement efforts towards successful
transitions and are frequently implemented in countries with ongoing peacekeeping
missions. Germany is the main contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund and actively
supports efforts to increase and diversify its funding sources in view of the increasing
demand for peacebuilding projects.
In this context, Germany is looking forward to the continued discussions on
peacekeeping reform in view of further adapting peacekeeping missions to transition
contexts, as well as the broader peacebuilding architecture, in order for the United
Nations and the Security Council to deliver on their promise of coherent,
multidimensional and comprehensive peace support.

18/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Ireland, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of September 2021, for convening this ministerial
open debate on transitions. At the same time, we also thank the distinguished
panellists for their presentations.
Guatemala shares the criteria mentioned in the concept note circulated by the
delegation of Ireland, recognizing that peacekeeping operations are critical elements
of the United Nations peacebuilding and sustaining peace architecture, and
considering that this architecture provides the framework to prevent the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of violence and is a bridge between conflict
and sustainable peace.
Guatemala believes that a successful transition is a shared vision of peace
among national actors and the United Nation system, as well as an agreement on the
guiding principles and the role of the United Nations in contributing to this vision.
This shared vision encompasses a common understanding of the “end state”.
Experience has demonstrated that the United Nations engagement preceding a
special political mission tends to influence its ability to perform and to navigate to a
successful transition. In particular, when special political missions follow the
presence of peacekeeping operations, they inherit the political relationship with the
national authorities. It is our interpretation that the engagement with host
Governments should include building partnerships with region al organizations and
financial institutions that will be involved in the peacebuilding planning beyond the
life of the mission.
Taking into account that it is not the mission that is transitioning but the entire
United Nations presence, lessons learned from past transitions have demonstrated the
importance of the need for early, flexible and integrated planning, driven by the
Security Council. Just as important as early planning is the need for the Council to
adapt transition processes in response to changing conditions on the ground.
Demanding frequent updates, and designing mandates that can respond to changes on
the ground, can help to avoid contentious moments within the Council and relevant
actors, including the host country.
In terms of planning, the drawdown of a special political mission requires the
United Nations to shift from focusing on peace and security to focusing on longerterm development, in line with the United Nations sustainable development
cooperation framework.
It is our interpretation that the Security Council mandates for United Nations
peace operations should contain the elements of their exit strategy fr om the outset,
and also, they must be part of a shared and long-term political strategy. This requires
that Council members have a clear understanding of the situation on the ground, the
real potential for a peace operation to drive a change, and the risks over the medium
term. It is also relevant to engage with national actors from the beginning of a mission,
not only in the start-up of the United Nations presence but also in creating a common
vision for how it will exit a determined country.
At the same time, the sustainability of the success of any special political
mission depends to a large extent on how well transitions to United Nations country
teams are managed. Managing this transition requires being clear about the
substantive differences between various stages of the United Nations presence and
21-12904

19/55

S/2021/783

the implications for political engagement and peacebuilding efforts. It requires
maintaining continuity in the cooperation of the United Nations with national
authorities and in its peacebuilding objectives.
Guatemala believes that unlocking the full potential of the Peacebuilding
Commission and strengthening its advisory and advocacy role can help with
successful transitions strategies. Member States should work with the aim to
strengthen the advisory capacity of the Commission to the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council, to work across
intergovernmental and institutional mandates to build consensus around
peacebuilding priorities while still honouring the separate and respective mandates of
each body. During transitions from special political missions, the Commission can
play an important role in maintaining international support for a country to address
its ongoing peacebuilding and development needs.
Effective coordination of the United Nations country team based on the
repositioning of the development system continues to be one of the most important
tools for assessing the development pillar. This coordination means that national
Governments must identify the strategy for developing better conditions to make real
progress for addressing the needs of the country in an inclusive way.
The Security Council can and should consider the full range of peacebuilding
resources available in a transition setting. Breaking silos within the Organization and
between Member States is a clear challenge, but it is important to work with the idea
of implementing the three pillars of the Charter of the United Nations jointly, in the
sense that peace and security, development and human r ights must be addressed in a
cross-cutting way as a whole.

20/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Indonesia to the United Nations, Mohammad K. Koba
I thank all briefers for their insightful briefings.
My delegation commends Ireland’s initiative in linking peacekeeping operations
with transition. This issue is close to Indonesia’s heart, being one of the biggest troop and police-contributing countries which has also been through its own demo cratic
transition.
On this note, I would like to raise following points.
First, ensuring the impact of peacekeeping operations for the local population.
Peacekeeping operations should be able to bring a positive impact to their
respective host country, especially its local communities. This is especially important
when the host country embarks on its transitional process.
Peacekeeping training and capacity-building should also include language
skills, soft skills, and understanding and respect for local culture. Therefore,
Indonesia has been including community engagement training as an essential part of
predeployment for our peacekeepers. Indonesia firmly believes that building a
connection with the local community facilitates the overall effectiveness of a
peacekeeping operation.
Along these lines, it is also critical for a peacekeeping mission to reach all
elements of the local community, especially women and children. We call on all
stakeholders to strengthen partnership in increasing the number as well as training of
women peacekeepers, as mandated by resolution 2538 (2020).
Second, ensuring a sustainable transition.
Being the world’s fourth largest democracy, Indonesia firmly believes in
strengthening democratic institutions to ensure a sustainable transition process.
This is especially important in ensuring that any peacekeeping operation
drawdown should not create a vacuum and expose the long-suffering civilians to
renewed risks due to the transition.
Indonesia believes that peacekeeping operations could support their host
countries as they embark on their security sector reforms, especially through
protection of civilians and police training sessions.
Third, ensuring a smooth withdrawal process.
As a major troop and police contributor, Indonesia remains committed to
ensuring the safety, security and well-being of peacekeepers, including during their
withdrawal process.
We emphasize the importance of ensuring the responsible withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation, including a smooth handover or liquidation of assets.
We also believe that dialogue remains essential in our joint effort to implement
these frameworks. Together with Brazil, Rwanda and China, Indonesia has
established and is co-chairing the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers, which could be utilized to further enhance the
discussion over the issue of safety and security during the withdrawal process.

21-12904

21/55

S/2021/783

Most importantly, all stakeholders also need to ensure the settlement of any
outstanding financial reimbursements. This requires all Member States to fulfil their
pledges and contributions.
To conclude, Indonesia reiterates its commitment to supporting a seamless
peacekeeping operation in the midst of transition.
Acknowledging that transition is one of the most crucial steps in peacebuilding,
we underline the importance of all stakeholders ensuring that all progress is sustained
in order for the local community to savour peace, stability and development.

22/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy thanks Ireland, as President of the Security Council, for organizing this
open debate on transitions in the context of peacekeeping operations.
United Nations transitions are a crucial step of peace processes, as their
management can significantly influence the outcome of the mission itself. While
successful transitions create prospects for a sustainable peace, the troubled closure of
a peacekeeping mission may lead to a relapse into conflict.
Transitions, which typically entail the drawdown and reconfiguration of peace
operations, take place at a critical juncture: as peacekeeping missions are in the
process of closing, the level of attention to these missions tends to decline, inducing
a possible reduction of commitment from contributing countries. At times, transitions
may be perceived as a simple handover of duties and responsibilities, although the
Security Council has been increasingly vocal in describing th em as a reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence in the host country and has endeavoured to act
accordingly.
In order to favour a successful transition, the framework of the exit strategy
should already be outlined in the mission mandate on the basis of a realistic analysis
of the goals that the mission is supposed to achieve. This should be done in close
cooperation with the Government of the host country and with the meaningful
involvement of national and local actors, being cognizant that an effe ctive analysis of
underlying national grievances could actually help to build more realistic transition
mandates as well. The importance of local ownership of the transition processes
should not be underestimated, as sustainable peace can be achieved only if
discussions and peace negotiations – as well as their implementation – are truly
inclusive, and if all segments of society can have their voices heard and contribute to
shaping the future of the society they live in.
The integrated quest for political solutions and socioeconomic stability and
development should be the primary goal of the United Nations and its Member States.
Investing in economic recovery, development and peacebuilding activities is the
recipe for successful transitions. In this spirit, the recent practice of the Security
Council to gradually evolve into a more holistic understanding of the needs of the
host country, in order to provide a better support for a sustainable transition process,
should be encouraged.
Peace and security issues should be addressed with an integrated,
multidimensional and inclusive approach that encompasses all relevant sectors and
local, national and regional actors with a view to preventing and mitigating conflict.
Furthermore, the timeline of a transition process needs to be tailored to the
actual situation on the ground. Rushing the closure of a mission might increase the
risk of a relapse into conflict and should therefore be avoided. To this end, a thorough
and independent assessment of the risks that might arise from a mission’s
reconfiguration is crucial. In planning the winding down of a mission, it is also
essential to retain an appropriate degree of flexibility. While some clarity about the
timeline is necessary, as the mission must make substantial logistics planning for the
transfer of resources and personnel, setting a fixed end date could at times prove
counterproductive, as it could encourage overly optimistic reports from the mission
and prompt spoilers to tactically wait until that time before resuming their disruptive
activities on the ground. To minimize these risks, a few baseline and objective
conditions should be established before setting a fixed end date, without which the
latter could be suspended or delayed. This flexible approach would provide the
21-12904

23/55

S/2021/783

Security Council with a time-bound approach to transitions while leaving open, with
a clearer modality, opportunities for slowing down, recalibrating or even stopping
transition processes that might prove too risky in changing circumstances. I n this way,
the transition processes would only start when security on the ground permits.
Finally, managing a successful transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
also entails planning orderly and integrated action by United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes on the ground in accordance with the tripartite peace -humanitariandevelopment nexus and in line with the principles and criteria of the reformed United
Nations development system.

24/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
As we experience more reconfiguration and drawdown of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in recent years, it has become increasingly important to
focus our attention on transitions, one of the most complex undertakings for the whole
United Nations system.
Japan has consistently stressed the importance of providing seamless and
comprehensive support to conflict-affected countries, including in the areas of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction.
The nexus between the peace, humanitarian, human rights and development
operations of the United Nations is the key to realizing a successful transition towards
self-sustained peace.
On these bases, I would like to touch upon three concrete points which would
facilitate effective transitions.
First, joint assessments of the needs on the ground by the mission and the United
Nations country team at an early stage are critical for a smooth transition, al lowing
United Nations country team members to identify in advance the mission’s residual
challenges and the areas in need of consolidation that they will be tasked to address
subsequently. An analysis based on up-to-date information from the United Nations
country team should allow the mission to draw up early, flexible and integrated
planning that responds to the changing conditions on the ground.
Second, at the headquarters level, the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should work closely together. The Council could make better use of the
Commission’s advisory role and convening power of a wide range of stakeholders to
mobilize every available tool in support of effective transition. Projects implemented
by United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in particular those funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund, should serve the needs for transition which require many actors
for a single purpose: a United Nations mission’s successful departure. Japan
appreciates the role of the Fund, which aims to direct 35 per cent of its investments
to the projects that support transitions.
Third, Japan reiterates the importance of institution-building. The ultimate goal
of any transition process is to leave the host country with the institutional and human
capacity to sustainably manage its own affairs. This would require the full support
not only of relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes but also of
regional organizations and bilateral donors. Japan has been supporting conflict
prevention efforts by the African Union and subregional organizations in Africa
through the New Approach for Peace and Stability in Africa, launched at the seventh
Tokyo International Conference on African Development in 2019, by providing
assistance for the capacity-building of police officers, public prosecutors, judges, etc.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, Japan worked with the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and others to train more than 20,000 active police personnel of the Congolese
National Police.
We stand ready to continue to play our part.

21-12904

25/55

S/2021/783

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the
United Nations
I congratulate Ireland on assuming the presidency of the Secu rity Council for
the month of September. I also express my profound gratitude to Ireland for
convening this timely meeting. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding have generated
considerable interest as a result of the growing recognition that the prevention of
conflicts is more cost-effective than the managing of conflicts.
In recent years, a significant portion of Jordan’s military and police personnel
have participated in United Nations peacekeeping operations, illustrating the
kingdom’s global commitment to peace. We have also supported the reform initiatives
related to peacekeeping within the United Nations towards the achievement of better
performance and safety.
Jordan was proudly among the first countries to endorse the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, and we welcomed the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative
presented by the Secretary-General. We hope that the set of strategic priorities defined
in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative would expedite the implementation of
the eight commitment areas in the coming years.
Peacebuilding is an inherently political process aimed at preventing the
outbreak, escalation, recurrence or continuation of conflict, and Jordan further
recognizes that peacebuilding encompasses a wide range of political, developmental
and human rights programmes and mechanisms. In this context, we commend the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which has begun to bring a whole -of-system
approach to its country-specific configurations.
Jordan reaffirms the importance of national ownership and leadership in
peacebuilding, whereby the responsibility for sustaining peace is broadly shared by
the Government and all other national stakeholders, underlines the importance, in this
regard, of inclusivity in order to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are
taken into account and further reaffirms the primary responsibility of national
Governments and authorities in identifying, driving and directing priorities, strategies
and activities for sustaining peace.
We recognize the critical role of regional organizations such as the League of
Arab States and the African Union in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
There is a need to address the root causes of conflicts throughout the process of
peacebuilding, as well as ensuring national reconciliation and moving towards
recovery, reconstruction and development. We underline the importance of
socioeconomic development for sustaining peace through economic development,
including
transnational
and
transregional
infrastructure
development,
industrialization, job creation, agricultural modernization and the promotion of
entrepreneurship. In this context, we must recognize that, although managing
conflicts is imperative to generating trust and maintaining confidence betw een the
parties to a conflict, it is equally important not to get stuck in the cycle of conflict
management, as this might eventually lead to frustration. Therefore, we shall focus
attention on finding enduring solutions to conflicts.
In conclusion, let me point out the need to encourage those who drive the efforts
on peacebuilding to take the necessary steps to ensure that women are equally
engaged in the process of peacebuilding. There is a growing recognition of young
people’s essential role in peace and security. It is encouraging to see many instances
in which Governments, United Nations entities, civil society actors and others are
26/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

stepping up to implement resolution 2250 (2015). However, the core challenges
remain, including structural barriers limiting the participation of young people and
their capacity to influence decision-making, and insufficient investment in facilitating
their inclusion and empowerment.

21-12904

27/55

S/2021/783

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Lebanon congratulates Ireland on assuming the presidency of the Council this
month and on a diversified and important programme of work, especially on
organizing this important debate by a champion of peacekeeping like Ireland. We also
thank India for its productive presidency during the month of August.
Peacekeeping operations are indispensable for the international community’s
efforts to mitigate regional crises and to preserve pe ace and avoid conflict through
lowering tension. Peacekeeping operations are an important component of prevention
through their work on preventing sliding into conflict and focusing on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
But as important as sustaining peace is, the role of peacekeeping operations in
winding down conflict and violence and transitioning into a peaceful and sustainable
environment is equally important in making it possible to end these operations while
preserving peaceful environments in the long term. Such transitions can help to avoid
a relapse into another conflict, sustain the gains made in conflict resolution and
conflict management, and pave the way for durable peace.
Here, Lebanon, as the host of one of the oldest peacekeeping operat ions, would
like to stress the importance of the priorities of peacekeeping reform embodied in the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. These priorities include
coherent action to serve an overarching political strategy, the safety and security of
peacekeepers, and the application of a gender lens to peacekeeping activities, all key
for successful transitions.
There is one essential element that has to be emphasized to make transitions
successful and safer for host countries and peacekeepers as well. Close cooperation
and coordination with the host country’s military services that are working side by
side with the peacekeepers are indispensable to making transitions smoother and
sustainable.
The coordination of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
with the Lebanese Army is an example of such cooperation that will make transition,
when the time comes, much easier and more effective. We encourage peacekeeping
operations to invest more in coordination, cooperation progr ammes and
communication with host countries, their militaries and host communities for a
successful transition as well. Moreover, drawing on previous experiences in mission
closure is essential.
Lessons learned from transition processes are fundamental in ensuring
successful drawdowns and exits of longstanding United Nations peacekeeping
missions planned for the coming years.
It is important to recognize the need to adequately resource the peacebuilding
components of United Nations peacekeeping missions, including during mission
transitions and drawdowns. We have to promote the need for political solutions as an
integral part of transition processes while keeping in mind the need for peacekeeping
mandates to have clearly defined goals and objectives. Moreover, it is important to
repeat how important it is to foster cooperation and partnership between host
countries, various United Nations entities, troop - and police-contributing countries,
regional organizations and other partners.
While primary responsibility remains in the hands of national Governments and
authorities in identifying, driving and directing priorities, strategies and activities for
28/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

sustaining peace, ensuring the full and effective participation of all segments of
society is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order
to ensure that their needs are taken into account.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, Lebanon has consistently called
for addressing the root causes of conflict, implementing the Sust ainable Development
Goals, promoting human rights and enhancing inclusion. Lebanon supported the
increased efforts of the Commission in promoting the women and peace and security
agenda in line with the Commission’s gender strategy. Women can play an impor tant
part as a driver and advocate of peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and they should
not be excluded from the process of transition, as they are an important component
of making peace.
Lebanon also continued to support the youth, peace and security agenda and the
Peacebuilding Commission’s call for greater inclusion of youth representatives in
coalitions and partnerships that are aimed at supporting peacebuilding initiatives and
processes. We also emphasized the importance of combating climate change and the
protection of the environment for peace and security. As a country that has
experienced the horrors of war, Lebanon knows the value of peace and the importance
of having an integrated approach to achieving a long-lasting peace.
I seize this opportunity to express Lebanon’s gratitude to all troop-contributing
countries in UNIFIL for their efforts in contributing to Lebanon’s stability. I would
also like to thank all members of the Security Council for supporting UNIFIL and for
taking exceptional measures to assist Lebanon during these unprecedented difficulties
that it is facing, and we appreciate all the efforts being exerted by so many of
Lebanon’s friends in this Council to help Lebanon maintain its security and stability.
In its resolution 2539 (2020), the Council authorized UNIFIL to take special
measures to assist Lebanese authorities in the aftermath of the 4 August 2020 port
explosion in dealing with the destruction that befell Beirut. This commendable and
appreciated effort was also present this last month in resolution 2591 (2021) when
this Council authorized UNIFIL to take temporary and special measures to support
and assist the Lebanese Armed Forces with the provision of relevant additional
non-lethal material and logistical support owing to the economic crisis that Lebanon
is facing.
Lebanon is extremely grateful to the leadership and staff of UNIFIL for their
relentless dedication and commends the strong and steady cooperation that exists
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces. Lebanon reiterates its full
commitment to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) in its
entirety and to the preservation of the safety and security of UNIFIL personnel.

21-12904

29/55

S/2021/783

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
I thank the President for the opportunity to address this important topic. In our
brief comments, Liechtenstein wishes to highlight the role that the Council can play
alongside partners to contribute to sustainable transitions. Fundamentally, the Council
should see transitions not as a deadline or set of deadlines by which to leave but as a
part of the life cycle of any operation. The process of transition should contribute to
sustainable peace, notably through the fulfilment of Sustainable Development Goal
16 on “peace, justice and strong institutions”. As such, many of the most important
decisions relevant to transitions must be made well in advance; sustainable, durable
peace can only be created by wise, long-term planning. In this, Liechtenstein
encourages a “multi-stakeholder” or “whole-of-society” approach, complementing
close engagement with the national Government, with the meaningful participation
of civil society and underrepresented groups, as applicable – minorities, women,
young people and indigenous peoples. In this way, peacekeeping transitions can be
made to be responsive to real issues and pressures, making their gains more
sustainable – rather than beholden to theoretical plans laid out in United Nations
documents.
One key decision that the Security Council can take in advance to lay the
foundation for sustainable peace is to systematically include clear human rights and
rule of law components across peace operations. Situations of armed conflict often
jeopardize the enjoyment of human rights, but at the same time, violations of human
rights can spark or intensify ongoing tensions or conflicts. By committing to the
protection of human rights, and by strengthening or creating lega l avenues for
accountability and justice for such violations, human rights and rule of law
components create the enabling conditions for sustainable peace even after the end of
a peacekeeping operation, and in so doing, ease the transition out of a peaceke eping
operation. As it stands, the wide divergence in mandates among different peace
operations is concerning. In order to more effectively address human rights violations
as part of its peace and security mandate, the Security Council must also better
coordinate with the human rights machinery of the United Nations, in particular the
Human Rights Council, relevant special procedures mandate holders and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Council should also expand cooperation with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the body specifically designed to address post-conflict dynamics. The
Security Council could contribute constructively to the work of the Commission in
helping to reassess the criteria to establish configurations and consider how their
establishment can assist the transition process. More regular, or more formal,
meetings between Peacebuilding Commission configuration Chairs and Council
members on country situations, where applicable, could be considered, building on
previous annual informal interactive discussions. In line with the needed emphasis on
the rule of law, the Council should also have an interest in introducing a clear justice
and accountability component into the Peacebuilding Commission’s work. This is
also important in the light of the parameters for sustainable peace given in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular those contained within
Sustainable Development Goal 16. The fulfilment of Goal 16 is vital to both Council
and Peacebuilding Commission mandates, and particularly so in situations of
transition, where upholding peace and justice must be at the centre.

30/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
Malaysia appreciates the convening of this open debate which allows
non-Council members, especially troop-contributing countries, to share their views
on ways to contribute towards a viable and sustainable peacekeeping transition
process.
Malaysia holds a strong view that we need to continue improving the transition
between the peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes so that it can be planned and
managed in a proactive, integrated and forward-looking manner. Malaysia believes
that sustained peace would only be possible if transition planning takes into account
the uniqueness of the host country. The views and expectations of the local
community would need to be taken on board. In this context, it is crucial that robust
engagement with relevant national stakeholders be part of an inclusive nationally
owned transition process. Such engagement could build upon the foundation that has
been developed in the peacekeeping phase, including with civil society, women, youth
and minorities.
Malaysia further believes that it is important for the transition process to fully
understand the needs of the host country in capacity-building efforts of its national
institutions. We fully support strategies towards creating effective governance that
must be in place and ready to administer a nation into a post-conflict situation. We
call on the strong support of the international community, including close neighbours
and regional organizations, to assist the host country in its capacity -building efforts
towards ensuring lasting and sustained peace in the spirit of effective national and
system-wide partnership.
Malaysia also believes that peacekeeping missions and stakeholders need to
continuously engage with each other to determine the best ways to facilitate the
implementation of the mandate and to prevent the recurrence of conflict. Efforts to
sustain peace should also include all three pillars of United Nations engagement at all
stages of conflict and in all its dimensions. It is also vital that greater contact with the
field and coordination with the broader United Nations family, including the United
Nations country team, be part of the engagement process. This contact and
coordination must be strengthened in progressing towards peace and new
opportunities for development in the host country, including in delivering on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Lastly, Malaysia would also like to underscore the importance of close
coordination between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in
transition planning. The Council would stand to benefit from the invaluable inputs
from the membership of the Commission, which also includes member countries from
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the latter’s
interaction with international financial organizations.
In closing, as a troop-contributing country, Malaysia reiterates its readiness and
support to work together with relevant stakeholders and partners in further improving
our practice of mandating and managing peacekeeping tra nsitions.

21-12904

31/55

S/2021/783

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the
United Nations
Malta thanks Ireland for organizing this high-level open debate during its
presidency on a crucial priority for a more coherent and effective response to the
evolving needs on the ground during transition. We also thank the Secretary -General
for his comprehensive briefing, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the former President of
Liberia, for being here with us today to share her country’s experience and invaluable
insights with us.
Malta emphasizes the multifaceted reality of peacekeeping operations and the
role that they play in sustaining peace and creating the space for peacebuilding with
a view to achieving durable and sustainable peace. It is crucial that no effort be spared
to make sure that transitions are managed in an orderly manner so that hard -fought
gains are not reversed at this delicate juncture.
The Security Council plays a vital role in ensuring effective peacebuilding,
including through peacekeeping operations. This also rings true to the centrality of
transitions and the process by which this is undertaken. As also reflected in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/27, the Council is responsible for ensuring how
the United Nations system is prepared for transitions in line with the prevailing
situation on the ground and also ensuring a nationally owned transition process. The
Council is also central in providing necessary guidance on how United Nations
operations adapt to the broader political and socioeconomic realities on the ground
and prepare for the challenges which can accompany peacekeeping transitions.
Given the way in which peacekeeping mandates have developed, it remains
important that these are drafted in a way which reflects the need for flexibility in the
face of changing security situations. Mandates also need to ensure that enough
resources and capacity are made available for peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
to take place effectively. The creation of the conditions which could lead to
sustainable peace requires careful planning and clear goals from the outset, coupled
with national ownership and partnerships which would lead to a sustainable transition.
Clear peacekeeping mandates, an early focus on national capacities and an integrated
United Nations approach remain critical.
Malta also reiterates that the protection of civilians should remain a priority
across the board and be factored into every step of transition planning and
implementation. It is essential that any transition process does not expose civilians to
additional risks and that all measures are taken to address this threat and safeguard
human rights. We also underline the fact that women must participate in a full, equal
and meaningful manner in such transitions, together with youth and civil society.
The recent wind-down of a number of missions, coupled with changing political
realities, will mean that transitions will remain a priority for the Council. We need to
carry on the lessons learned from these experiences moving forward, inter alia, in
relation to the importance of a broad United Nations integrated approach to transitions
and the inclusion of all the dimensions of peacekeeping and peacebuilding in setting
up mandates. Only sustained United Nations engagement can ensure that the lengthy
task associated with effective peacebuilding can be achieved and sustained.

32/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
I would like to warmly congratulate Ireland on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September and to express our sincere gratitude for
convening this meeting on peacekeeping transitions.
In recent years, United Nations-wide efforts and sustained focus on this subject
matter have allowed for significant reconfiguration of the peacekeeping transition,
resulting in encouraging outcomes in terms of effectiveness.
In order to better prepare for the next wave of transitions, we believe that it is
of great importance to keep the discussion ongoing, including by drawing the
necessary lessons and identifying the relevant best practices from experiences.
Development of a common vision by the host country and the United Nations
system actors is key, as it helps to establish the role and contribution of each
stakeholder in the process, in order to achieve the expected outcome defined by the
parties.
The Security Council plays a central, strategic and political role in this
framework, given its responsibility in initiating and overseeing the transition process.
In this context, and to strengthen transition efficiency in ensuring the consolidation
of peacekeeping gains, the Council should:
• Base exit strategies on clearly defined and measurable benchmarks aligned with
the host country’s needs, priorities and context. Developing objectives and
result-oriented measures linked to the country conditions not only helps to make
decisions about drawdown but also provides clear guidance that facilitates
national political engagement and encourages ownership of the operational
transformations;
• Ensure a balanced emphasis on security and civil transitions and enforce
accountability to guarantee progress in both sectors. Transition often puts
stronger focus on security reforms, while creating the conditions for economic
and social recovery is just as important;
• Sustain momentum, visibility and high-level political engagement by
strengthening coordination with other actors within the United Nations, notably
the Peacebuilding Commission. The added value of the Peacebuilding
Commission lies not only in sharing its analysis on country -specific
configurations but also in its considerable efforts to suppor t political transition,
as well as its contribution to financing the transition process by mobilizing the
necessary resources to sustain peacebuilding programmes, mainly through the
Peacebuilding Fund.
Achieving a sustainable peace requires a comprehensive approach that includes
political, humanitarian and human rights programmes to foster sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty, and the rule of law.
As a critical step in the peace continuum, transition requires adequate planning
and strong partnerships with relevant national, regional and international actors,
including international financial institutions, such as the World Bank, and bilateral
development agencies that have responsibility for economic recovery.
Rather than a handover of mandates, transition should be planned as a long-term
comprehensive, integrated and collaborative response to the specific conditions in
each country that requires continued coordination and support, in particular in
theatres marked by instability and uncertainty.
21-12904

33/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
At the outset, I extend my sincere appreciation to the Government of Ireland for
organizing this open debate, under its presidency of the Security Council, on the
important issue of United Nations peacekeeping operations transitions.
I would also like to commend the briefers, including the Secretary -General, the
former President of Liberia and the representatives of civil societies, for th eir
insightful briefings.
Peacekeeping operations including special political missions have remained
some of the most valuable tools at the disposal of the United Nations for the
promotion and maintenance of global peace and security. However, peacekeepin g is
a temporary undertaking, and transition is inevitable. In fact, peacekeeping is just a
snippet in the continuum of transition from conflict to peace. Accordingly,
peacekeeping should not just strive to keep the peace but also build and maintain a
lasting peace that is sustained.
All peacekeeping must begin with an end of transition in mind. We have many
examples of the success and failure of transition in front of us. We must learn from
the mistakes and capitalize on the success stories. Peacekeeping operations must
encompass the features of peacebuilding right from the beginning, and the transition
must be smooth and gradual so that it is sustainable and never relapses into conflict
again.
Components of social and economic transformation should be integrated into
peace operations from the very beginning. In this regard, the concept of a whole -ofUnited Nations approach and continued efforts in strengthening institutions are
crucial. Despite being well intentioned, many well-crafted strategies have been the
victim of a budget crunch; careful and well-thought-out processes have been
overshadowed by political motives. The Council must be unanimous in making the
decision to preserve years of hard work and sacrifices. The Council’s unity, supported
with adequate financial commitment, is a prerequisite for the success of peace
missions. United Nations mission transition processes should be executed in an
integrated, coherent and sustainable manner with equal emphasis on all three pillars –
peace and security, sustainable development and human rights.
The involvement of the host Government at the strategic and operational levels
and engagement with the community at the tactical level right from the beginning are
a stairway to successful transition, among other things. This not only facilitates
ownership by the host nation but also leads towards conflict resolution and institution building.
Mission management and planning, in a transition context, should consider the
level of political engagement, a risk assessment of potential conflict drivers and the
availability of resources to support national authorities leading nationally owned
policies. The drawdown or withdrawal of a peace operation must be anticipated by
strengthening the national Governments, which can advance their policies and
programmes in a participatory, inclusive and transparent manner. Smooth transition
to sustainable peace from a post-conflict setting should involve the following
considerations.
First, the national Governments are the main actors in the peacebuilding efforts
and sustaining peace. National leadership should not only be acceptable to the people
but also capable of handling the post-conflict grievances, reconciliation and
34/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

reconstruction of the societies. In this sense, enhancing their capacity is crucial.
Further, policies, programmes and specific requirements of national Governments
should be supported by the international community, including the United Nations
and development partners. We should be cautious that the failure of the national
Government equals the loss of strategic gains achieved during the long period of
international support through peace operations.
Second, for national ownership to be sustained, national Governments should
be inclusive, transparent and participatory in their process of nation-building.
Women, children and youths, along with ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
should be involved in the national governance architecture. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former adversaries into the societies and their
reconciliation should be prioritized. The partnership of national Governments,
regional organizations and the United Nations should continue. As agents of positive
change, the role of academia, civil society, media and youths, as well as human rights
activists and social workers, is important. Equally important are fair elections,
criminal and transitional justice and the rule of law in order for the Government to be
able to address the root causes of conflicts.
Third, we need adequate, predictable and sustainable financing for
peacebuilding, including in the process of transition. Poverty, exclusion, inequality,
injustice and the violation of human rights have often been found to be the drivers of
conflicts. We need to address those problems for the peace to be sustained in any
society. The requirement is high. Peacebuilding funds alone may be insufficient to
support the varied requirements of countries. Therefore, support from donors,
international financial institutions, regional organizations and business communities
is desired. The continued attention of the international community and organizations
is essential for a country to successfully transit into peace.
Nepal commends the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting
synergies among the United Nations, international and regional agencies, and national
Governments for achieving sustainable peace.
In conclusion, mission transition is the result of our long and continued peace
operations in conflict-affected zones. We must foster our collective partnership to
strengthen national ownership promoting inclusive and participatory national
government with a view to preventing conflict and maintaining sustainable peace.

21-12904

35/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the
United Nations
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the President on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. Let me also commend Ireland’s decision to
select the agenda item entitled “United Nations peacekeeping operations” for
convening this high-level debate on transitions. The debate carries special value for
my delegation, given Pakistan’s long-standing status as a troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping and as a founding member of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The management of peacekeeping transitions is a key element defining the
success of the modern peace and security architecture. A seamless transition, for
example, from a peacekeeping mission to a United Nations country te am, depends on
the capacity of the United Nations system, including that of the key United Nations
organs and entities at the headquarters, to respond to the ever-changing threat
dynamics in the field. A key component of this response is the ability to int roduce,
early in the life of a peacekeeping mission, context-specific peacebuilding initiatives.
Undertaking preventive diplomacy and tailor-made peacebuilding activities at an
early stage helps to mitigate the risks of the breakout, continuation or relaps e of
conflict. In the words of the Secretary-General: “Instead of responding to crises, we
need to invest far more in prevention.” It is out of these considerations that Pakistan
has proposed allocating a certain percentage of the peacekeeping budget to
peacebuilding activities, especially during the drawdown phase of a peacekeeping
mission.
The Security Council, with its power to define peacekeeping mandates, has the
primary role in developing a robust transition framework based on a coherent and
comprehensive analysis of the root causes of conflict. In this regard, Pakistan would
like to underline the following points:
• First, host authorities should be engaged from the outset while designing
transition strategies in fragile settings. National ownership must remain central
to any transition along the peace continuum – from the deployment of a
peacekeeping or political mission to withdrawal or reconfiguration. Sustainable
peace in a conflict-affected country cannot be imposed from outside – it must
be rooted within the country. The aim of any international support, including
capacity-building assistance, should be to complement the nationally defined
peacebuilding priorities.
• Second, countries healing after conflict may need support in promoting
reconciliation among communities, assistance in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, and sustainable development. The United
Nations entities, including the peace operations, political missions and United
Nations country teams, should contribute towards these endeavours with a view
to helping national authorities to distribute the dividends of peace across all
segments of society. Creating socioeconomic opportunities and ensuring equity
in the distribution of resources offer powerful incentives to dissident groups to
embrace peace and renounce violence. An inclusive peace process fosters
harmony and could ensure a seamless transition process at a time when the
missions are either reconfigured or preparing to leave the country.
• Third, the restoration and rehabilitation of essential infrastructure should take
centre stage during the transition from conflict to peace. This is key to
socioeconomic recovery and achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. However, it requires not only an increase in the
36/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

volume of infrastructure financing but also a well-defined investment strategy.
A major handicap of the developing countries is their inability to prepare
commercially viable projects. Here comes the critical role of the Uni ted Nations.
Pakistan has proposed the establishment of an infrastructure investment facility
at the United Nations, as a public-private partnership, which could serve the
twin purposes: on one hand, it could assist in prefeasibility and feasibility
studies of projects; on the other hand, it could scale up investments in high -risk
countries coming out of conflict.
• Fourth, the Security Council could consider enhancing its engagement with the
Peacebuilding Commission, especially before and during a mission ’s drawdown
or reconfiguration phase. A more active engagement between the two may also
precede the visits of the Council members to conflict-affected countries. The
Peacebuilding Commission, drawing on the views of its diverse membership,
including host States, troop-contributing countries and finance contributors,
along with country-specific configurations, is uniquely positioned to provide
“informed advice” to the Council. Fortunately, Council resolution 2558 (2020)
recognizes this potential and emphasizes the vital importance of strengthening
the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory and bridging role. The need is to
translate this call into reality and leverage the Commission’s ability to
complement the Council’s work and promote system-wide coherence in
peacebuilding efforts.
• Finally, we consider regional partnerships a useful vehicle to promote the
peacebuilding priorities during and beyond transitions. Regional entities have
the leverage to advance peacebuilding norms, including those on the protection
of civilians, with the ability to convert them into national policy frameworks
through good offices, advocacy and the pooling of resources. Pakistan therefore
welcomes the increasing role of regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in the peace and security architecture.
Pakistani peacekeeping contingents have played a key role in some of the most
successful United Nations peacekeeping transitions, such as in Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Burundi and Timor-Leste. Our peacekeepers have also supported host authorities in
holding peaceful elections, the disarmament of rebels, demining operations and the
protection of civilians including through the capacity-building and training of local
police and other law enforcement agencies. In 2019, Pakistan deployed its first all female community engagement team in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which
undertook several successful peacebuilding initiatives including vocational training
for students, teachers and women, and conducted psychological workshops for the
Congolese police. Following the drawdown of the African Union -United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, a female officer of the Pakistan Police Service, Helena
Iqbal, was recently appointed as the Police Commissioner in the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan. These deployments reflect
Pakistan’s deep-rooted commitment to women’s critical role in the promotion of
sustainable peace and security.
To conclude, let me underscore that a successful transition sets the stage for the
host Government to continue political engagement with the international community.
It leaves behind arrangements that allow the national authorities to secure institution building support and conflict-sensitive advice from the United Nations country teams.
In short, transition in a conflict-affected country should be a step towards the goal of
self-sustaining peace, stability and economic prosperity.

21-12904

37/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Osama Abdelkhalek
At the outset, I wish to welcome Ireland’s decision to convene this open debate
on transitions, which addresses key priorities for the Peacebuilding Commission,
which, building on its advisory, bridging and convening roles, has regularly provided
its advice to the Security Council.
In 2005, the General Assembly and the Security Council decided to create the
peacebuilding architecture with a view to filling what the late Secretary -General Kofi
Annan called a “gaping hole” and to providing support to conflict-affected countries,
in particular those transitioning from one form of United Nations presence to another.
Since then, not only has the Peacebuilding Commission accompanied successful
transitions, such as those in Liberia and Sierra Leone, but the whole United Nations
system has engaged in a more coherent way, recognizing the centrality of building
and sustaining peace in our efforts to build lasting peace, sustainable development
and respect for human rights.
This has been particularly evident in the strong synergies between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. Peacekeeping operations have played an increasingly important
role in assisting host countries to develop critical peacebuilding capacities and
generate peacebuilding outcomes, and the twin resolution s on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace of 2016 welcomed “the contribution of peacekeeping operations to
a comprehensive strategy for sustaining peace”.
On 15 June 2021, the Commission convened a meeting to discuss the
contributions of peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Allow me to
share with the members of the Security Council the main elements that emerged from
that meeting that are relevant for today’s debate:
• Coherence, strategic and operational coordination, and synergies are vita l,
especially at a time when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is
exacerbating the risks and impact of conflict. This is particularly important
during mission drawdowns, when more efforts should be made to build a
common vision between the United Nations, host Governments and a wide range
of partners, including civil society, women, and youth organizations, with a view
to mitigating gaps. The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund,
working in support of national priorities and fostering coherence among
partners, including international, regional and national actors, are important
tools in transition phases. In this regard, recognizing the important role of
women in transition settings, and in implementing its gender strategy, the
Commission held dedicated discussions on the gender aspects of transitions.
• Peacekeeping operations continue to be an important instrument to assist host
countries to develop critical peacebuilding capacities. They not only enable the
work of other peacebuilding actors through their security presence but also
provide political focus on peacebuilding goals and undertake peacebuilding
tasks that help to address the root causes of conflict. The launch of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative three years ago aimed, inter alia, to enhance the
contribution and impact of peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The emphasis that the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative places on working
closely with international partners is a positive development.
• Strong partnerships and appropriate financing mechanisms are key to ensuring
smooth transitions and avoiding relapses into conflict. In this regard, the
Commission welcomes the progress and further opportunities for the United
38/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Nations-World Bank collaboration in peacebuilding, including taking into
account the release of the fragility, conflict and violence strategy of the Bank
and the International Development Association 2020 replenishment, and
encourages the two organizations to continue to work together in joint
programming and peacebuilding assessments in support of nationally defined
peacebuilding and development priorities, in accordance with the commitments
and terminology agreed upon by Member States at multilateral discussions.
• Financing for peacebuilding remains a critical element to secure successful
transitions. The Commission reiterates the need to mobilize more peacebuilding
financing, and it welcomes the decision of Member States to convene a General
Assembly high-level meeting on financing for peacebuilding in the next session.
• All phases of peace operations’ mandates should contain guidelines to
encourage timely transitions. The Peacebuilding Commission, with its broad
peacebuilding mandate, is well positioned to advise the Security Coun cil during
the formation, review and drawdown of peace operations’ mandates, and the
work done by the Commission to inform the mandate renewal of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic is a good example. Elements contained in presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/27 remain very relevant for the Council to draw upon
during all missions’ life cycles. In this connection, on countries and regions
considered by both the Council and the Commission, Commission members
would welcome receiving a copy of the Secretary-General’s relevant reports to
the Council with, as far as practicable, enough anticipation to allow timely
Commission input.
I wish to reiterate the readiness of the Peacebuilding Commission to strengthen
its advisory role to the Security Council in matters under the consideration of both
bodies with a view to providing specific, strategic and targeted recommendations, in
line with its mandate on issues relating to peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the
formation, review, drawdown and transition of peacekeeping operations.

21-12904

39/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the
United Nations
Poland would like to thank Ireland for organizing this timely and important
debate. We also express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his statement
and to Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for her insightful and inspiring remarks.
Peacekeeping is a critical contributor to the susta ining peace agenda in all its
dimensions: from conflict prevention and resolution to post-conflict recovery.
Therefore, the withdrawal or drawdown of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
or special political mission is a serious challenge in terms of th e “peace continuum”
both for host countries and for the United Nations. Poland stresses the importance of
transition processes to the sustaining peace agenda and fully supports all actions
aimed at making them more effective and coherent.
Peacekeepers play the central role in delivering and enabling transitions and
preparing the ground for peacebuilding actors. The 2020 Security Council resolution
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture confirmed that effective
peacebuilding requires the cross-pillar commitment of the entire United Nations
system and should be mainstreamed in various United Nations actions at all stages of
conflict. In this vein, we are fully convinced that transition and peacebuilding
considerations should be built into the initial mandate of each mission or operation.
Poland stresses the need for improving the coordinated planning of transition
processes. There is still space to be filled with more effective and earlier collaboration
between United Nations missions, United Nations country teams and other United
Nations actors present in the field. It is particularly important when it comes to joint
planning, financing and operational support. We need to address the resource and
timeline gaps between peacekeeping and other United Nations actors in order to
enhance the coherence on the ground.
Poland also underscores the importance of clear benchmarks and well -defined
conditions for withdrawal. The United Nations needs to be clear about its engagement
in the various phases of conflict resolution and post-conflict recovery.
We are positive that the success of transition depends mostly on United Nations
constructive engagement with host countries and on coordination with regional and
international partners, including financial institutions. It is crucial that, during and
after transition, the United Nations continue to play its role of convening power
among this wide range of stakeholders. In order to maximize the impact of sustaining
peace efforts, the United Nations also needs to work closely with all relevant actors
to define medium-term peacebuilding priorities.
Another key aspect of the transition process is the alignment of peacebuilding
strategies with national recovery strategies and development plans. More attention
needs to be given as well to the economic dimension of the transition process and
peacebuilding, as well as to the impact of economic challenges on sustaining peace.
Developing sustainable funding strategies and exploring innovative financing options
are key in this regard. Moreover, political economy analysis should be strengthened
within peacekeeping missions.
To effectively consolidate peace and security, community engagement needs to
be fostered at the earliest stage of mandate implementation, and especially in the
context of transition planning. United Nations missions and operations should c onsult
systemically with civil society at the national and local levels in order to identify
transition priorities as well as needs in terms of capacity -building. Special attention
40/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

and recognition need to be given to the participation of women and youth, w ho are
frequently part of the movements demanding change but tend to be excluded from
peace and transition processes.
Poland is particularly concerned with transition processes conducted against a
backdrop of security challenges and protection gaps. The protection of civilians
remains a crucial area of Poland’s engagement, and we fully support the idea of
integrating protection issues into transition processes. It is vital to ensure that, when
peacekeepers draw down, the United Nations country team and ot her United Nations
agencies are provided with adequate political and risk analysis, especially regarding
potential violence against civilians.
There is a clear need to establish protection of civilians coordination
mechanisms between United Nations missions, humanitarian and development actors
and host authorities. The creation of a common framework on the protection of
civilians during transitions could be a useful tool in this context. Strategic
communication, quick-impact projects and strengthening the analysis of local-level
conflict dynamics are also key while addressing the protection gaps.
Ahead of the transition process, the approach to the protection of civilians needs
to shift from military-dominated to civilian-led. More attention needs to be paid to
ensuring a good understanding of the protection needs and capacities of the
communities, including through consultations with local civil society, including
women, youth, persons with disabilities and vulnerable groups.
Poland stands ready to endorse any initiative within the United Nations
framework aimed at strengthening the protection of civilians in the context of United
Nations transitions. We fully agree that the United Nations should support the
development of national protection of civilians strategies in order to mitigate the risk
of violence during and after transition. We also call on the Secretariat to ensure the
wide dissemination of lessons learned from the past transitions, with a special
emphasis on protection issues.
If United Nations peacekeeping is to leave the legacy of peace, prevent conflict
relapse and lay the foundations for sustainable development, we need to strengthen
transition processes. Poland calls for the Security Council’s engagement in advancing
the proactive, integrated and forward-looking management of transition processes, in
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission and all relevant United Nations
actors in the field.

21-12904

41/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
Portugal thanks Ireland, in its capacity as Security Council President, for
organizing this timely open debate.
To advance our common agenda and provide effective answers to traditional and
future challenges, we need a twenty-first century United Nations – one that is more
efficient, more nimble, more accountable and more delivery-oriented.
Portugal fully supports the United Nations reform agenda. This, of course,
includes the peace and security reform and the Action for Pe acekeeping agenda, but
also the overall reform agenda in its three strands, all of which are critical for
successful peacekeeping transitions.
We remain a staunch supporter of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
they truly are one of the most effective means at our disposal for maintaining peace
and security.
For peacekeeping operations to also play a valuable role in preserving and
consolidating long-lasting peace, their transitions and drawdowns need to be done in
a coherent and effective way. Only with an integrated approach throughout the whole
peace continuum, based on peace and security, sustainable development and human
rights, can we guarantee sustainable peace. Peacekeeping mandates should continue
to take into consideration peacebuilding activities from the beginning.
The broader United Nations reform is also fundamental for successful
transitions, enabling United Nations country teams to effectively widen their focus
and prioritize the issues of development and support to national priori ties.
The Peacebuilding Commission, with its convening role, is instrumental
throughout this cycle. Through its advisory role, the Commission can provide
informed and realistic peacebuilding perspectives during the consideration of
peacekeeping operations and political missions’ mandates. The Peacebuilding
Commission can also provide synergies and greater coordination within as well as
outside the United Nations system, namely with civil society representatives and
women’s and youth organizations.
Transition planning should start long before transitions effectively take place.
This is crucial to ensure national ownership of the process. Moreover, peacekeeping
mandates should also be flexible in order to adapt to changing circumstances on
the ground, which can be particularly volatile in fragility contexts. Specifically, the
protection of civilians must be regarded as a cross-cutting priority throughout the
conflict cycle, and host Governments should be supported in upholding their
responsibilities in this regard.
The transition or drawdown of a peacekeeping operation or a special political
mission should be a sign of progress in achieving sustainable peace, and not a
consequence of the fatigue or disengagement of the international community.

42/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XXVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation thanks the President for convening today’s timely ministerial
open debate of the Security Council on transitions of the United Nat ions peacekeeping
operations. The Republic of Korea offers its deep appreciation to António Guterres,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the former
President of Liberia, for their presence today and enlightening briefin gs.
Since its inception, peacekeeping has been one of the most effective and visible
instruments for the international community to maintain and promote global peace
and security. More recently, we have underscored the importance of enhancing
peacekeeping operations’ impact, with the launch of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative three years ago and the new phase of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative this year. It is never enough to emphasize that ensuring
a smooth and lasting transition is key to achieving the ultimate goal of peacekeeping:
sustaining peace.
In this vein, my delegation would like to emphasize the following three points
with a view to advancing sustainable and successful transitions of peacekeeping
missions.
First, peacebuilding priorities should be incorporated at all levels of
peacekeeping mandates. The vital work of peacebuilding and addressing the root
causes of conflict should not wait until the drawdown of peacekeeping missions.
Instead, peacebuilding should begin from the first day of the intervention. We need
to discuss and consider the desired end state from the early stages of designing
missions’ mandates.
Second, the Peacebuilding Commission can support the Security Council with
well-coordinated and inclusive transition planning. Using its advisory, bridging and
convening role, the Commission can bring a wide range of stakeholders together and
provide substantial and practical advice to the Council. In addition, holding regular
meetings or sharing advance copies of relevant reports of the Secretary -General with
the Commission can help to systematize its contributions to the Council. As such, we
request the Council to engage more with the Commission when discussing mission
transitions.
Third, transitions must be anchored in the local context to avoid relapse into
conflicts. Lasting peace can only be achieved when local communities are included
in the peace process. On the basis of our experiences with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, Korea learned the
valuable lesson that peacekeepers were able to build strong bonds and trust with host
communities through continued civil-military operations. Such close relationships
with people on the ground are conducive to the peacekeeping operations. Going
forward, we also believe that the engagement platoons can and should play a
significant role in encouraging the participation of marginalized groups, in particular
women and youth.
My delegation would like to conclude by reminding everyone that the upcoming
United Nations peacekeeping ministerial meeting of 2021 in Seoul this December will
provide an invaluable platform to enhance United Nations peacekeeping operations
by sharing good practices and mobilizing concrete pledges. The topics of transitions,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace will be addressed in depth.

21-12904

43/55

S/2021/783

The Republic of Korea would like to reaffirm its driving commitment to
working with the United Nations and all Member States to protect civi lians and
achieve sustainable peace by improving peacekeeping transitions.

44/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Annex XXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
I would like to thank the President for organizing a timely discussio n that
provides an opportunity for reflection on this important topic. It is crucial to underline
that, in the 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture, through General Assembly
resolution 75/201 and Security Council resolution 2558 (2020), the Council
reaffirmed that effective peacebuilding involves the entire United Nations system,
including peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations support and create space for other peacebuilding actors
and contribute to political solutions that advance peacebuilding goals. How a
peacekeeping operation manages a transition shapes the durability of peace. A shared
vision of peace among national actors and the United Nations system, as well as
agreement on the guiding principles and the role of the United Nations in contributing
to this vision, is the baseline for the successful transition of peacekeeping missions.
This shared vision encompasses a common understanding of the “end state” – the
conditions that must be met in order for the mission to leave. Strengthened
cooperation of all the partners aimed at developing this common understanding can
help to set and manage expectations.
The Security Council, in its presidential statement from 2017, recognized that
the process by which a transition is undertaken is crucial, emphasizing the importance
within peacekeeping mandates of clearly defined goals and objectives guided by
specific agreed-upon milestones towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Specific attention was given to how a peacekeeping operation is tasked, including its
engagement on transition-critical issues such as the protection of civilians;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and capacity-building in the security
and justice sectors, as well as how it engages in integrated planning with local and
national authorities, communities and civil society. All of these elements have been
recognized as crucial when building towards a successful and sustainable transition.
A peace operation’s legacy in a country emerging from conflict depends, in part,
on how and whether it has made it possible for local actors and international partners
to succeed in consolidating any gains made during the United Nations mission
presence. United Nations transitions should be planned and managed in a proactive,
integrated and forward-looking manner, resulting in the United Nations being better
positioned to provide effective support to host countries as they progress towards
peace and sustainable development.
Lessons can also be learned from recent transitions, which demonstrate the need
for coherence and cooperation across the United Nations system and with regional,
national and local stakeholders, in particular women as well as youth. Taking a phased
and graduated approach that is in line with the security conditions on the ground and
that fully considers the risks to civilians that arise during peacekeeping transitions
and the capacity and priorities of the national Government and citizens is critical
when cementing a sustainable peace.
During transitions, the Peacebuilding Commission can play an important role in
maintaining international support for a country to address its ongoing peacebuilding
and development needs. The Commission is well positioned to provide a broad -based
political platform for drawing greater international attention and align the United
Nations system and its partners around common goals. The Commission has proved
to be one of the leading platforms for gathering international partners to sustain
momentum and accompany the country’s reform efforts.
21-12904

45/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
First and foremost, my delegation expresses its appreciation to the Permanent
Mission of Ireland for convening this meeting to highlight the imperative nature of
transitioning from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and invariably sustaining hard -won
gains. Peace is often defined as the absence of violence; however, the mere absence
of violence may not lead to sustainable peace, especially when the underlying roots
of violence are not addressed.
We wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres, the former President of Liberia,
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, and the President of the Community Development Association
of the Sudan, Safaa Elagib Adam, for their informative remarks.
As a troop- and police-contributing country, South Africa acknowledges that
United Nations peacekeeping transitions are a phased a nd gradual process that
encompass a range of political and technical issues requiring sustained engagement
by the entire United Nations system. South Africa would like to raise the following:
1.

The importance of developing exit strategies from the outset.

2.

The necessity of national ownership and inclusivity.

3.

The inevitable priority to advance the women and peace and security
agenda.

We need a clear understanding, at inception, of the outcome we seek from
peacekeeping operations. Security Council mandates should contain the elements of
the intended exit strategy which should form part of the long -term political strategy.
We wish to impress that the early development of exit strategies should be done in
collaboration with host Governments. Furthermore, the engagement with host
Governments should include building partnerships with regional organizations and
financial institutions that will be involved in the peacebuilding planning, beyond the
life of the peacekeeping mission. If we are to live up to the aspiration to leave a place
better than we found it, then the drawing down of the military components of missions
should be followed by advancing and expanding development-driven plans.
National ownership, inclusivity and participation are both funda mental and
critical in peacebuilding processes in order to address the needs and concerns of all
segments of society. This principle highlights the importance of engagements between
women, men and young people in conflict prevention, resolution and reconst ruction.
Since clarity precedes success, coherence and cooperation among all stakeholders
will lead to coordinated efforts that avoid the duplication of initiatives and prevent
fragmentation. During the fragile process of transition, missions are to assist the host
Government to achieve political transition, progress towards democratic governance,
the protection and promotion of human rights and sustainable peace, support peace
processes and the implementation of peace agreements, peacebuilding and civilian
protection, and establish the rule of law, as well as mobilize economic and
development assistance and coordinate humanitarian assistance. It is a challenging
process to harmonize the demands for peace, reconciliation and justice in societies
transitioning from conflict to peace. A discussion on transitions would not be
complete without considering the need for a holistic policy framework on transitional
justice.
It remains imperative in transitions that women are not exulted as countries
move from conflict towards sustainable peace. In this regard, the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, as reflected in the resolutions of the
46/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Council, including resolution 2493 (2019), necessitates the facilitation by all Member
States of the full, equal and meaningful inclusion of women in all stages of the peace
process. Women should therefore be included in peacekeeping, the political process
and peacebuilding efforts to ensure that a significant portion of society is not excluded
as countries transition towards peace.
Research conducted by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) has shown that, when women are included
and participate in peace processes, there is a significant increase in the possibility of
peace agreements leading to sustained peace. South Africa views the women and
peace and security agenda as not only a means for women to mediate in conflict
situations but essential to end the use of force as a means of settling disputes.
To conclude, we pay tribute to the men and women who have served in the
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved scores of lives and continue to do so during the m ost unprecedented times, and
we owe them a great deal of gratitude for their efforts.

21-12904

47/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
The establishment and launch of a United Nations peacekeeping miss ion is not
an end in itself, but a temporary measure to resolve a conflict or situation of instability
that requires immediate action. Therefore, from the outset all peacekeeping missions
should come with a defined and realistic exit strategy.
It is therefore necessary that the initial objectives of the mission be well defined,
decisive, and from a practical point of view, achievable. There is no use in
establishing diffuse, impractical or ambiguous objectives. Many times, the
negotiation of a resolution causes us to balance the language to gain greater support
or prevent discussions from being blocked. This type of drafting at the political level
often presents problems at the lower levels, where it must be implemented, especially
for the commander of the operation. While it is always necessary and desirable for
the Chief of Mission to have some freedom of action that allows the objectives of the
mandate to be realigned in the field, we should not put that person in the position of
resolving at the tactical level the lack of precision or definition at the political level.
In drafting the mandate, there should be a balance that facilitates the task of the
subsequent phases.
Once they are established, these objectives should be tied to a series of
measurable targets, so that progress in their achievement can be determined and
evaluated according to objective criteria.
The moment when the transition of a peacekeeping mission should begin should
not be something that we are hoping will happen, but which is sought, hence the
importance of having established some clear objectives, linked to measurable targets
towards which the efforts of the mission will be aimed. A presence in the field for a
lengthy period of time is not only undesirable, but can also becom e
counterproductive. Creating permanent and irreplaceable dependencies on the
mission itself or inhibiting the action of the local authorities, who expect others to
resolve their problems, should be avoided.
One of the fundamental elements throughout the process, from its launch
through the end of the transition, is ownership by the State where the mission is
deployed. There is general agreement on this concept, but it is difficult to put into
practice. It is therefore necessary that from the earliest phas e, what the State needs so
that it can function independently must be identified, in such a way that those needs
are covered through training and capacity-building initiatives.
To these eminently practical aspects (knowledge and availability of resources)
must be added others that, in this case, are difficult to measure, such as the willingness
of the recipients to accept aid and training. A situation where, a s the transition process
ends, a lack of will prevents the accomplishment of tasks for which train ing was given
and for which the necessary means of implementation are available, should be
avoided. One of the possible solutions is to insist on leadership training, directed
appropriately at all levels of administration.
Any transition is a complex process, with a marked crosscutting nature, and thus
coordination of all actors in the field is essential. The various organic units often make
this coordination difficult, including among different agencies of the same
organization. Once again, the clear establishment of a series of realistic, defined and
measurable objectives will facilitate this task. At times the host State of the mission

48/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

itself, especially in the lower levels of its administration, has difficulty in identifying
the complex structures of the various organizations deployed in its territory.
We must be able to conduct a learning and simplification exercise, explaining
at those levels who is in charge of each item, and on the other hand, endeavor to reach
other international organizations in coordinating efforts, not just the agencies or
bodies deployed by the United Nations. This can be especially complicated, given the
differing interests that often come together in the field.
We definitely believe that the basis for realistic and timely tra nsitions in
peacekeeping missions is adequate planning before their establishment and launch.
The final objective of the mission is not to perpetuate itself, but to give way to the
subsequent stages, for which it is necessary from the beginning to design a clear exit
strategy. The mission is part of a much broader, crosscutting process, with various
actors, in which coordination among them all is essential, along with ownership from
the initial stages by the authorities and the host State of the mission.

21-12904

49/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations, Pascale Baeriswyl
[Original: French]
Switzerland thanks Ireland for organizing this open debate and the speakers for
their contributions.
“Transitions and withdrawals of peace operations deserve our full attention in
order to prevent a return to violence in countries concerned”. This imperative was
once again emphasized at the third strategic dialogue of the Secretary -General’s
Peacebuilding Fund held last week in Switzerland. We welcome the work of various
United Nations actors to make transitions more effective and inclusive. Transitions
do not imply a reduction of effort, but rather require increased engagement with
peacebuilding instruments.
Switzerland would like to highlight the following elements of a successful
transition:
First, any transition must be based on a strategic vision for the future of the
country. This vision should come from the host State and involve the various actors
concerned, including civil society. The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women should no longer be in question. The wish to transition to a less robust
international presence should come from the host State first of all, which should be
in a position to take on the tasks performed by the United Nations. The joint strategy
on the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO can serve as an example of
a gradual transition. We call on the Security Council to consider national needs and
prioritize tasks in the mandates through such a sequential approach. The United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission can also support the establishment of national
priorities in transition contexts, as the example of Liberia shows. It is in the Council’s
interest to fully consider the recommendations of the Peacebuilding Commission in
the contexts on its agenda.
Second, given the risks associated with the transition and withdrawal of peace
operations, protection of civilians and respect for human rights must be ensured at all
times. The Government should assume its primary responsibility to protect.
Strengthening its capacities is key. In that regard, Switzerland supports the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants as well as demining,
for example in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Sudan. Our
experience shows that meeting the challenges of protecting civilians requires a needs
assessment, a common approach by United Nations agencies, and human rights
monitoring. We encourage the Council to use all the instruments at its disposal,
including new technologies, to strengthen the protection of civilians and human rights
in contexts of transition.
Third, peace operations and the wider United Nations presence must be
equipped with mandates adapted to the transition progress. Independent strategic
reviews of missions as recently requested for the United Nations Security Force for
Abyei are relevant tools for the Council. The Council should ensure increased
flexibility of United Nations missions to respond to emergin g risks and needs. It
should also support the strategic communication capacities on the role of the United
Nations in order to manage the expectations of local populations, as outlined in the
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
Lastly, to ensure successful transitions, adequate funding is essential. With
transition contexts as one of its three priorities, the Peacebuilding Fund plays a unique
50/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

role in this regard. As a donor, as well as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
and a candidate for the Security Council, Switzerland remains engaged in transition
contexts.

21-12904

51/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of the Irish Security Council
presidency to hold this open debate and expresses its gratitude to the briefers for their
presentations.
The issue of transitions has a very practical meaning for Ukraine as an activ e
troop and police contributor to the United Nations peacekeeping operations. Given
our experience in the missions which have completed their tasks and withdrawn, such
as the United Nations Mission in Liberia in 2018, this phase in itself marks progress
on the path towards peace.
Making this progress sustainable and irreversible remains a main task, and there
are several important prerequisites to this end.
First of all, there is a need to ensure continuity of efforts by maintaining the
high level of the international attention to a particular situation following the
drawdown or closure of a peacekeeping operation. Despite the improved security
environment on the ground, peacebuilding must be underpinned by disarmament and
security sector reform, reconciliation and accountability, promoting and ensuring
human rights, the protection of vulnerable groups, including women and children, the
strengthening of national institutions and the curbing of corruption.
The engagement of international stakeholders, including financial institutions
and other donors, will also be helpful in seeking efficient solutions to the hardships
in countries emerging from conflict related to economic devastation and poverty, the
destruction of infrastructure, ecological challenges and migration.
Crisis situations and post-conflict recovery also demand a tailored approach,
taking into due consideration the root causes of conflict. This is particularly important
in the case of inter-State conflicts.
It is necessary, while conducting all peacebuilding activities, to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including the principles
of sovereign equality, territorial integrity and the political independence of Member
States. Viable transition strategies should include the entire scope of conflict drivers,
including the violation of the above principles in the case of external aggression and
occupation.
It will be instrumental in responding to the risks posed by attempts of a party to
a conflict that was an aggressor State to further pursue its aggressive policies towards
another State by affecting its post-conflict rehabilitation through illegitimate political
demands and the use of proxy forces.
The issue of access to the affected population should a lso be at the core. The
situation whereby all humanitarian organizations are forced to stop their activities on
occupied territories must be treated as unacceptable.
National ownership should be the essence of the peacebuilding activities. As the
responsibilities have to be transferred to national actors, taking into account their
vision and priorities remains essential.
It is crucial that the entire United Nations system remain closely engaged in
supporting countries in transition and focus on cross-pillar coordination, including
development, peace and security and human rights, and that partnership with regional
organizations, in particular the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the African Union, be further strengthened. As it was rightly pointed out in the
52/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

concept note for this debate, “all demonstrate the need for coherence and cooperation
across the United Nations system and with regional, national and local stakeholders,
particularly women as well as youth”.
Ukraine recognizes the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission as a
dedicated intergovernmental advisory body to bring a strategic approach and
coherence to international peacebuilding efforts and encourages the Security Council
to further utilize the Commission’s capacities as a platform to accompany transition
processes.
In 2020, Ukraine was part of the consensus on the General Assembly resolution
on reviewing the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, which reaffirmed our
common commitments to improving mission transitions and drawdowns.
Ensuring peace remains a critical challenge today. Even the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic that prompted a call to end hostilities worldwide has changed
little in today’s world affairs, where armed conflicts are stil l a recurring feature. The
ongoing Russian armed aggression against Ukraine that resulted in the attempted
annexation of Crimea and the further incitement of the armed conflict in Donbas serve
as a powerful example.
Ukraine has always been a strong and reliable partner of the Organization in
peacekeeping activities and will remain its steadfast supporter and contributor,
including in their transition phase. We believe that our collective success in
peacekeeping depends on all partners playing their respective roles with unwavering
commitment.

21-12904

53/55

S/2021/783

Annex XXXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
As the United Nations faces the drawdown of several peace operations, it is
imperative that we draw on lessons learned on how to execute coherent transition
processes and to secure the gains made from years of United Nations engagement.
Transitioning from United Nations peacekeeping is important and necessary. If not
done properly, however, these transitions could result in fragile political,
humanitarian and security situations. Clear, tailored and realistic transition strategies
should be designed to set a solid basis for sustaining peace and building back resilient,
stable and inclusive societies. Transition strategies should prioritize the protection of
civilians, reinforce the capacity of host countries and guarantee the active
participation of women and youth.
Successful transition strategies begin with the Security Council. Mission
mandates need to outline clear objectives for peace operations. They need to be
realistic and achievable and must set the foundations for an exit strategy from their
inception. The best exit strategy is a good mission strategy.
The United Arab Emirates would like to suggest the following recommendations
for more coherent transition processes:
• First, the Security Council should be inclusive when planning transition
strategies of peace operations. It should extensively engage with host States to
better address their needs and make sure that the process is demand -driven and
not supply-driven. To that end, the Council should consider carrying out more
systematically missions to the field to interact directly with relevant
stakeholders. Where in-person visits cannot be arranged, the Council should
consider organizing virtual visits.
• Second, peace operations should work together with United Nations country
teams to make sure that there is continuity in critical streams of work. The
United Arab Emirates would like to emphasize the importance of the United
Nations delivering as one and incentivizing coordination and information sharing during transitions. A key area of potential development is improving the
Security Council’s relationship with field-based actors beyond the leadership of
peace operations, notably including resident coordinators and representatives of
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
• Third, missions should explicitly develop strategies to leave reliable
infrastructure behind for host communities whenever that is feasible. Renewable
energy is a strong example, since the large demand profile of the United Nations
can anchor local projects and enable initial financing. The United Arab Emirates
is working with Norway, the International Renewable Energy Agency and other
partners to increase the uptake of renewable energy by peace operations. Given
its benefits to local communities, including sustainabil ity, reliability and costeffectiveness, this infrastructure can be part of the legacy of peace operations
following drawdown.
• Finally, successful transitions require an integrated approach to peace
operations, which engages local communities, especially women and youth.
Security Council resolution 2538 (2020) recognized that women peacekeepers
contribute to more effective community engagement. This means that women’s
roles in peacekeeping have to be normalized and their participation increased.
In collaboration with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak
54/55

21-12904

S/2021/783

Women, Peace and Security Initiative of the United Arab Emirates has been
supporting this aim through providing training to hundreds of women cadets
from Africa, Asia and the Middle East and North Africa region since 2019. The
third cohort of training is planned to commence in early 2022.
To conclude, the United Arab Emirates firmly believes that a successful
transition is the ultimate sign of the success of a peace operation. This holistic
approach will be one of the priorities of the United Arab Emirates in the Security
Council next year, and we look forward to working with Member States and the
United Nations system in ensuring sustainable transitions that are inclusive and
prevent the recurrence of conflict.

21-12904

55/55
