A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/138
1 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.1)]
53/138. Effective implementation of international instruments on human rights,
including reporting obligations under international instruments on
human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/118 of 12 December 1997, as well as other relevant resolutions, and taking
note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/27 of 17 April 1998,1
Recalling also the relevant paragraphs of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,2
Reaffirming that the full and effective implementation of United Nations human rights instruments is of
major importance to the efforts of the Organization, pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,3 to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect.
A.
2

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3

Resolution 217 A (III).

99-77041

/...

A/RES/53/138
Page 2

Considering that the effective functioning of the human rights treaty bodies established pursuant to
United Nations human rights instruments is indispensable for the full and effective implementation of such
instruments,
Conscious of the importance of coordination of the human rights promotion and protection activities of
the United Nations bodies active in the field of human rights,
Recalling that the effectiveness of the human rights treaty bodies in encouraging the realization by
States parties of their obligations under United Nations human rights instruments requires constructive
dialogue, which should be based on the reporting process supplemented by information from all relevant
sources and aimed at assisting States parties in identifying solutions to human rights problems,
Recalling also the initiatives taken by a number of human rights treaty bodies to elaborate early warning
measures and urgent procedures, within their mandates, with a view to preventing the occurrence or
recurrence of serious human rights violations,
Reaffirming its responsibility for the effective functioning of human rights treaty bodies, and reaffirming
also the importance of:
(a) Promoting the effective functioning of the periodic reporting by States parties to those instruments,
(b) Securing sufficient financial, human and information resources to overcome the under-resourcing of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which impedes the ability of the
human rights treaty bodies to carry out their mandates effectively,
(c) Promoting greater efficiency and effectiveness through better coordination of the activities of the
United Nations bodies active in the field of human rights, taking into account the need to avoid unnecessary
duplication and overlapping of their mandates and tasks,
(d) Addressing questions of both reporting obligations and financial implications when elaborating any
further instruments on human rights,
Concerned that the lack of adequate resources should not impede the effective functioning of the human
rights treaty bodies, including in regard to their ability to work in the applicable working languages,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the effective implementation of international
instruments on human rights, including reporting obligations under international instruments on human
rights,4
1. Welcomes the submission of the reports of the persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies on
their ninth5 and tenth6 meetings, held at Geneva from 25 to 27 February and 14 to 18 September 1998,
respectively, and takes note of their conclusions and recommendations;

4

A/53/469.

5

A/53/125, annex.

6

A/53/432, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/138
Page 3

2. Encourages each treaty body to give careful consideration to the relevant conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report of the persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies;
3. Welcomes the submission to the Commission on Human Rights of the final report of the
independent expert on enhancing the long-term effectiveness of the United Nations human rights treaty
monitoring system7 and of the report of the Secretary-General containing the comments and observations of
Governments, United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and
interested persons on the report of the independent expert, as well as his views on the legal, administrative
and other implications of the recommendations made in the report,8 taking into account further developments;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to solicit the views of Governments, United Nations
bodies, the specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and interested persons on the final report of
the independent expert and to submit a further report thereon, including his own views on the legal,
administrative and other implications of the recommendations made in the report, taking into account further
developments;
5. Encourages ongoing efforts to identify measures for more effective implementation of the United
Nations human rights instruments;
6. Emphasizes the need to ensure financing and adequate staff and information resources for the
operations of the human rights treaty bodies, and, with this in mind:
(a) Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General provide adequate resources in respect of each
human rights treaty body;
(b) Calls upon the Secretary-General to make the most efficient use of existing resources and to seek
the resources necessary to give the human rights treaty bodies adequate administrative support and better
access to technical expertise and relevant information;
(c) Also calls upon the Secretary-General to seek, in the next biennium, the resources within the United
Nations regular budget necessary to give the human rights treaty bodies adequate administrative support and
better access to technical expertise and relevant information without diverting resources from the
development programmes and activities of the United Nations;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the revised plan of action to strengthen the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child9 and the plan of action to strengthen the implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,10 recalls the importance of administering
those plans in accordance with established United Nations procedures, welcomes the information provided by
the Secretary-General on the implementation of those plans, and requests him to include in his report
prepared pursuant to the present resolution further information in this regard;

7

E/CN.4/1997/74, annex.

8

E/CN.4/1998/85 and Add.1 and Corr.1.

9

Resolution 44/25, annex.

10

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
/...

A/RES/53/138
Page 4

8. Notes with interest the work being done by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on a plan of action to enhance the resources available to all human rights treaty bodies;
9. Reaffirms the need for human rights treaty bodies to better complement each other in their work,
and emphasizes that the universal ratification of international human rights treaties containing reporting
obligations adopted within the framework of the United Nations system is important for the realization of that
complementarity;
10. Welcomes the continuing efforts by the human rights treaty bodies and the Secretary-General aimed
at streamlining, rationalizing, rendering more transparent and otherwise improving reporting procedures, and
urges the Secretary-General, the treaty bodies and the meetings of persons chairing the treaty bodies to
continue to examine ways of reducing the duplication of reporting required under the different instruments,
without impairing the quality of reporting, and of generally reducing the reporting burden on States parties;
11. Takes note with appreciation, in this regard, of the efforts of the persons chairing the human rights
treaty bodies, at their ninth and tenth meetings, to propose appropriate reforms of the reporting system with a
view to, inter alia, reducing the reporting burden on States parties while maintaining the quality of reporting,
and encourages them to continue these efforts, including through the continued examination of the benefits of
reports focused on a limited range of issues and of opportunities for harmonizing the general guidelines
regarding the form and content of reports, the timing of consideration of reports and the methods of work of
the treaty bodies;
12. Invites the Chairperson of the periodic meetings of the persons chairing the human rights treaty
bodies to submit the reports of the meetings to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
13. Welcomes the initiative undertaken by the persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies of
inviting representatives of Member States to participate in a dialogue within the framework of their periodic
meetings, and encourages them to continue this practice in the future;
14. Calls upon the Secretary-General to complete as soon as possible the detailed analytical study
comparing the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,10 the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,10 the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,11 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
9
Women,12 the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,13 which is being prepared with a view to identifying
duplication of reporting required under those instruments;
15. Urges States parties to contribute, individually and through meetings of States parties, to
identifying and implementing ways of further streamlining, rationalizing, avoiding duplication in and
otherwise improving reporting procedures;
16. Welcomes the publication of the revised Manual on Human Rights Reporting;14

11

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

12

Resolution 34/180, annex.

13

Resolution 39/46, annex.

14

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.GV.97.0.16.
/...

A/RES/53/138
Page 5

17. Underlines the importance of providing technical assistance to a State, upon its request, in the
process of ratifying human rights instruments and in the preparation of its initial reports;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to compile in a single volume all the general guidelines regarding
the form and content of reports to be submitted by States parties that have been issued by the Human Rights
Committee, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and the Committee against Torture;
19. Reiterates its concern about the increasing backlog of reports on the implementation by States
parties of certain United Nations instruments on human rights and about delays in consideration of reports by
the treaty bodies;
20. Also reiterates its concern about the large number of overdue reports under the United Nations
instruments on human rights, and again urges States parties to make every effort to meet their reporting
obligations;
21. Invites States parties that have been unable to comply with the requirements to submit their initial
report to avail themselves of technical assistance;
22. Urges all States parties whose reports have been examined by human rights treaty bodies to
provide adequate follow-up to the observations and final comments of the treaty bodies on their reports;
23. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to continue to identify specific possibilities for
technical assistance, to be provided at the request of the State concerned, in the regular course of their work
of reviewing the periodic reports of States parties;
24. Recalls the recommendation by the meeting of persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies that
treaty bodies urge each State party to translate, publish and make widely available in its territory the full text
of the concluding observations on its reports to the treaty bodies;
25. Welcomes the contribution to the work of the human rights treaty bodies made by the specialized
agencies and other United Nations bodies, and invites the specialized agencies, other United Nations bodies
and the treaty bodies to continue to pursue further cooperation between them;
26. Notes that efforts continue to be made at coordination and cooperation between the human rights
treaty bodies and the special procedures, rapporteurs, representatives, experts and working groups of the
Commission on Human Rights and the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities of the Commission, all acting within their respective mandates;
27. Recognizes the important role played by non-governmental organizations in all parts of the world
in the effective implementation of all human rights instruments, and encourages the exchange of information
between the human rights treaty bodies and such organizations;
28. Recalls, with regard to the election of the members of the human rights treaty bodies, the
importance of giving consideration to equitable geographical distribution of membership and to the
representation of the principal legal systems and of bearing in mind that the members shall be elected and
shall serve in their personal capacity and shall be of high moral character, acknowledged independence and
/...

A/RES/53/138
Page 6

recognized competence in the field of human rights, and encourages States parties, individually and through
meetings of States parties, to consider how to give better effect to these principles;
29. Takes note of the discussion of the payment of honorariums to the members of the human rights
treaty bodies included in the report of the Secretary-General on the effective implementation of international
instruments on human rights, including reporting obligations under international instruments on human
rights,4 and of other work being done by the Secretary-General on this subject;
30. Encourages the Economic and Social Council, as well as its functional commissions and their
subsidiary bodies, other United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies to consider the feasibility of
participation by representatives of the human rights treaty bodies in their meetings;
31. Welcomes the continuing emphasis by the persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies that the
enjoyment of the human rights of women should be monitored closely by each treaty body within the purview
of its mandate, and, in this context, takes note of the recommendation made at their tenth meeting15 that the
treaty bodies take full account of the recommendations contained in the report prepared by the Division for
the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat;16
32. Also welcomes the contributions of the human rights treaty bodies, within their mandates, to the
prevention of violations of human rights, in the context of their consideration of reports submitted under their
respective treaties;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on
measures taken to implement the present resolution, on obstacles to its implementation and on measures
taken or planned to ensure financing and adequate staff and information resources for the effective operation
of the human rights treaty bodies;
34. Decides to continue to give priority consideration at its fifty-fifth session to the conclusions and
recommendations of the meetings of persons chairing human rights treaty bodies, in the light of the
deliberations of the Commission on Human Rights, under the item entitled “Human rights questions”.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

15

A/53/432, annex, para. 53.

16

HRI/MC/1998/6.
