UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/21
25 April 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3659th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has taken note of the letter dated 12 April 1996
from the Secretary-General to the President of the Council on the present
situation in Burundi (S/1996/313), in response to the request to the
Secretary-General in resolution 1049 (1996) to keep the Council informed on
the situation.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the recent degeneration
of security conditions and political cooperation in Burundi. The Council
condemns all acts of violence. The Council is equally concerned at
reported statements calling for the arming of civilians which could lead to
grave consequences. The dramatic increase in violence throughout the
country already severely inhibits humanitarian aid and could have a
negative effect on the donors’ capacity to implement development assistance
in support of the search by the people of Burundi for reconciliation and
rehabilitation.
"The Security Council urges the authorities and all parties in Burundi
to set aside their differences and demonstrate the necessary cohesion,
unity and political will for settlement of the conflict by peaceful means.
The Council calls upon all Burundians to renounce the use of violence and
to engage in a comprehensive dialogue to ensure a peaceful future for the
people of Burundi.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the widespread purchase
and use of weapons by Burundians, in particular the laying of landmines.
"The Security Council looks forward to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in the report which it requested by 1 May 1996 on the
progress towards commencement of the National Debate and other initiatives
for comprehensive political dialogue and national reconciliation. The
Council extends its full support for and confidence in the efforts of the

96-10532 (E)

250496

/...

S/PRST/1996/21
English
Page 2

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and those of former
President Nyerere and other envoys to facilitate negotiations to resolve
the present crisis.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with paragraph 13 of resolution 1049 (1996), to expedite consultations with
Member States concerned and the Organization of African Unity, as
appropriate, on contingency planning both for the steps that might be taken
to support a comprehensive dialogue and for a rapid humanitarian response
in the event of widespread violence or serious deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in Burundi.
"The Security Council underlines its commitment to follow events in
Burundi closely and resolves to consider further all relevant options for
an appropriate response by the international community upon receipt of the
impending report of the Secretary-General."

-----
