General Assembly-Forty-first Session

200

gees and displaced persons in all its aspects, including its
root causes;
2. Invites Governments and international organizations to intensify their co-operation and assistance in
world-wide efforts to address the serious problem of mass
exoduses of refugees and displaced persons;
3. Welcomes the special interest which the SecretaryGeneral has taken in this question, and reiterates its request to him to follow closely developments in the field of
human rights and mass exoduses;
4. Encourages the efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General to enable the United Nations to anticípate
and react more adequately and speedily to cases requiring
humanitarian assistance, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General on the work ofthe Organization 140 submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session;
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to keep
the question ofhuman rights and mass exoduses under review with a view to making appropriate recommendations
concerning the further measures to be taken in this matter;
6. Decides to review the question of human rights and
mass exoduses at its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/149.

Human rights in the administration of justice

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies embodied in articles 3, 5, 9, JO
and 11 ofthe Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 2 as
well as the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Política] Rights, 22 in particular article 6,
which explicitly states that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Guided also by the relevant principies embodied in the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment 141 and in the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forros of
Racial Discrimination, 3
Calling attention to the Declaration of Basic Principies
of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power1 42 and
the safeguards guaranteeing protection of the rights of
those facing the death penalty, approved by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1984/50 of 25 May
1984 and endorsed by the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention ofCrime and the Treatment ofOffenders, 143
Calling attention a/so to the Basic Principies on the Independence of the Judiciary, 144 the Code of Conduct for
Law Enforcement Officials 117 and the Standard Mínimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 145
Considering the importance of progress with regard to
the draft Body of Principies for the Protection of Ali Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment,

140 !bid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplnnent No. / (A/ 39/ 1).

14 1 Resolution 39/46, annex.

142 Resolution 40/34, annex.
143 Sec Seventh United Nario11s Congrn., un

rhe Prevenriun of Cnme
and rhe Trearmenr of Offinders. Mi/an. 26 Augusr-6 Seplember /985:
report prepared by rhe Sccretariar (Unitcd Nations puhlication, Sale,
No. E.86.IV.J), chap. l, sect. E.IS
144 !bid., sect. D.2.
145 Firsr United Natio11s Congress 011 rhc Preventiun of Crime and rhe
Treatment of OJJender.1, Geneva, 22 Augu.11-3 Seprember /955: reporr
prepared by rhe Secretariar (United Nations puhlication, Sales No.
1956.IV.4), anncx IA.

Recalling its resolutions 2858 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971, 3144 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 and 40/146 of
13 December 1985 on human rights in the administration
of justice,
Acknowledging the important work accomplished by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control at its ninth
session and by the Economic and Social Council, as reflected in Council resolution 1986/10 of 21 May 1986,
Convinced of the need for further co-ordinated and concerted action in promoting respect for human rights in the
administration of justice,
1. Deplores the continued use of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, prohibited under international law, and strongly condemns the practice of summary or arbitrary executions;
2. Welcomes the recommendations made by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1986/10 on the
more effective application of the Declaration of Basic
Principies of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of
Power, the Basic Principies on the Independence of the
Judiciary, the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the safeguards guaranteeing protection of the
rights of those facing the death penalty;
3. Welcomes a/so the recommendations made by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1986/10 on
the prevention and investigation of extra-legal, arbitrary
or summary executions and on new developments in the
area of human rights in criminal justice and international
co-operation, including the role of lawyers and model
agreements in criminal justice;
4. Encourages the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights to give urgent consideration to
the issue of the independence and impartiality of the
judiciary, jurors and assessors and the independence of
lawyers, taking into account the report of its Special Rapporteur on this subject; 146
5. Reiterates its call upon Member States to spare no
effort in providing for adequate mechanisms, procedures
and resources so as to ensure the more effective implementation of existing standards, both in legislation and in
practice;
ó. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist
Member States, at their request, in implementing these
standards;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
employ his best endeavours in cases where the safeguards
guaranteeing protection of the rights of those facing the
death penalty are violated and to give his full support to
the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission so as to
permit him to respond effectively to such violations and to
promote the safeguards;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council and,
through it, the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control to keep these matters under constant review and to
continue to give special attention to effective ways and
means of implementing existing standards and to new developments in this arca;
9. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizatiorn, of the U nited Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned,
to cnntinue to co-operate with the Secretary-General in
these endeavours;

14, E/CN.4/Suh.2/19H5/18 and

Add.1-h.

VI.

10. Decides to consider at its forty-second session the
question of human rights in the administration of justice.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/150.

201

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Considering that the year 1988 will mark the fortieth anniversary ofthe Universal Declaration oí Human Rights, 2
which, conceived as a common standard of achievement
for ali peoples and ali nations and having provided the basis for the development of the International Covenants on
Human Rights, 24 has been and rightly continues to be a
fundamental source of inspiration for national and international efforts for the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling, in this respect, its resolution 217 A (111) of
10 December 1948, by which it officially proclaimed the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and its resolution 36/169 of 16 December 1981, concerning the observance of the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, as
well as its resolution 38/57 of 9 December 1983, relating
to the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration,
Convinced ofthe continuing need to promote the universal observance and enjoyment of human rights, which
contribute to peaceful and friendly relations among nations,
1. Decides to celebrate in 1988 the fortieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations to take appropriate measures,
such as those set forth in the annex to the present resolution, and to support appropriate activities aimed at encouraging the promotion of the universal observance and
enjoyment of civil and political rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural rights;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to consider including in his proposed programme budget for the biennium
1988-1989 appropriate activities, such as those indicated
in the annex to the present resolution, to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration;
4. Requests the Department of Public lnformation of
the Secretariat to disseminate appropriate public information, broadcasting and audio-visual material designed to
draw attention to, and emphasize the importance of, the
Declaration and the role played and the work done by the
United Nations to ensure the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Invites the United Nations Postal Administration to
issue commemorative postage stamps on the occasion of
the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session an ítem entitled "Fortieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights";
7. Further decides to devote one plenary meeting during its forty-third session to the celebration of the fortieth
anniversary of the Declaration, which falls on 10 December 1988, and requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary preparations for the programme of that meeting.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

ANNEX
Recommended measures for the celebration of the fortieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
l. The following measures are recommended for possible action at
t he national level:
(a) Formal proclamation of 10 December 1988 as Human Rights
Day;

(b) lssuance of special messages on 10 December 1988 by heads of
State or Government or other prominent civil personalities;
(e) Spccial meetings of parliamentary and other public and prívate
institutions on Human Rights Da}.:
(d) Special ..:onsideration by States which have not yet ratified or
acceded to the international instruments of the United Nations in the
field of human rights to become parties to those instruments;

(e) Establishment or strengthemng of national or local institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights and encouragement of
teaching programmes on human rights at various educational levels;
(/) Dissemination of the text of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in national languages, including the languages of minorities;
(g) Issuance during 1988 of human rights postage stamps, first-day
covers and special cancellations;
(h) Participation by non-governmental organizations in the celebration of the anniversary, and the organization of activities by such organizations;
(1) Organization of activities within the framework and in support of
curren! decades and international years being prepared on human rights
issues.
2. It is rewmmended that the following measures, among others,
should be taken by the Secretary-General at the United Nations leve!:
(a) Issuance by 10 December 1988 of updated versions in ali official
languages of the United Nations of the publication entitled Human
Rights: A Compilation of lnternational lnstruments; 113
(b) lssuance by 10 December 1988 of updated versions in ali official
languages of the United Nations of the publication entitled United Nations Action in the Field of Human Rights: 141

(e) Organization of commemorative events, as in past practice, at
United Nations Headquarters and at the United Nations Offices at
Geneva and Vienna, as well as at Nairobi and at United Nations information centres, on or around 10 December 1988;
(d) Organization in 1988, within the framework of the programme of
advisory services in the field ofhuman rights, of an international seminar
011 the teaching of human rights;

(e) Adoption of arrangements for the award of human rights prizes,
as envisaged in recommendation C of the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2217 A (XXI) of 19 December 1966.

41/151.

Measures to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of ali migrant
workers

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming once more the permanent validity of the
principies and standards set forth in the basic instruments
regarding the international protection of human rights, in
particular in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,2 the International Covenants on Human Rights, 24
the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali
Forros of Racial Discrimination 3 and the Convention on
the Elimination of Ali Forros of Discrimination against
Women, 60
Bearing in mind the principies and standards established
within the framework ofthe International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, and the importance ofthe task carried out in connection with migrant workers and their

147 llnited

Nations publication. Sales No. E.83.XIV.2.

r
