VI.

Resoludou adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

concerned within the United Nations system to comment
on ways and means of implementing the International
Plan of Action on Aging and, in particular, on the desirability and viability of elaborating a United Nations programme for the implementation of the Plan of Action, and
to prepare a report on the basis of these comments for submission to the Economic and Social Council at its first reg:Jlar session of 1986;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to include in
that report a full analysis of the programmatic and financial aspects of activities undertaken by all organs, bodies
and organizations of the United Nations system under the
Plan of Action since its inception;
3. Invites interested non-governmental organizatiom
in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to provide, through the Secretary-General, information
and documentation that will facilitate this work;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to consider the report at its first regular session of 1986 and to
submit appropriate recommendations to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session;
5. Decides to consider at its forty-first session the recommendations of the Economic and Social Council as a
matter of high priority.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/31. Implementation of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons and
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by
which it adopted the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, 54 37/53 of3 December 1982, by
which, inter a/ia, it proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, 38/28 of 22
November 1983, in which it recognized the United
Nations Trust Fund for the International Year of Disabled
Persons as an important instrument for the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the desirability of the continuation of
the Trust Fund throughout the Decade, and 39/26 of 23
November 1984, by which it adopted further specific
measures for implementation of the World Programme of
Action,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/35 of 29 May 1985, in which, inter a/ia, the Secretary-General was requested, in order to facilitate contributions by Governments, to include, on an annual basis, the
United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year of
Disabled Persons among the programmes for which funds
are pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities,
Noting with satisfaction the concrete measures already
carried out by the Governments of Member States, the
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations to implement the
objectives of the World Programme of Action within the
framework of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the United
Nations system and by non-governmental organizations
concerned to establish a monitoring procedure and prepare
a consolidated questionnaire to monitor the implementation of the World Programme of Action,
S4 Af37/351/Add.l and Add.1/Corr.L annex. sect. Vlll. recommendat1on
I (IV).

203

Noting with concern that, in spite of a number of contnbutions made by Governments between 198 l and 1985
and constant appeals by the General Assembly and other
United Nations organs to contribute to the financing of
activities for the disabled, progress towards the improvement of the situation of the disabled in the developing
countries has been slow.
Noting with serious concern the alarming situation of
disabled persons in developing countries and the critical
economic situation in a number of countries, in particular
in Africa and Latin America and the least developed
countries,
Mindful that, since developing countries are experiencing difficulties in mobilizing resources, international cooperation should be encouraged to assist national efforts m
implementing the World Programme of Action and the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the World Programme of Action
concerning Disabled Persons and the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, 55
Expressing its appreciation to Member States and organizations, in particular to the twenty-five States that have
donated $1.6 million over the past few years,
Expressing its appreciation of the useful role played by
the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year
of Disabled Persons in implementing the World Programme of Action,
I. Urges all Member States and other donors to consider further generous contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Year of Disabled Persons;
2. Expresses its appreciation to Member States that
have established national committees or similar bodies to
co-ordinate activities in the field of disability and encourages all Member States to do so;
3. Invites Member States to reinforce national committees as focal points for the United Nations Decade of
Disabled Persons, to stimulate activities at the national
level, to mobilize public opinion on behalf of the Decade,
to participate in the implementation of disability projects
with regard to the International Year of Disabled Persons
and to assist in monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons;
4. Encourages Member States to translate the World
Programme of Action into national languages;
5. Invites Member States, in close collaboration with
the national committees and non-governmental organizations concerned, to submit their replies to the questionnaire for the first round of monitoring and implementing
the World Programme of Action to the Secretary-General
as soon as possible for inclusion in his report on the evaluation of progress at mid-Decade, to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session;
6. Urges the Secretary-General to comply with paragraphs 157 and 158 of the World Programme of Action;
7. Invites all States to give high priority to considera-•
tton of projects concerning the prevention of disabilities,
rehabilitation and the equalization of the opportunities of
disabled persons within the framework of bilateral assistance;
8. Reiterates the need to give greater publicity to the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons and calls
upon Member States, national committees and non-governmental organizations to assist in publicizing the Decade
by all appropriate means;
5S A/40/728 and Corr. I.

204

General Assembly - Fortieth Session

9. Takes note of the measures taken by the bodies and
organizations of the United Nations system to promote
equal employment opportunities for disabled persons and
urges them to continue their efforts m this field;
I 0. Endorses, in particular, the terms of reference proposed in the report of the Secretary-General5 5 for the
United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year of
Disabled Persons, henceforth to be called the Voluntar}
Fund for the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons:
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
administer donated funds, using them for projects under
the present structure of the Trust Fund. and m addition to
make new provisions in order to offer a selection of projects to donor countries which might be willing to finance a
particular programme under the "Special Purpose Contributions";
12. Reaffirms that the resources of the Trust Fund
should be used to support catalytic and innovative activities in order to implement further the objectives of the
World Programme of Action within the framework of the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, with priority
given, as appropriate, to programmes and projects of the
least developed countries;
13. Requests all bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system administering assistance projects to take
into account the concerns of disabled persons in their projects for the rehabilitation of the disabled and their integration into society, as well as to include disabled persons in
their overall planning objectives;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the imple.
mentation of the present resolution:
15. Further requests the Secretary-General to mclude
in the report requested in paragraph 14 above information
on preparations for the meeting of experts to evaluate progress at the mid-Decade, as provided for in paragraph 16
of resolution 37/53 and paragraph 13 of resolution 39/26,
as ~ell as information on the establishment of inter-organ1zat1onal task forces, as recommended by the Advisory
Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons
at its third and fourth sessions and by the General Assembly in paragraph 17 of its resolution 36/77 in order to provide support services for the exchange of technical information and transfer of technological know-how and other
activities in the fields of prevention, rehabilitation and
equalization of opportunities in developing countries
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda nf its
forty-first session the item entitled "Implementation of the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons
and United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons"
96th plenary meetrng
29 Novemher 1985

40/32. Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 351171 of 15 December 1980 m
which it endorsed the Caracas Declaration, annexed· to
that resolution, and urged implementation of the conclusions relating to the new perspectives for international cooperation in crime prevention in the context of development adopted by the Sixth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,'''
_ 56 See .\~1xth_L'r:utt•d Natwns ( ,,ngrt'Ss un thi' l'rt.'~·,•nflur1 oj ('r1me und /!1,

Treatment o(Ojjendt'rs. Carac/J.\ ..'5 fo!(ust s Septemb,,, /980 rt'pwt pre
pared by the Secreranat (l 1rnted "'-la11on•- puhlicaHon Sales No F R I IV
chap I. sect C

Recalhng also its resolution 36/ 2 I of 9 November 1981.
in which the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Pre-

vention of Cnme rnd the Treatment of Offenders was
mvited to consider current and emerging trends in crime
prevention and criminal justice, with a view to defining
new guiding principles for the future course of crime prevention and cnminal justice in the context of development
needs. the goals of the International Development Strategy
for the Third Unill'd Nations Development Decade8 and
the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 21
takmg into account the political, economic, social and cultural circumstances and traditions of each country and the
need for crime pre\ ention and criminal justice system'i to
he rnnsonant with the principles of social justice.
Recalling further its resolution 39/ I l 2 of 14 December
1984. in which the Secretary-General was requested to
ensure that the substantive and organizational work of the
Seventh Congress was fully adequate for its successful outiOme.

!: mphasizrng the responsibility assumed by the United
Nations in crime prevention under General Assembly resolution 415 (V) of I December 1950, which was affirmed
by the Economic and Social Council in its resolutions 731
F 1XXVIII) of 30 July 1959 and 830 D (XXXII) of 2
August 1961, and 111 the promotion and strengthening of
mtemational co-operation in this field in accordance with
Assembly resoluti,rns .102 I (XX VII) of 18 December
19:2, 32/59 and J:' 60 of8 December 1977, 35/171 of 15
I)ecember 1980 and 361 21 of 9 November I 981,
Bearing 1n mind the theme of the Seventh Congress,
( ·rime prevention for freedom, justice, peace and devd<1pment", and the importance of preserving peace as a con,.liuon for development and international co-operation.
Welcoming the fact that the Congress, in accordance
wnh General Assembly resolution 39/ 112. paid particular
attention to the question of illicit drug trafficking.
·llarmed by the growth and seriousness of crime in
many parts of the world. including conventional and non,·onventional criminality, which havr a negative impact on
development and the quality of life.
( 'onsideringthat crime. particularly in its new forms and
dimensions, seriously impairs the development process of
'Tiany countries, a~ well as their international relations.
Voting that the function of the criminal justice system is
'O contribute to the protection of the hasic values and
1orms of society.
·I ware of the importance of enhancing the efficiency and
. :tfectiveness of criminal justice systems.
Voung that to limit etfecti vely the harm caused by
modem economi,: and unconventional crime, policy
measures should he based on an integrated approach, the
mam emphasis being placed on the reduction of opportu~1t1es to commit c-1me and on the strengthening of norms
.md attitudes agai11st 11,
I ware of the importance of crime prevention and crimi11al justice, which t·mbraces policies, processes and instituaons aimed at co11trolling criminality and ensuring equal
.md falf treatmeni for all those involved in the criminal
1ustice process,
Hind/iii that tht mcorporation <>f crime prevention and
,T1minal justice policies in the planning process can help to
ensure a better lift· for people throughout the world, promote the equality ,if rights and social securit)', enhance the
•·ffrct1veness ,,f , •ime [)revenl.it111 •-'.SIJCl1alh m 'iUcl'
