General Assembly-Fifth Session
to the General Assembly of the United Nations concerning the discharge of his functions. The Commissioner may consult with the Interim Committee of the
General Assembly with respect to the discharge of his
functions in the light of developments and within the
terms of the present resolution. \t\ihen the transfer of
authority has been completed, he shall so report to the
General Assembly and submit to it the text of the Eritrean Constitution;
B. Authorizes the Secretarv-Ceneral, in accordance
with established practice:
1. To arrange for the payment of an appropriate remuneration to the United Nations Commissioner;
2. To provide the United Nations Commissioner with
such experts, staff and facilities as the Secretary-General
may consider necessary to carry out the terms of the
present resolution.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly, to assist it in making the
appointment of the United Nations Commissioner in
Eritrea,
Decides that a Committee composed of the President
of the General Assembly, two of the Vice-Presidents
(Australia and Venezuela), the Chairman of the Fourth
Committee and the Chairman of the /}d Hoe Political
Committee shall nominate a candidate or, if no agreement can be reached, two or three candidates, for the
post of United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea.
316th plenary nieetinq.
2 December 1950.

*

*

*

The Committee established by the General Assembly
under !he above rc.w/uiiun to J101:1inute a rnndidate or
candidates for the office of United Nations Commissioner
in Eritrea agrcrd to nominate tlzr following candidates:
Mr. Victor Hoo ( Assistant Secretary-General);
Justice Aung Khine (Burma);
Mr. Eduardo Anze Matienzo (Bolivia).
The General Assembly, at its 325th plenary meeting on
14 December 1950, elected by secret ballot Mr. Eduardo
Anze Matienzo to the of!ice of United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea.

391 (V). The appropriate adjustment of the
frontiers between Egypt and the former
Italian colony of Libya, with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Annex XI of
the Treaty of Peace with Italy
The General Assembly,
. Decides to defer to its sixth session consideration of
item 59 of the agenda of its fifth session entitled "The
appropriate adjust~ent of the frontiers between Egypt
and the former Italian colony of Libya, with particular
reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Annex XI of the
Treaty of Peace with Italy".
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.

392 (V). Procedure to be adopted to delimit the
houndaries of the former Italian colonies in
so far as they are not already fixed by international agreement
The General Assembly,
l II accordance with its resolution 289 C (IV) adopted
on 21 November 1949, in which the General Assembly
callell upon the Interim Committee "to study the procedure to be adopted to delimit the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies in so far as they are not already
fixed by international agreement, and report with conclusions to the fifth regular session of the General Assembly",
Having ta!?en note of the memorandum,° prepared at
the Interim Committee's request by the Secretariat,
giving information relating to the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies not already fixed by international agreement, and having taken into consideration
the views of the interested governments,
1. Recommends:
(a) With respect to Libya,
That the portion of its boundary with French territory not already delimited by international agreement
he delimited, upon Libya's achieyement of independence, by negotiation between the Libyan and French
Governments, assisted on the request of either party
hy a third person to be select<:'d by them or, failing
their agreement, to be appointed by the SecretaryCenl'ral;
( !, ) With respect to the Trust Territory of Somali/and,
That the portion of its boundaries with British
Somaliland, as well as with Ethiopia, not already delimitvd lJv international agreement be delimited by
bilateral 11egotiations between the United Kingdom
Covernrnrnt ancl the Administering Authority, in respect of the boundaries with British Somaliland, and
between the Ethiopian Government and the Administering Authority in respect of the boundaries with
Ethiopia;
In orclcr to resolve any anrl all differences arising in
the coursc> of such negotiations, the respective parties
to each bilateral negotiation agree, on the request of
either party, to a procedure of mediation by a United
Nat ions Mediator to be appointed by the SecretaryCe11eral and, further, in the event of the inability of the
parties to accept the recommendations of the Mediator,
to a procedure of arbitration;
2. Recommends, further, that, with respect to any
other boundaries not delimited by international agreement, the parties concerned seek to reach agreement by
negotiation or b_v arbitration.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
393 (V). Assistance to Palestine refugees
The Cen!'ral Assembly.
F::ccal!inq its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949,
f-!ai,ing examined the report'° of the United Nations
Relief ar;d W arks Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
9 See doct1rnents A/AC.18/103, NAC.18/103/Corr. 1 and
Al AC.18/103/Corr. 2.
1o See documents A/1451 and A/1451/Corr.1.
