S/2004/1015

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2004
English
Original: French

Letter dated 21 December 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I write in reference to the letter dated 14 December 2004 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Immigration of Papua New Guinea, the Rt. Hon. Sir Rabbie
Namaliu, addressed to me regarding the peace process in Bougainville and the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB). A
copy of the letter is attached (see annex).*
I commend the Government of Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville parties
for overcoming their differences and adopting the Bougainville Constitution,
thereby opening the way for elections for an autonomous Bougainville government.
Preparations for the holding of elections have already begun, the details of which
are contained in the Foreign Minister’s letter. A schedule for elections has also been
drawn up by the Papua New Guinea Electoral Commission in consultation with the
Bougainville Administration. It is thus evident that the Government of Papua New
Guinea and the Bougainvillian parties remain firmly committed to implementing the
Peace Agreement without further delay.
With regard to the Weapons Disposal Plan, one of the main components of the
Agreement, the Government of Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville provincial
administration, with the facilitation of UNOMB, continue their efforts to encourage
the former combatants to destroy the 6 per cent of the contained weapons that
remain. It is expected that this will lead to the removal of this final hurdle to
launching the electoral process.
As the Council members are aware, UNOMB holds the chairmanship of the
Peace Process Consultative Committee (PPCC) and monitors and reports to the
Consultative Committee on the security situation, a role that is especially crucial in
the period leading up to the elections. The renewed activities of Francis Ona across
Bougainville make it imperative that UNOMB continue to facilitate a dialogue
between his supporters and the Bougainville leaders until the voting is completed.
With the establishment of an autonomous Bougainville government (ABG), the
functions of the PPCC will be assumed by the autonomous Bougainville
government, and UNOMB’s responsibilities will have been fully implemented. The
autonomous Bougainville government will also deal directly with the “no-go-zone”
issue.

* The annex is circulated in the language of submission only.

04-66442 (E) 281204 281204

*0466442*

S/2004/1015

The transparent and thorough electoral preparations undertaken by the
Government of Papua New Guinea are positive developments and deserve our
support. Every effort should be made to sustain the progress achieved thus far to
enable the parties to reach a successful conclusion of the peace process in June next
year.
In the light of the above, I would be grateful for the Council’s support in
responding positively to the Papua New Guinea Government’s request for
UNOMB’s continued presence in Bougainville and recommend that the mandate of
the Observer Mission be extended for a period of six months, until 30 June 2005, so
that it can complete its tasks which the Council has endorsed.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2004/1015

Annex
Letter dated 14 December 2004 from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Immigration of Papua New Guinea addressed to
the Secretary-General
[Original: English]

1
