106

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

specialized agencies, particularly the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and the Economic Commission for
Western Asia, to prepare and submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session a comprehensive
and analytical report on the social and economic impact of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions
of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
above-mentioned report, to consult and co-operate with
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people;
4. Urges all States to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in the preparation of the report.
107 th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/172.

United Nations
ertification

Conference

on

Des-

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and International
economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of
17 December 197 4, in which it decided to convene the
United Nations Conference on Desertification,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the results of the Conference, 10 ~
I. Approves the report of the United Nations Conference on Desertification, held at Nairobi from 29 August to 9 September 1977; 110
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government and
people of Kenya for acting as host to the Conference;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General o_f t~e Conference for its efficient preparation and
orgamzat1on;
4. Calls upon all Governments to consider on a
priority basis, the recommendations for national' action
contained in section IV of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertifi~at~on 111 an~, where ne~essary, the desirability
of estabhshmg a national authonty to co-ordinate consolidate and implement national anti-dcsertificati~n action programmes;
5. Recommends that subregional co-operation be
initiated or intensified, as considered necessary amono
co~ntries affected by desertification, with the ~equircd
assistance from the United Nations Environment Programme and other organizations concerned, with a view
to formulating specific joint programmes and requests
for development assistance for implementation of the
Plan of Action;
6. Requests the regional commissions to undertake
intensified and sustained action in support of national
efforts to combat desertification to assist Governments
'
'
109 A/32/257 and Corr. I.
110 A/CONF.74/36.
111 Ibid., chap. I.

at their request, in the implementation of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification and to convene as
appropriate, in co-operation with interested Governments and regional organizations, intergovernmental regional meetings, technical workshops and seminars to
consider the immediate implementation of the recommendations contained in section V of the Plan of
Action;
7. Requests the organs, organizations and other
bodies of the United Nations system to support international action to combat desertification within the
context of the Plan of Action;
8. Decides to entrust the Governing Council and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, as well as the Environment Coordination Board, with the responsibility of following
up and co-ordinating the implementation of the Plan
of Action, in accordance with recommendation 27
thereof, 112 and requests the Governing Council to report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session and every
two years thereafter;
9. _Calls upon all countries, in particular developed
countnes, as well as multilateral financial institutions
and non-governmental donors, to provide and increase
t~eir assist~nce to countries suffering from desertification, esl?ecially for the financing of their subregional
an_d reg10nal l?rogrammes and projects within appropr_ia!e consortrnm arrangements, such as those pertammg_ to the Sahe! green belt, and urges developing
~ount~ics to give due priority to desertification problems
m their development assistance requests;
JO. Authorizes the Execut,ive Director to convene
immediately a consultative group, which would meet
as and when required, comprising representatives from
the organizations referred to in paragraph 7 above,
such ~ther org!lnizations as might be required, donor
countnes, multilateral financial agencies as well as dcvel?ping countries having a substantial interest in combatmg desertification, to assist in mobilizing resources
for the activities undertaken within the framework of
implementing the Plan of Action;

11. E1:dc:rses in rrinciple the creation of a special
account w1thm the Umted Nations for implementino the
Plan of Action;
"'
12: Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit a study on the establishment and operation of
su~h an a_ccount to the General Assembly at its thirtythird sess10n, through the Governina Council and the
Economic and Social Council·
"'

'

13. Invites the Gov_erning Council to have prepared,
by a small group of high-level specialists in the international_ financing of projects and programmes, a study
?f additiona~ mea_sures and means of financing for the
1mplementat1011 of the Plan of Action, and to submit a
final report on the subject of additional measures of
fina?cing to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
sess10n, through the Economic and Social Council;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to approach
Member States and competent organizations and bodies
wit~in !he _United Nations system, as well as the scientific mst1tutions concerned outside the system for
further research, development and refinement of the
data pertaining to desertification, in order to close any
11 2 Ibid.,

chap. I, sect. VII.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

existing gaps in scientific knowledge and technology,
and for further development of the world map of desertification on the basis of the relevant recommendations
of the Conference;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite
intergovernmental and non_-governmental organiz_ati?ns
concerned with desertification problems and theu impact on development to participate in the implemell:tation of the Plan of Action with a view to co-ordinatmg
their activities within world-wide and regional programmes;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the resolutions adopted by the
Conference, 113 especially resolution 2 of 9 September
1977 on financial and technical assistance to the least
developed countries and resolution 4 of 9 September
1977 on the effect of weapons of mass destruction on
ecosystems.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/173.

Resources of the United Nations Habitat
and Human Settlements Foundation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation,
Believing that the current level of resources available
to the Foundation is clearly inadequate,
Recognizing that the international community, at
both the global and regional levels, should encourage
and support Governments determined to take effective
action to ameliorate conditions, especially for the least
advantaged, in urban and rural settlements,
Bearing in mind the invitation of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, in its decision 92 (V) of 25 May 1977, 114
to the General Assembly regarding the setting of a
target for total voluntary contributions by Governments
to the Foundation,
1. Appeals to all Governments to contribute generously to the United Nations Habitat and Human
Settlements Foundation as soon as possible in order to
expedite action programmes in the field of human settlements;
2. Notes the proposal of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme regarding
the target of $50 million as a minimum for the total
voluntary contributions by Governments for the years
1978-1981 ;115
3. Requests the Secretary-Genera\ to convene, during the thirty-third session of the General Assembly,
a pledging conference on voluntary contributions by
Governments to the Foundation if pledges to meet the
minimum target referred to in paragraph 2 above are
not forthcoming.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
11a Ibid.,

chap. II.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Tkirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/32/25), annex I.
1111 See UNEP/GC/93.
114 See

32/174.

107

Resolution adopted by th~ General
Assembly at its 107th plenary meeting

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-Vl) of l May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3 362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation, as well as its resolution 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Recalling the resolutions adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
fourth session,11 6
Recalling the results of various United Nations conferences held during recent years on major topics relating to economic and social development, which pertain
to the establishment of the new international economic
order,
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 178 of 21 December 1976,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2125 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Noting the report of the Conference on International
Economic Co-operation, 117
Noting the report of the Committee on Review and
Appraisal on its fourth session 118 and the preliminary
proposal of the developing countries contained in the
annex to that report,
Recalling the role of the Economic and Social Council and of other organs, organizations, bodies and conferences of the United Nations system in the establishment of the new international economic order,
Emphasizing the need to oversee and monitor the
implementation of the decisions and agreements reached
in the negotiations in various appropriate forums of
the United Nations system in their respective fields,
and to determine further lines of action and provide
impetus for further negotiations for the solution of
issues remaining unresolved,
Deeply concerned at the deteriorating economic situation of developing countries and at negative trends
in international economic developments,
Deeply concerned also that parts of the developing
world are still subjected to colonialism, neo-colonialism,
racial discrimination, apartheid, foreign aggression and
occupation and alien domination, which constitute
major obstacles to the economic emancipation and
development of the developing countries and peoples,
Recognizing the concern that the negotiations conducted so far on the establishment of the new international economic order have produced only limited
results while the gap between the developed and <level116 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
111 See A/31/478 and Corr.I, annex, and A/31/478/Add.1
and Add.! /Corr. I.
118 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5994 ).
