A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/129
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 12
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/726)]
49/129.

Commemoration of the millennium of the
Kyrgyz national epic, Manas

The General Assembly,
Considering that 1995 is the year that marks the millennium of the
Kyrgyz national epic, Manas, which corresponds to the principles of the World
Decade for Cultural Development, 1988-1997, 1/
Recalling resolution 27 C/13.22 of the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, concerning the
commemoration of anniversaries during the biennium 1994-1995, 2/
Taking into consideration that the Manas epic has been a vital link in
sustaining and unifying the peoples of the Central Asian region throughout
their long history,
Recognizing that the epic is not only the source of the Kyrgyz language
and literature but also the foundation of the cultural, moral, historical,
social and religious traditions of the Kyrgyz people,
Bearing in mind that the epic promotes widely shared ideals and values
of humanity,

1/

General Assembly resolution 41/187.

2/
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Twenty-seventh Session, vol. I, Resolutions,
sect. IV.13.
95-76867

/...

A/RES/49/129
Page 2

Mindful of the contribution that the commemoration of the millennium of
the Manas epic can make to the cultural and human heritage and to the
furtherance of international cooperation and understanding,
Noting the freedom-loving legacy of the epic for the nations of the
region,
Noting also the ideals and principles contained in the "Memory of the
World" programme of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
1.
Recognizes 1995 as the year commemorating the millennium of the
Kyrgyz national epic, Manas;
2.
Welcomes the fact that the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization has assumed the role of lead organization for the
commemoration of the millennium of the Manas epic;
3.
Encourages the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in cooperation with the Government of Kyrgyzstan and other
interested international organizations, to take all appropriate measures to
observe 1995 as the year commemorating the millennium of the Manas epic;
4.
Takes note with satisfaction of the international activities
undertaken by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in collaboration with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic to
spread international knowledge of the legacy of the Manas epic.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
