A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/166
17 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 91
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/717/Add.12)]
48/166.

An agenda for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/181 of 22 December 1992,
Convinced of the need to elaborate a framework to promote international
consensus in the field of development,
Committed to strengthening the effectiveness of the United Nations in
the economic and social sectors and recognizing, in this respect, the need to
revive the role of the United Nations in fostering and promoting international
cooperation for economic and social development,
Taking note of the views expressed by States on an agenda for
development,
Welcoming the intention of the Secretary-General to issue in the early
months of 1994 the report requested in its resolution 47/181,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General
on progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 47/181; 1/
2.
Decides that the intergovernmental discussions to consider an
agenda for development and the reports of the Secretary-General thereon should
be held at the substantive session of 1994 of the Economic and Social Council
and at the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
__________
1/

A/48/689.

/...

A/RES/48/166
Page 2

3.
Invites the President of the General Assembly to promote, as early
as possible in 1994, in an open-ended format, broad-based discussions and an
exchange of views on an agenda for development, on the basis of the report of
the Secretary-General requested in its resolution 47/181;
4.
Also invites the President of the General Assembly, in order to
ensure the broad-based nature of those discussions, to invite relevant
programmes, funds and agencies of the United Nations system, relevant
multilateral institutions and other relevant organizations, including
scientific and academic institutions, to participate fully in or present their
views during those discussions;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session further recommendations, as appropriate, to follow
up his report on an agenda for development, taking into account the views
expressed during the substantive session of 1994 of the Economic and Social
Council, as well as the views expressed during the discussions promoted by the
President of the General Assembly and summarized under his own responsibility;
6.
Recommends that the Economic and Social Council, at its
organizational session for 1994, consider "An agenda for development" as a
possible topic for the high-level segment of its substantive session of 1994;
7.
Decides to hold special plenary meetings at a high level, at its
forty-ninth session, to consider ways of promoting and giving political
impetus to an agenda for development;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session an item entitled "An agenda for development".
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
