Reeolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Having requested that Committee to "examine,
within the scope of the Questionnaire adopted by the
Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of
Nations in 1926, such information and documentation
as may be available in respect of the Territory of
South West Africa" and to "transmit to the General
Assembly a report concerning conditions in the Territory taking into acount, as far as possible, the scope
of the reports of the Permanent Mandates Commission
of the League of Nations",
Having considered the report 11 of the Committee on
South West Africa,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Committee;
2. N ates the report and observations regarding conditions in the Territory of South West Africa, contained in annex V of the report of the Committee;
3. N ates with concern that, in the opinion of the
Committee, the administration of South West Africa is
in several aspects not in conformity with the obligations
of the Government of the Union of South Africa under
the Mandate ;
4. N ates with satisfaction that the representative of
the Union of South Africa participated in the substantive discussion in the Fourth Committee of the report
on conditions in the Territory of South West Africa;
5. Invites therefore the Government ~f the Union of
South Africa to co-operate with the Committee on
South West Africa and, in particular, to submit to
the Committee reports on its administration of the
Territory of. South West Africa and to assist the Committee on South West Africa in the examination of
such reports or such information and documentation
as may be available to that Committee;
6. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to analyse and summarize the substantive discussion of
the South West African question in the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly and to transmit this
analysis and summary to the Government of the Union
of South Africa for its information;
7. Requests further the Committee on South West
Africa to examine the extent to which and the manner
in which the specialized agencies and extra-budgetary
organs of the United Nations might contribute to the
social, economic and educational advancement of the
inhabitants of the Territcry.
501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.

*

*

*

At its 512th plenary meeting on 14 December 1954, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee to the President, approved the nomination of THAILAND
and the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA to fill the vacancies occurring in the Committee on South West Africa.

852 (IX). Status of the Territory of South West
Africa
The General Assembly,
Having recommended, by its resolutions 65 (I) of
14 December 1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 14, and documents A/2666/Corr.1 and A/
2666/Add.1.

29

(III) of 26 November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December
1949, 449 B (V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI)
of 19 January 1952 and 749 B (VIII) of 28 November
1953, that the Mandated Territory of South West
Africa be placed under the International Trusteeship
System, and having repeatedly invited the Government
of the Union of South Africa to propose, for the
consideration of the General Assembly, a Trusteeship
Agreement for South West Africa,
Having accepted, by its resolution 449 A (V) of 13
December 1950, the advisory opinion of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice concerning South
West Africa, inter alia, to the effect that:
(a) While "the provisions of Chapter XII of the
Charter do not impose on the Union of South West
Africa a legal obligation to place the Territory under
the Trusteeship System", they "are applicable to the
Territory of South West Africa in the sense that they
provide a means by which the Territory may be
brought under the Trusteeship System",
(b) " ... the Union of South Africa acting alone
has not the competence to modify the international
status of the Territory of South West Africa", and
" ... the competence to determine and modify the international status of the Territory rests with the Union
of South Africa acting with the consent of the United
Nations",
Considering that, in accordance with Chapter XII of
the Charter, all Mandated Territories which have not
achieved independence have been brought under the
Trusteeship System with the sole exception of the
Territory of South West Africa,
1. Reiterates its resolutions 65 (I) of 14 December
1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227 (III) of 26
November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December 1949, 449 B
(V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI) of 19 January
1952 and 749 B (VIII) of 28 November 1953, to the
effect that the Territory of South West Africa be
placed under the International Trusteeship System;
2. Reasserts that the normal way of modifying the
international status of the Territory would be to place
it under the Trusteeship System by means of a Trusteeship Agreement in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter XII of the Charter.
501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.

853 (IX). Participation of the indigenous inhahitanl8 of the Trust Territories in the work
of the Tru11teeship Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 554 (VI) of 18 January
1952 and 653 (VII) of 21 December 1952 in so far
as they concern the participation of the indigenous
inhabitants of the Trust Territories in the work of the
Trusteeship Council,
Concerned to ensure that the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of the inhabitants
of the Trust Territories and their progressive development towards self-government or independence shall
be attained in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples concerned,
Considering that it is essential to employ to their
fullest extent the means which are already enumerated
in the Charter to ensure that, as free public opinion

so

General Assembly -

evolves in each Trust Territory, it will be brought
effectively to bear on the examination by the Council
of conditions in that Territory,
1. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that, in
order to develop further the participation of the indigenous inhabitants in its work through the medium of
visiting missions, it instruct each mission:
(a) Not only to consider such expressions of public
opinion as may be spontaneously brought before it by
all sections of the population, but also to take the
initiative in seeking out public opinion on all important
problems and to undertake popular consultations in
whatever forms it may deem appropriate;
( b) To report fully on the development of the free
expression of the wishes of the people and on the main
trends of their opinions and to make recommendations
concerning the further development of a free public
opinion;
2. Recommends to the Council that, in order to
develop further the participation of the indigenous
inhabitants in its work through the medium of their
right of petition, it should:
(a) Examine and propose concrete action upon, a~
part of its examination of conditions in each Trust
Territory, petitions which may reflect public opinion
on questions of general concern to the development of
the Territory;
( b) Request the Administration Authorities to make
copies of their annual reports promptly available to the
peoples of the Territories;
(c) Instruct each visiting mission to encourage in
the Trust Territories public discussion of and expression of views on the annual reports, and to report
on the extent to which facilities have been made
available to the population for the purpose;
3. Recommends to the Council that, as a means of
ensuring, in cases which it deems urgent, that a given
situation in a Trust Territory meets with the freely expressed wishes of the people, it should immediately
grant a hearing to those qualified representatives of
public opinion who apply for one, or in the case of
representatives who are unable to travel, the Council
should examine all communications, letters or telegrams
expressing their points of view;
4. Reiterates the views and recommendations put
forward in its resolutions 554 (VI) of 18 January 1952
and 653 (VII) of 21 December 1952.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
854 (IX). Question of the frontier between the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950, it recommended that the boundary between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia should be delimited by
bilateral negotiations between the Administering Authority of the Trust Territory and the Government of
Ethiopia and that, in order to resolve any and all
differences arising in the course of such negotiations,
the parties to such bilateral negotiations should agree,
on the request of either party, to a procedure of me-

Ninth Session

diation by a United Nations Mediator to be appointed
by the Secretary-General and, further, in the event of
the inability of the parties to accept the recommendations of the Mediator, to a procedure of arbitration,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 755 (VIII)
of 9 December 1953, it recommended to the two Governments that they should intensify their efforts to
achieve a final, just, equitable and friendly settlement
of the question,
Having taken note of the conclusion of the Trusteeship Council, contained in its resolution 1000
(XIV) of 6 July 1954, that the delimitation of the
frontier is a matter of the utmost urgency in view
both of the approach of the date of the attainment
of independence by the Trust Territory and of the
continuing political, economic and social difficulties
in the area of the present provisional frontier,
Having taken note of the information12 submitted
by the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy concerning
the progress of the direct negotiations between them
on the delimitation of the frontier between the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
and Ethiopia,
Having further taken note of the information13
submitted by the United Nations Advisory Council for
the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration concerning the situation in the frontier area,
1. N ates with concern that no progress has been
made to date in the direct negotiations between the
Governments of Ethiopia and Italy on the delimitation
of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and Ethiopia;
2. Urges the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy to
exert their utmost efforts to achieve a final settlement
of the frontier question by direct negotiations ;
3. Recommends that, should direct negotiations fail
to achieve any results by July 1955, the two Governments agree to the procedure outlined in General Assembly resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
855 (IX). Financing of the economic development plans of the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered Trusteeship Council resolution
1001 (XIV) of 7 July 1954 on the financing of the
economic development plans of the Trust Territory of
Somaliland under Italian administration,
Bearing in mind the fact that a United Nations
Visiting Mission has just travelled through the Territory and will have to submit to the Trusteeshio Council a full report on the general situation there, including reference to the economic development plans prepared by the Administering Authority,
1. Takes sympathetic note of Trusteeship Council
resolution 1001 (XIV) of 7 July 1954;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consider in
agreement with the Italian Government the advisability
12 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/C.4/277.
13 Ibid.
