UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNC@~~ coLLECTIoN
OFFIbAL

RECOittiS’

ct :

FOR’T76TH

YEAR

2613th

MEETING:

3 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/26 13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17509) . . .

1

WPV.2613

;

. .’

NOTE

_.,
;

I

,

:.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates’ a reference
.
:
:I to a United Nations
document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
: ‘.
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
.

I. :

2613th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

3 October

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Bangladesh, the German Democratic Republic,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malta, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Saudi Arabia and Yugoslavia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of prokdure.

President: Mr. Vernon A, WALTERS
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2613)
1. Adoption
2.

1985, at 3.15 p.m.

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangiadesh), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Wiryono
(Indonesia), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. Gauci (Malta)). Mr. Chamorro Mora (Nicaragua),
Mr. Garba (Niger@, Mr. Shihabi (Saudi Arabia) and Mr.
Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17509)
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 3 October 1985
[S/17524] from the representative of Egypt which reads as
follows:

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17509)

“I have the honour to request that during the Security Council’s discussion of the item entitled ‘Letter
dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council’, the Council extend
an invitation undkr rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, SecretaryGeneral
of the Organization
of the Islamic
Conference.”

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2610th and 261 lth meetings, I invite the representatives of Tunisia and Israel to take a place at the Council table; I invite the observer for the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table; I
invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cuba,
Greece, Jordan, Kuwait, Lesotho, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Pakistan, Senegal, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey and Yemen to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation to Mr. Pirzada under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided

At the invitation of the @resident. Mr. Bouzin’ (l&nisia)
and Mr. Netanyahu (Israel) took pIaces at the Council table;
Mr. Qaddoumi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a
place at the Council table; Mr. Zarv (Afghanistan), Mr.
Taleb Ibrahimi (Algeria), Mr. Malmierca Peoli (Cuba), Mr.
Dountas (Greece), Mr. Masri (Jordan), Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Makhele (Lesotho). Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr. Ould Boye (Mauritania),
Mr. Fi/ali
(Morocco), Mr. Yaqub Khan (Pakistan), Mr. San+ (Senegal), Mr. AI-Sharaa (Syria Arab Republic), Mr. Halefo@
(Turkey) and Mr. Basendwah (Yemen) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the CounciI chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the following documents:
letter dated 2 October 1985 from the representative of
Spain to the Secretary-General [S/175Z6J; letter dated 2
October from the representative of Democratic Yemen to
the Secretary-General [S/17517); letter dated 1 October
from the representative of India to the Secretary-General
[S/17518iJ; letter dated 2 October from the representative
of Argentina to the President of the Security Council
[S/27.5191; and letter dated 2 October from the representative of Luxembourg to the Secretary-General [S/17520&
1

5. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Al-Sharaa. I welcome him
and I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

10.’ Experience has taught us since the forging of the
Camp David accords and particularly during the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon, that if any Arab party were to beg
for peace from Israel, that would result only in an escalation of Israel’s aggressive spirit and an increase in its
expansionist desires. For the Israeli concept of peace is
synonymous with hegemony. The Israelis believe that
undermining the role of the United Nations, violating
international law and taking the law into their own hands
are the ways to make the Arabs surrender; that is the kind
of peace they want.

6.

Mr. AL-SHARAA (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretaI should like to associate myself with
those who have preceded me in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, which starts with consideiation of a new
complaint-that
by Tunisia in connection with the Israeli
aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Tunisia. I should also like to express our appreciation to
the President of the previous month, in which the Council
considered the act of aggression by the racist Pretoria
regime against our brothers in southern Africa as well as the
oppressive Israeli measures against the Arab population in
the occupied Arab territories,
tion from Arabic):

11. The repeated Israeli acts of aggression have been supported by both American money and American arms and
have usually been given the blessings or encouragement,
either implicit or explicit, of the United States. More often
than not, they have resulted in rewards and assistance to
the aggressor and in 6 clear show of defiance of the international community and obstruction of the role of the
Security Council as the unique instrument for the deterrence of aggression and the maintenance of international
peace and security. In the light of all that, experience has
taught us that there is no other way to deter Israeli aggression and establish a just and genuine peace than to work
seriously in the region to achieve unity in the Arab position and to establish a strategic balance in order to meet
any Israeli aggression in the future.

7. The Council has been urgently convened to consider
the Tunisian complaint [S/17509]. Rapid action is required
from the Council, action based on the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security and the deterrence of
aggression.
8. We believe that the militr& action by Israel against
Tunisia is a blatant act of aggression against the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of a’ sister
country, a blatant violation of the principles and norms of
international law and the provisions of the Charter. This
aggression is but one more link in the chain of repeated acts
of aggression by Israel against Arab countries. Such acts are
still taking place daily against Lebanon and in the occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories in the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip and the Golan Heights. And yesterday’s aggression
will not be the last link in the chain if the aggressor is not
punished under the provisions of the Charter.

12. One of the first duties of the Security Council is to
eliminate the effects of aggression and to punish the
aggressor. Hence, my delegation repeats that it is necessary
to impose sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter.
13. We state once again our total solidarity with the Tunisian people, a brother people that has been the victim of
aggression.
14. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): You had a reputation that did you honour,

9. It is absolutely clear that the fact that Israel has not
been punished for its repeated acts of aggression in the
past-particularly
because of the position of the United
States, which has prevented the application of sanctions
against Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter-has
encouraged Israel to persist in its aggressive and expansionist policy, in disregard for the Charter and the rules of
international law. The Syrian Arab Republic works for the
achievement of a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, based on total Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories and for the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights, in the first place, its right to
return to its homeland, to self-determination and to the
establishment of an independent State on its national soil.
We also support the convening of an international conference, under the aegis of the United Nations, to attain that
peace. At the same time, Syria believes that if any of the
Arab or Palestinian rights is waived or compromised, that
will only contribute to making Israel more intransigent and
will encourage it to commit further acts of aggression
against the Arab countries, whether on the front line or-as
‘in the case of the Israeli strike against the Iraqi nuclear
research centre in 1981 and this newest act of aggression
against Tunisia-thousands
of miles away from its borders.
\

Mr. President, before you came to the United Nations, and
most of us are aware of your talents as a mediator and a
conciliator. Thus, my delegation takes particular pleasure
in offering you its congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. We are certain that we shall
benefit from the long diplomatic experience which you
have had du&ng your career.
IS. Notwithstanding the suggestion made by Sir John
Thomson, the President of the Council last month, I really
must associate my delegation with the words of praise and
thanks that have been addressed to him. September was a
busy month for us, but also an historic month, and we
were able to attain very satisfactory results because of the
great competence, the skill and; may I say, the tenacity
demonstrated by Sir John Thomson during our meetings
and consultations.
:

16. My delegation learned with indignation, but without
surprise, of the act of aggression perpetrated by Israel on 1
October against the Republic of Tunisia and the PLO, the
guests of the Tunisian Government. With indignation
because, despite the appeals and condemnations of all
2

kinds, Israel-from
Baghdad to Tunis, and passing
through Syria, Jordan and Lebanon on the way-has over
the years been constantly resorting to occupation, oppression, repression, threats, pre-emptive attacks and reprisals,
all in the name of self-defence-and Israel’s concept of
self-defence is very far from that in international law.
Without surprise, because we ha$e unfortunately become
accustomed to the escalation of arrogance and cynicism
and the improper equation of liberation movements with
terrorism that some circles try to impose on us, while modestly covering their faces when we dare to speak about
State terrorism.

21. At the beginning of my statement I said that our :
appeals had been rejected and our condemnations had had
no result because Israel had chosen to ignore them. The
growing and ever more worrying impunity enjoyed by
Israel is not unconnected with that fact, and we have the
right to ask whether the time has not come, in view of
Israel’s repeated use of the threat or use of force and its
refusal to comply with its obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter, to consider the adoption against Israel of
appropriate measures provided for in the Charter, including Chapter VII. We did that in resolution 566 (1985) with
regard to Namibia. The case that we are considering today
is not very different, and our authority and credibility are
at stake.

17. Yet that is what is involved when a country which
calls itself a responsible State fails to realize the limits of its
power in an orderly society and indulges in aggression and
adventurism, scorning the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States. Such an attitude deserves nothing but
strong condemnation, for it constitutes a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of intemational law and the principles governing relations between
States under the Charter.

22. In conclusion, I wish to express on behalf of my
Government our sympathy, solidarity and support for the
Tunisian Government and the PLO, represented here by
our brother, Farouq Qaddoumi. We are convinced that
the Council will not fail its responsibility to the Tunisian
people and the Palestinian people by demanding that
Israel end its acts of aggression and pay reparations for the
loss of human life and the material damage resulting from
such acts.

18. We find it difficult to find any sufficient justifi&on
for Israel’s armed aggression against Tunisia, planned and
carried out in cold blood. It has been argued that since it
harboured the headquarters of the PLO, Tunisia bore a
responsibility,
according to the specious argument
advanced, for all hostile acts against Israel and its citizens,
even if they were carried out by individuals and responsibility was not claimed by the PLO. Israel could thus arrogate to itself the right to destroy all the PLO offices,
wherever they were to be found-in North America, Latin
America, the Caribbean, Europe, Asia or Africa. If that
were so, Israel would be at war with the whole world.
Moreover, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia
reminded us, Tunisia’s support for the Palestinian people
does not represent a casual decision but is part of the
historic traditions that distinguish Tunisia of honouring
the obligations it has freely assumed towards the liberation
movements in their struggle against colonial or foreign
occupation.

23. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) (inierpretution from Russian): I extend the congratulations of the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of October, at a
time when we have a great deal of work to do, and I wish
you success in guiding the Council’s work.
24. I wish also to express our gratitude to the representative of the United Kingdom for his able guidance of the
Council’s work last. month.
25. The latest aggressive act of Israel against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of yet ariother Arab country, Tunisia, has rightly aroused the indignation of the
whole world and resulted in its justified condemnation.
The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic believes that the
concern of the victim of that aggression is legitimate, as is
its appeal to the Security Council to consider the latest
criminal act of Israeli aggression.

19. It has also beeq contended that the Israeli aggression
is part of the struggle against international terrorism. We
believe that once again there has been a mistake over the
identity of the terrorist. Let us remember that the United
Nations began to deal with the matter 15 years ago, when
it was accepted that consideration should also be given to
the profound causes that prompted people to commit acts
of desperation. We have not come here to defend intemational terrorism, which we condemn. It is on that basis that
we say how concerned we are about the fate of the Soviet
diplomats taken hostage in Beirut. But we cannot accept
the fight against international terrorism being used as only
to0
easy a justification for acts of aggression.

26. It is clear from the statement of Tunisia’s Minister for
Foreign AMairs 12610th meeting3 that as a. result of the
attack by Israeli aircraft on the territory of Tunisia, 60
people were killed and approximately 100 were wounded,
apart from significant material damage. The attack was a
flagrant act of aggression, as defined in the Definition of
Aggression ‘adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session [resolution 3314 (XXW]. It was a flagrant violation of the rules of international law, as well as
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations as set out in Articles 1 and 2. It is one of the latest
manifestations of the policy and practice of State terrorism, which was strongly condemned by the General
Assembly at its last session. -Moreover, ‘the Israeli aircraft
attacked a target on the territory of a country that is not in
a state of war with Israel.

20. Only one conclusion is possible: Israel wishes to eliminate the PLO physically in order to be able to impose its
own peace, ‘at the very moment when there seem to be
some signs of hope, however faint, and it is not unreasonable to say that Israel’s recent act of aggression is a preventive action against peace in the Middle East.
3

ent efforts to achieve a comprehensive and just Middle
East settlement. Those efforts, however, meet with fierce
opposition from those two “strategic partners”. In place of
those efforts, they are attempting to impose on the Arabs
their military and political diktat and to draw them into
humiliating and dangerous separate deals with the aggressor, deals which are only to the advantage of imperialism.

27. This latest aggression against an Arab country that is
thousands of kilometres away from Israel is part and parcel of Israel’s policy of aggression and expansion in the
Middle East and is yet another in a series of crimes against
the Arab peoples. Suffice it to recall that Israel has caused
five major wars in the region, wars in which large Arab
territories have come under the heel of the occupier. Those
territories include the Palestinian West Bank of the Jordan, the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem, the Syrian Golan
Heights and southern Lebanon. In the very same way, the
Palestinian people has been deprived of its inalienable
rights, including its right to exist as a State.

32. Peace will not come to the peoples of the Middle East
through further Israeli adventurism or through any kind of
separate negotiations. The way to achieve a comprehensive, just settlement in the region will be found through the
convening of an international conference on the Middle
East.

28. These aggressive acts were carried out in spite of a
Security Council resolution condemning a similar attack
made by Israel in June 198 1 against peaceful Iraqi nuclear
installations and calling upon Israel “to refrain in the
future from any such acts or threats thereof’ [resolution
487 (1981)].

33. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR sternly condemns Israeli aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Tunisia and supports Tunisia’s just
demands for compensation for all damage. We wish to
convey our deepest condolences to the people and the
Government of Tunisia on the loss of life and the material
damage sustained. Once again, we express our solidarity
with the Arab peoples, including the Palestinian people
which is struggling for an end to Israeli occupation and for
the enjoyment of its inalienable national rights. We support the proposal that the Security Council adopt stem
measures against Israel, including comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is high, ’
time that the aggressor was stopped and peace and security
restored to the region.

29. As we have stressed here, on many occasions,‘Israel’s
brazenness before the international community, its disregard for its Charter obligations as a Member of the Organization and its systematic non-compliance with Security
Council resolutions are possible only because of the unconditional support of the United States and of some other
Western Powers. It is only because of the economic, military and financial assistance provided by those countries
that Israel is able to pursue its policy of aggression and
expansion in the Middle East. That assistance is supplemented by political and diplomatic support, as manifested
in the United Nations. It is enough to note that in the
Security Council during the 1970s and 198Os, the United
States made use of its veto power 17 times in Israel’s
interests in order to protect it from the consequences of its
expansionist acts against Arab States. Ten of those vetoes
were in fact cast under the present Administration.
The
most recent case was on 13 September this year [2605?h
meeting], when a draft resolution sponsored by the nonaligned countries [S/I74291 was blocked; had it been
adopted, that draft resolution would have condemned the
latest repressive measures by the Israeli authorities against
the Arab population of the occupied Palestinian territories.
The same stance is evident in statements made by United
States Administration
officials which attempt to confer
legitimacy on the latest piratical act of their junior partner.

34. I wish in conclusion to say a few words as Chairman
of the Group of Eastern European States for the month of
October. We sternly condemn this new act of aggression
committed against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Tunisia and against the Palestinian people. This piratic
raid is a manifestation of the policy of State terrorism and
violates the basic norms of international law and of the
Charter. We are in favour of the adoption by the Council
of stem measures against Israel in conformity with the
Charter.
35. Mr. BASSOLE (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from
French): My delegation wishes to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. You are a
man of great and rich experience and a man who is open to
dialogue. We are thus convinced that under your leadership our work will be crowned with success.

30. There can be no doubt that this unconditional assistance and support will impel Israel and its military authorities to new adventurist acts against Arab countries and
peoples. The latest act of Israeli aggression, against Tunisia, has once more demonstrated to the peoples of the
region what actions they can expect from the United
States-Israeli strategic alliance. This latest aggressive act
has once again shown the true worth of the hypocritical
statements of Israeli leaders to the effect that they are
working towards peace in the Middle East. It will inevitably lead to increased tension in the Middle East and to a
new cycle of violence.

36. Our congratulations go also to Sir John Thomson,
who skilfully presided over the work of the Council in
September. We ask him to convey to Sir Geoffrey Howe,
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, my delegation’s admiration for the outstanding
and tactful way in which he presided over the Council’s
special meeting to commemorate the fortieth anniversary
of the United Nations.

31. We should draw attention to the fact that this latest
act of Israeli aggression took place as the international
community and the United Nations were making persist-

37. With its cowardly and barbaric act of aggression
against Tunisia and its deliberate violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member State, Israel
4

sional rules of nrocedure at the 2611th meeting. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to-make his
statement.

has shown once more that it does not deserve to be among
us. By violating the Charter once again, Israel has made z
clear, as if it needed clarification, that it is not and never
will be prepared to fulfil its obligations in the United
Nations or abide by the resolutions and decisions of the
Organization.

46. Mr. OMRAN (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me,
Sir, to associate myself with those who have congratulated
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of October, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the successful conduct of the Council’s meetings last month.

38. That attitude is not suprising. It reflects the same
frame of mind as prevails in southern Africa, where the
racist regime of Pretoria has just-and at the very same
time-called
itself again to the attention of the world by
adding its attack on Angola to the list of its crimes. The
facts speak for themselves. Israel, like the apartheidregime,
thrives on hostility.

47. The Security Council is considering the new Israeli
aggression, which is part of the terrorism the Zionist entity
has pursued since its inception. This act is but an episode
in a series of horrific events, and is similar in dimension,
meaning and objectives to what we witnessed earlier this
century at the hands of the fascist and Nazi regimes.

39. The repeated violations of the Charter which we have
witnessed for years have invariably prompted us to wonder
why and how Member States which are prepared, unconditionally, to understand and defend those violations can
continue to exist within the United Nations and especially
within the Security Council.

48. Israel has perpetrated a new act of aggression against
an Arab State, Tunisia, a State Member of the United
Nations, a State that takes pride in its record of advocating
justice, right and freedom for all the peoples of the world.
If tolerated by the Organization, Israel’s perpetration of
such an act of aggression will have extremely dangerous
significance because it compromises not only the security
and sovereignty of the State victim of that aggression but
also the security and stability of each and every Member
State, large or small.

40. Weary from having tried, unsuccessfully, various
remedies over the years, does the Council not believe it is
high time to administer to those among us who are ill the
remedy provided by Chapter VII of the Charter, the only
remedy we have not yet tried? For our part, we say the
answer is yes, for Israel has obstinately refused to abide by
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter, which calls for all
States to refrain from the use of force in their relations. In
so doing, it has strayed from the purposes of the Organization and prefers the use of blind brute force.

49. The complaint brought before the Council by Tunisia clearly demonstrates the premeditated nature of the
Israeli act of aggression, which was carefully planned
against civilian targets in full awareness that it would
inflict a heavy toll upon innocent Tunisians and Palestinians who have been displaced more than once from their
homeland, Palestine, and uprooted, also more than once,
from other countries of refuge, particularly from the Palestinian camps in Lebanon.

41. Today, peace and security are threatened in the Mediterranean area as a result of the air attack by the Israeli
armed forces.
42. Let us not injure the Charter and the international
community by encouraging in any way this kind of action
by a Member State. Those who have paid with their lives
as a result of this senselessact of aggression perpetrated by
Israel deserve our respect. Let us not wait for Israel to run
out of arguments: obviously it will always have arguments.

50. The Council must consider this premeditated killing
and this premeditated destruction bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles and rules of international law. The Council must also
seriously consider the Israeli aggression and the risks
entailed in that aggression for the peace and security in the
Middle East region. The continued aggression and the continued laxity towards it could endanger our international
organization and render it susceptible to meeting the same
fate as the League of Nations.

43. Today, the least that can be expected of the Security
Council is that it condemn Israel unanimously and vigourously for its premeditated armed aggression against Tunisia and demand that Israel offer appropriate reparations
for the loss of human life and material damage resulting
from the aggression.

51. The Council definitely recognizes Israel’s record in
the Organization, and in the Council in particular, where
the right of veto has been placed at the service of Israel.

44. The Council has an overriding obligation to come to
the assistance of the Palestinian people, which Israel has
pitilessly hounded in an effort to prevent it from liberating
its occupied homeland. The Council must also find ways
and means to deter Israel from perpetrating reprehensible
acts of the kind it perpetrated yesterday against Tunisia.

52. The statement of the Israeli representative before the
Council yesterday showed that the Israelis are unmoved by
bloodshed and the death of innocent victims. It also
showed Israel’s contempt for the will of the Council and its
role of upholding peace. The statement of the Zionist representative contained new evidence of Israel’s defiance of
the will of the international community. It also proved

45. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Adnan
Omran, Under-Secretary-General for Political and International Affairs of the League of Arab States, to whom the
Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provi5

acts of aggression and murder against the Palestinian
people and against the Arab States, without any exception.
To that we must add the American support that Israel
receives internationally and politically in the Council as
well.

Israel’s disregard of the principles and values cherished
and defended by all the peoples of the world represented in
the Organization, including the American- people.
53. The Israeli interpretation of terrorism as presented
by the Israeli representative is based on Israel’s belief and
conviction that its occupation and annexation of the Arab
territories is legal, which runs counter to the Organization’s decisions in this regard. Israel is convinced that the
bombing of homes and residences, villages and cities, is a
legitimate act, be it in the West Bank and Ghaza or in
Lebanon, Tunisia or any other place for that matter.

59. The attitude of the United States, as shown in the
statements that have been made in Washington, indicates
how wide the gap is between what the Arab States are trying
to pursue, the efforts they are attempting to make to establish relations of friendship and co-operation with the United
States and the American attitude, which has reached its
highest level of hostility to the whole Arab nation.

54. As we know, Israel has enacted its own version of
international law: the Israeli logic is that he is right who is
capable of committing acts of aggression and occupation.
However, we must remember the fate of those powers that’
in this century have followed a similar logic. True, they
won one victory after another at the beginning, but eventually they crumbled and fell victims of the aggression they
themselves had waged, in a war they had inflicted on the
peoples of the world.

60. This American attitude in support of Israeli terrorism, unfortunately, constitutes a great distortion of the
tradition of the American people and of their praiseworthy
struggle for liberty, independence and the principles of
human rights. This attitude makes the Statue of Liberty,
which stands a few miles away, a symbol of the abyss
which separates the struggles of the heroes of freedom in
the history of the American battle for independence and
the reality of American policy. This attitude makes that’
lady a dead statue belonging to the past.

55. The terrorism adopted by Israel as a policy, system
and ideology has stained with blood the entire history of
Zionism and has gravely blemished the values and principles of the Jewish faith.

61. The Security Council is called upon today fully to
shoulder its responsibilities. We hope once again that the
United States delegation, before adopting its final position,
will take into consideration the blood and tears shed as a
result of the Israeli treachery and will remember the mothers who lost their children and the children who lost their
fathers. We. hope that the United States delegation will ’
remember that history has no mercy and that the condemnation from which Israel may be spared today-and we
hope it will not-would be an historic condemnation of a
State that allows the criminal to escape with impunity. We
hope that the United States will reconsider its position with.
respect to that aggressive entity and will remember that by
continuing ‘to support, arm and defend its aggression, it
sets itself against the Arab nation as a whole.

56. It furthermore points the finger of condemnation at
those who have been the rulers of Israel since the carnage
at Deir Yassin and the King David Hotel, and we know
that one of the protagonists of the latter was the current
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Zionist entity. It condemns them all the way to the carnages of Sabra and
Shatila and all other ,acts of terrorism and annihilation
committed by Israel in Lebanon yesterday, in Tunisia
today, and who knows where tomorrow.
57. In the light of this Israeli record, which is replete with
acts of aggression, and of -the Israeli logic used to justify
that aggression, such as that presented by the Zionist representative yesterday in the Council, when he pledged to
continue Israeli aggression against innocent people and to
persist in acts of destruction and terrorism-in
the light of
all that, do we not have the right to wonder about the
reasons behind such Israeli determination to defy the will
of the international community? Israel persists in its crimes
because, unfortunately, it receives all the support it needs
in committing those crimes from a super-Power in the
Council, which does so without questioning the nature of
those crimes, their cost and the number of their victims.

62. I should like to express the hope, on behalf of the
League of Arab States, that the Council will live up to its
responsibilities and adopt a decision that responds to the
hopes the people of the world have placed in the Organization and in the Security Council, particularly in this year of
the fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations.
63. The decision adopted by the Council must condemn
Israel for -committing aggression and must impose sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter, as well as determining the necessary reparations and other measures to
deter Israeli aggression. The failure of the Council to take
the necessary measures would be disappointing and would
necessarily mean the further disintegration of the edifice of
the Organization at a time when society is in dire need of
it, in this era of nuclear terror, and of the values and
principles that -the Organisation represents.

58. Within that framework, we,can basically look at, first,
the American-Israeli Strategic Co-operation Agreement;
secondly, the American-Israeli Trade Free Zone Agreement; thirdly, the ,American military support which gave
Israel an arsenal that contains the most recent American
means of destruction; fourthly, the billions of dollars from
which the poor in American society and those in need of
social services are deprived and from which many poor
countries in need of assistance in Africa, Asia and Latin
America are deprived. The money is used instead to finance

64. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen,
Mr. Abdulkarim Al-Eryany, who wishes to make a state6

representative of the Palestinian ’ people, is aggression
against international peace and security and a further challenge to the Security Council, the organ that embodies the
international will which entrusted to it responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

ment in his canacitv as Chairman of the Oraanization of
the Islamic Conference. I invite him to take i place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
65. Mr. AL-ERYANY
(Yemen) (interpretation from
Arabic): Sir, I should like at the outset to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should also like to express,
through you, our appreciation to your predecessor. We are
confident that your experience and wisdom, which are
known to all, will enable you to conduct the business of
this Council sucessfully.

72. Today the Council is being called upon to consider
again the conduct of Israel and to take a responsible decision with regard to it which will show that the intemational community
as represented in the Council is
prepared to shoulder its responsibilities in the face of
Israel’s irresponsible actions. While appealing to the Council to take such a decision, we reaffirm the solidarity of all
Islamic countries with our brothers in Tunisia. We support
Tunisia in its call for the condemnation of Israel and for
full compensation for the materialdamage
inflicted upon
it by Israeli aggression. We call upon all members of the
Council to support the just draft resolution submitted by
Tunisia, convinced as we are that it represents the minimum the Council can do with regard to this brutal crime
that has claimed the lives of so many innocent people,
Tunisians as well as Palestinians.

66. I should like to express our thanks to you and to the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
take part in the discussion on the agenda item before the
Council, since the Yemen Arab Republic is now presiding
over the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
67. The Security Council is meeting today to review once
again a treacherous aggression which demonstrates Zionist
terrorism in its worst form. That aggression committed by
Israel the day before yesterday against the’ Republic of
Tunisia, a State Member. of the Organization, is another
example of the aggressive policies that it adopts against
Arab countries at a time when they are affirming their
sincere desire to seek peace based upon justice. That barbaric raid launched by Israeli aircraft over civilian areas in
the Tunisian capital is a flagrant violation ‘of the sovereignty of a Member State, a violation of its territorial integrity and airspace. That act constitutes a blatant aggression
and a violation of the Charter of the United Nations as
well as of the norms of international law which guarantee
the peace and security of States.

73. On behalf of all Islamic countries, I extend condolences to Tunisia and to the PLO.
74. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mr.
Ali A. Treiki. I welcome him and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
75. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretution from, Arabic): Allow me to associate myself with
preceding speakers, Sir, in congratulating you on presiding
over the Council’s deliberations this month. We wish the
Council all success. I should also like to thank Sir John
Thomson, representative of the United Kingdom, for the
constructive way in which he conducted the deliberations
of the Council last month.

68. Along with all peace-loving countries, we have
repeatedly warned that Israel and its aggressive practices in
defiance of international law represent a threat to the security and peace of the Middle East and of the entire world.
Israel’s recent act of aggression and provocation against
the capital of Tunisia gives ample proof of the pertinence
of the warnings we have voiced in the Council and other
international forums.

76. I shall not dwell upon the illegal aspects of the act of
aggression against the sister country of Tunisia or upon
the fact that it contravened the Charter of the United
Nations. Because of the Zionist entity, we have been forced
to come to regard such action as habitual. This latest deed
is but one link in the chain of acts of aggression perpetrated against Arab and non-Arab States.

69. It is a matter for profound regret that Israel’s aggressive conduct should be supported and unfoundedly justified
by the United States Administration, whose international
responsibilities should impel it rather to support peace and
justice and deter aggression anywhere in the world.

77. The, nature of Zionism is continuous expansion and
aggression. Ever since the United Nations committed the
grave error of establishing that entity, it has persisted in
engaging in continual wars and acts of aggression against
the Arab nation in violation of,the Charter and resolutions
of the United Nations. The Zionist entity annexed the
Holy City of Jerusalem in violation of all relevant intemational decisions, and what was our answer? What steps
have we taken? It annexed the Syrian Golan Heights, and
what steps did we take then? What did the Council do?

70. By its latest act of aggression against Tunisia and its~
violation of the sovereignty of a State Member of the
United Nations and of international law, Israel has shown
that it is not satisfied with having usurped the territories of
Palestine, displaced the Palestinian people and dispersed
them throughout the world, that it is not satisfied with
perpetrating acts of aggression against its Arab neighbours
or invading and destroying Lebanon; but that it will persist
in pursuing its illusory goal and its desire to shed blood
and destroy the Palestinian people wherever they may be.

78. The Zionist entity still occupies part of southern Lebanon, and a short while ago it occupied the greater part of
Lebanese territory, killing. or displacing thousands of

71. Israel’s treacherous act of aggression against the sister country of Tunisia and the PLO, the sole and legitimate
7

people. What was our answer? It was negative. The Zionist
entity, in contravention of all international laws, is altering
the physical character of the occupied Arab territories and
establishing settlements. Here, too, our attitude has been
negative. The United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, as a result of circumstances in which it operates, have always been unable to adopt any measure
against the Zionist entity.

85. All of us, including the United States, will pay a high
price. Zionism will destroy the United States and American society, and the American people will pay the price.
Thus, we should start immediately
to eradicate this
scourge which threatens all mankind.
86. The representative of the Zionist entity sDoke of terrorism. We all condemn terrorism. We -condemn the
hijacking of air-planes, including the hijacking of American
airplanes. We condemn the assassination of diplomats,
whether they be Americans, Russians or others. However, 1
shall we allow such international terrorism to take place?
Shall we allow a State to act according to the law of the
jungle? Do we allow it to send its airplanes to displace and
kill innocent Tunisians? There are Palestinians here in the
United States. Do we expect the Zionist entity to strike at
the United States and American targets because there are
Palestinians in this country?

79. We in the Arab nation have given warnings about the
nature of the racist Zionist entity and against the danger
that entity represents. Now we see new evidence of its
nature in its direct aggression against a State Member of
the United Nations far remote from Palestine.
$0. Why has this happened? It is said that it was because
Tunisia offered refuge to the Palestinians. What is the
Zionist entity’s aim with regard to that people? It is to
annihilate them, to liquidate them physically. We are told
that Hitler tried to annihilate the Jews. We were against
that because, in the fmal analysis, the Jews are our cousins;
we are of the same race. But what the Zionist entity is
doing is even more terrible than the carnage for which
Hitler was responsible. Hitler killed the Jews in Germany,
but the Zionist entity kills the Palestinians not only in
Palestine but also in every part of the world, in an attempt
to annihilate them directly.

87. This is really dangerous. We see ourselves confronting stark aggression. But at the same time as we see the
whole world condemn and denounce this act of aggression, we unfortunately find the United States defending
and justifying it and commending Israeli intelligence for
having chosen those who were going to be hit. Such an
attitude cannot but encourage the Israeli entity to commit
acts of aggression. American arms are responsible for killing children in Egypt at the school of Bahr Al-Bakhar.
American armaments have killed thousands of innocents,
martyrs, women and children, including Syrians and Lebanese. Has the time not yet come for the United States to
reconsider its attitude and to shoulder its responsibility as
a super-Power and permanent member of the Security
Council? Or will we continue to witness indefinite support
of this entity by American airplanes and American
financing?

81. What is left to the Council? What is left of its prestige
and importance if it does not take the necessary measures
to expel that entity and to compel it to comply with United
Nations resolutions? The United Nations is no longer
honoured by the presence of the Zionist entity because it is
a blemish to the Organization to include such a Member.
82. What is the role of the Council and what respect is it
shown? What are we, the small peoples, going to say to the
Council? Our independence is jeopardized and our peace
and security are jeopardized. Yesterday it was Iraq, today
it is Tunisia; tomorrow, who knows whose turn it will be?
At one point, it was the turn of Uganda.

88. We in the Arab world have lost patience. We used to
look with admiration to the American people when it
united and supported liberation movements and the Algerian revolution. However, what are we to tell our people
today? What are we to tell our children about the American attitude, which supports the Zionist entity?

83. We had neglected, and the world had ignored for a
period .of time, what Hitler did. When the-invasion of
Czechoslovakia began and continued, and the aggression
continued, what was the result? Tens of millions of victims.
And if the world does’not unite today in the face of Zionism, which was termed a racist movement by the United
Nations, the world will pay the price, which will indeed be
costly. If we, the Arabs, have paid a high price, others will
do so as well.

89. A few days ago, in an attempt by the United States
administration to divide Tunisia and Libya, we heard a
statement by the official spokesman of the American State
Department claiming that there had been Libyan aircraft
violating the air space of Tunisia. He then said:
“President Bourguiba in June paid a visit to the
United States. President Reagan noted that the United
States is firmly committed to the security of Tunisian
territory, its integrity and the principle of noninterference in its internal affairs. Tunisia can rely on
the continued support and the friendship of the United
States.*‘*

84. The representative of the Zionist entity spoke yesterday of peace. Which peace is that-the annexation of Jerusalem, the annexation of the Golan Heights, the carnage
of Sabra and Shatila, aggression against Tunisia, the
annexation of the Arab territories? Is that peace? Is there
one among us, including the United States, who can justify
support for the Zionist entity? Is there a single, peaceloving State or one that claims its love for peace and freedom, regardless of its point of view, that can say yes to that
entity?

90. Where is this friendship of the United States for Tunisia? When Zionist aircraft bomb Tunisia, we cannot say
*Quoted

8

in English

by the speaker.

97. Do not make us lose confidence completely. We are
small countries, but, even so, we are determined to live free
or to die in dignity.

that the Americans, who own the most tin-to-date means
of intelligence and surveillance, did not know of this. Why
did the United States administration not protect Tunisia?
Why did it support the act of aggression against Tunisia?
We would have hoped that the United States administration would be committed to what it had said, and that it
would protect Tunisia against aggression.

98. I appeal to the Council to take all the measures provided for in the Charter and to confirm its support for-and
solidarity with the Tunisian people and the sister country
of Tunisia as well as with the Palestinian people.

91. Tunisia has not been a victim of aggression on the
part of Libya, because Libya is a fraternal country and a
neighbour to Tunisia and will remain so. The security of
Tunisia is part of our own security. It has been proved
beyond any doubt that the aggressor against Tunisia could
not be and is not Libya, but rather the aggressor against
the Arab nation. It is the enemy of the Arab nation, including the people of Tunisia, Palestine, Algeria, Syria and
Morocco.

100. I wish simply to say that later, at the end of the
debate, I shall reply to the intemperate words and veiled
threats contained in the Libyan representative’s speech,
about the United States “paying the price”.

92. At a time when we condemn and denounce this act
of aggression, we should like to say that we fully support
the fraternal country of Tunisia and the Tunisian
people. We are at the service of Tunisia, because what
happened in Tunisia will happen to us one day and will
happen to every Arab State tomorrow.

101. Mr. ALLEYNE (Trinidad and Tobago): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and to express my confidence that under your
able stewardship the deliberations of the Council will
prove most productive.

99. The PRESIDENT:
At this point I take off my presidential hat and put on the hat of representative of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

102. I take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to Sir
John Thomson, representative of the United Kingdom, for
the skilful manner in which he conducted the Council’s
proceedings over the past month.

93. At the same time, we hold the Council, including
the United States, responsible before history. We thus
ask that the United States reconsider its attitude and
realize that peace will not be achieved either with aircraft or with Israeli terrorism.
Peace is basically
achieved through respect for human rights and international instruments, as well as through withdrawal from
the occupied‘ Arab territories, That is genuine peace.

103. I am sure I speak for all members present’ when I
express our congratulations and our thanks to Sir Geoffrey
Howe, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, on the professional manner
in which he conducted our commemorative meeting on 26
September. We were particularly impressed by the great
facility with which he synthesized all the strands of our
respective contributions into a comprehensive summary.

94. We will ail pay the price, including the United
States, if we fail to achieve this. If we do not implement
Chapter VII of the Charter, we shall find ourselves faced
with another act of aggression and with discussions of
one act of aggression after another. It might then be too
late.

104. It was with great distress and indignation that my
delegation learned of the deplorable air attack conducted
by Israel on 1 October in the locality of Hammam-Plage,
south of Tunis, which resulted in extensive casualties,
among which at least 50 were killed. Our condolences go
to the bereaved families and to the Government and
people of Tunisia.

95. The Arab nation, even if it is now incapable of
defending itself against this act of aggression because the
perpetrator is supported by the strongest Power on
earth, will one day be capable of defending itself. History has taught us that the peoples will eventually prevail. Where are Hitler and Mussolini? Mussolini killed
more than half the Libyan people during his period in
power. But fascism is dead; nazism is dead; and zionism
and the Zionist regime will also die.

105. Only a few days ago, at the meeting of the Council
convened to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, we all~reaffhmed our obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and our continued commitment to its principles and purposes. It is therefore a sad
reflection on the Council’s credibility, and indeed, on the
present conduct of international relations, that a State
Member of the United Nations should so flagrantly violate
the very principles on which the Organ&&ion is founded.
There can be absolutely no justification for Israel’s violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Tunisia.

96. We will not be patient; our patience has run out. We
ask the members of the Council not to make us lose confidence in the United Nations and the Security Council. We
do not want to lose hope in the Council, although we see
that it is paralysed by the veto right. We call upon the
Council to cancel this veto right. It should not be given to
one group of States. We have seen this veto right being
used by that group of States against the will and the rights
of peoples. We shall see it used once again now to protect
and support aggression.

106. We are all committed to peace and to upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter. Members of the
Council therefore cannot, in all conscience, condone such
an act of hostility and the consequent loss of innocent
9

human lives and destruction of property. Israel’s act of,
aggression can only serve to increase-tension in the region
and militate against attempts to secure a just and lasting
peace in the Middle Past. This attack took place just at the
time when there was some optimism that -direct negotiations could commence involving some major parties to the
conflict from the region., Acts of violence such as that
which occurred last Tuesday can only undermine this
regional peace process and the efforts by the United
Nations to convene an international peace conference on
the Middle Fast.

Tunisia, which left a great number of dead and of
wounded, many of them wounded seriously.

107. My delegation wishes to reiterate that only through
the resolution of the Palestinian problem, which lies at the
heart of the Middle Fast conflict, will there be durable
peace in the area. This peace can never be achieved unless
the Palestinian people are able to exercise their inalienable
right to self-determination and establish an independent
Palestinian State, in conformity with all the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. We recognize the right of all
States in the region, including Israel; to exist and to live in
peace within secure borders that are internationally recognized, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973)

115. The Greek Government has on many occasions
unequivocally condemned all acts of terrorism. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece recently strongly reiterated that position in addressing the General Assembly.* It
was within this context that we also condemned the brutal
slaying of Israeli nationals in the Republic of Cyprus, itself
a victim of continuous aggression. We are convinced, however, that acts of terrorism cannot in any way serve as an
excuse for a Government to launch an armed attack on a
third country.

114. My Government has strongly denounced this act of
aggression and, together with other member States of the
European Community, has energetically condemned it. I
should simply like here to reiterate our condemnation of
this armed violation of the territory of the Republic of
Tunisia, a truly peace-loving country with which Greece
has traditionally maintained close ties of friendship.

116. The Middle Fast problem is almost as old as our
organization. At a time when efforts are being made to
promote a peaceful solution to this perennial conflict,
actions such as those taken by Israel cannot but hamper
the process towards peace. My Government urges the.
Government of Israel to abandon the policy of mass retaliation, which violates the very principles of the Charter and
of international law in general.

108. Less than three weeks ago. attemnts bv the Council
to address the deteriorating s&ration in-the &-ritories illegally occupied by Israel were frustrated. Unless we deal
with this fundamental problem of Palestine, there will be
little hope of finding a solution which will open the gateway of peace to this area. The reprehensible raid by Israel
against Tunisian territory emphasizes the need for the
Council not only to take prompt action on this immediate
problem, but to deal expeditiously with the wider Middle
Fast question.

117. In concluding, I extend to the Government and
people of Tunisia, to the Palestinian people and to the
families of the victims the profound sympathy of my
Government.

109. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement..

118. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Morocco, Mr.
Abdellatif Filali, whom I welcome. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

110. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): Mr. President, I thank
you and through you the members of the Council, for
giving me the opportunity to address this meeting.

119. Mr. FILALI (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
I wish first, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of October.
We are convinced that, thanks to your human qualities
and your great ~experience in international affairs, our
debates will be crowned with success.

1 Il. At the very outset, allow me to congratulate YOU on
your assumption of the &ice of President of the Council
for the month of October. This is a period which, apart
from coinciding with the celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, will unfortunately be a diffrcult one. The Council is seized of a number of recent cases
of violations of the Charter of the United Nations. I am
sure that with your well-known wide, and long experience
in international affairs, you will be able to guide the Council’s deliberations successfully.

120. I should also like to pay a particular tribute to Sir
John Thomson for the adroit and competent manner in
which he led the Council’s debates during September.
121. Finally, I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to
all the members of the Council for allowing me to take
part in this debate, which I hope will have a positive
outcome.

112. I also congratulate the President of the Council for
the month of September, Sir John Thomson, representative of the United Kingdom, on the able way in which he
carried out his duties.

122. For the past 40 years, the question of Palestine has
constantly and persistently demanded the attention of the
Organization because of the policy of aggression and systematic expansion followed by Israel in the Yiddle East.

113. On instructions of my Government, I should like to
refer to the recent attack by the Israeli air force against
10

123. The United Nations and, in particular, the Security
Council have been asked on many occasions to take decisions in connection with massacres of the Palestinian
people, the violation of. the internationally
recognized
borders of neighbouring States and the acts of terrorism
made into a State policy by Israel, such as the destruction
by the Israeli air force on 7 June 1981 of the nuclear
research centre at Tamuz, near Baghdad.
124. The Council is meeting today in tragic circumstances to consider yet another criminal act of aggression by
Israel against an Arab State Member of the United
Nations. This time it is a raid carried out by the Israeli air
force more than 2,400 kilometres from its bases against the
headquarters of the PLO, which caused dozens of innocent
victims among Palestinian and Tunisian civilians.

impose the
aggressor.

necessary sanctions

against

the Israeli

130. The whole of international public opinion, indignant at the savage, criminal act perpetrated against inn&
cent civilians in Tunisia, is placing its hopes in the Council
to restore respect for the system of values on which international society in our day is based and respect for the
valuable achievements of the United Nations. What is at
stake is the credibility of the Council and of the Organization as a whole, at a time when it is commemorating its
fortieth anniversary and intends to prove its effectiveness
in bringing about a better world and its dedication to its
founders’ desire for peace.
’
13 1. Official terrorism cannot go unpunished, unless we
want to go back to the rule of the law of an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth and to the endless escalation of
violence and destruction. The Council must, in the overriding interest of international security and stability, strongly
condemn Israel and demand that it provide suitable and
complete compensation to the victims of its act of
aggression.

125. When such a close member of our Maghreb family
is harmed, we share in the grief and sorrow, and the entire
Moroccan people joins its Tunisian brothers both in
mourning and in indignation and revulsion.
126. The Kingdom of Morocco, which pays homage to
the innocent victims, strongly condemns Israel’s violation
of the sovereignty of the brother people of Tunisia, to
which we offer our solidarity and unreserved support in
the present time of trial. The terrorist aggression is a denial
of the most basic principles of international law set forth in
the Charter and in all the major declarations interpreting
it, such as those to be found in General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and resolution 3314
(?0UX) of 14 December 1974 on the Definition of
Aggression.

132. Since the Fez, Summit of 1982, when a -peace plan
was adopted unanimously [see S/15510 of 6 December
1982, annex], the Arab leaders have been working ceaselessly to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
with respect for the principles of the United Nations. It
must be said that so far they have come up against the
policy of force of Israel; which has just attacked a country
which is the host of the League of Arab States and has
always been among the first loudly to proclaim its desire
for a peaceful settlement under appropriate international
auspices. However, we remain convinced that, thanks in
particular to the firmness that the Security Council will not
fail to show on this occasion, justice will prevail, in the
interest of all the peoples concerned.

127. Wanton reprisals against innocent civilians, including women and children, have always been condemned by
the international community since the Second World War,
and if self-defence consisted ‘in bombing all those tenitories where Palestinians live, no country would be safe from
Israel’s destructive folly.

133. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, Mr. Taher Masri, whom I
welcome. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

128. It was a deliberate action when the Government of
Israel chose to strike, on 1 October, against a moderate
Arab country and against the PLO headquarters, at the
moment when the Organization, in co-operation with all
responsible, peace-loving States, is making every effort to
achieve a just and lasting solution to the question of the
Middle East. The act of aggression against Tunisia was
really nothing less than an attempt to sabotage the process
of restoring peace to the Middle East, and once again gives
the clearest possible proof of Israel’s persistence in its policy of confrontation and denial of all the fundamental
rights of the Palestinian people.

134. Mr. MASRI (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
wish first of all, Sir,.to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of October. I am certain that, thanks to your vast
knowledge of international affairs and your well-known
qualities as an enlightened diplomat, the Council will carry
out its duties successfully. I wish also to thank your predecessor, Sir John Thomson, the representative of the United
Kingdom, for the exemplary manner in which he guided
the work of the Council last month.

129. The Security Council, which recently reaffirmed, at
its meeting on 26 September at ministerial level, its commitment to fulfil its prime responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, is now
duty-bound fully to use its powers under the Charter and

135. Moreover, I thank the members of the Council for
their prompt response to Tunisia’s request that the Council be convened urgently to consider Israel’s attack on the
southern portion of the Tunisian capital. I have every hope
that the joint response of the Council will meet the challenge before it.
11

136. It is our earnest hope that in this year of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations, the Council will take
decisive action on the Tunisian complaint, so that the
world may forget the Council’s past inability to carry out
its responsibilities under the Charter regarding the Middle
East. We hope that the commemoration
of this anniversary will do honour to our collective responsibility and will
make us aware of our joint task in the Organization, on
which the peoples and nations of the world have pinned
their hopes. We hope that this time the Council will play
its proper role and will discharge its responsibility by condemning the aggressor and forcing it to mend its ways, in
keeping with the justice of the complaint lodged by the
sister republic of Tunisia.

East, both for the present and for the future. This tolerance of such a flagrant raid against an independent Arab
State can only encourage Israel to continue its acts of
aggression against the countries of the region. The assertion that the Israeli attack can in some way be justified is
unacceptable to us, as that could provide a political shield
and material support for Israel’s acts.
141. This act of aggression was perpetrated just as sustained efforts were being made to get the peace process
moving again. That is why we believe that the attack was
directed against the peace efforts now being made.
142. The attack by Israel is an unlawful military act with
disastrous political consequences. We would draw attention to the political gravity of this senseless and serious
illegal act, an Israeli attack carried out against the offices
of the PLO, near the capital of Tunisia. It is yet another
example of the policy of pre-emptive surprise attacks, and
goes in tandem with the “iron list” policy being pursued
by Israel in southern Lebanon, on the West Bank and in
the Gaza Strip. It is the very essence of Israel’s crude
approach to its security, an approach based on senselessly
using military force against the Arab countries. The bombing of Baghdad, Beirut and Tunis is a vivid illustration of
that policy.

137. We need not recall the disastrous consequences and
complications of this unjustifiable Israeli attack; Israel illegally violated Tunisia’s territory and sovereignty, jeopardizing its stability and national security. The toll among the
civilian population was more than 150 dead and wounded.
138. Members of the Council know that in 1982 Tunisia
welcomed Palestinians from Beirut under international
agreements which have been respected by a number of
States, including certain members of the Council. It did
this in order to facilitate the withdrawal of Palestinians
from Beirut. Furthermore, history has forged the closest of
links between Tunisia and the rest of the Arab nation.
Tunisia is a State known for its moderation, balanced policies and open attitude. It has never been a staging area for
terrorism; on the contrary, it houses the headquarters of
the League of Arab States, which in 1982 adopted the
Arab peace plan [ibid.]. That is why Tunisia’s willingness
to welcome Palestinians after Israel invaded Lebanon is
praiseworthy, for it contributed to lessening the tension in
our region, thereby preventing a further outbreak of violence. This is an important fact which should be overlooked by no one, certainly not by the members of the
Council.

143. The Arab region has suffered much and has paid
dearly for Israel’s policies, which are marked by military
reprisals and by the occupation of the territory of others,
and arise from Israel’s conviction of its own military
superiority.
144. Israel tries to blame others for its continued occupation of Arab territories, for the arbitrary actions of its,
occupation forces and for the internal resistance of the
inhabitants under occupation. As a result of these policies,
there have been 18 years of persistent occupation, no
peaceful and just settlement, ever increasing destruction
and the dispersal and exile of inhabitants.

139. Everyone knows that the persistence of the Palestinian problem and Israel’s continued occupation of Arab
territories are the real causes of the tension and instability
in the Middle East and of the resulting extremism. The
cause of the violence is obvious: it lies in the absence of a
just political solution. That is why it is of paramount
importance to get the peace process moving again and to
work seriously and sincerely for peace, rather than supporting or encouraging Israeli aggression. For in fact,
Israel is trying by its military retaliatory actions to hobble
the peace process and gain control of a situation marked
by violence and extremism, a situation in which Israel
holds the trump cards. Israel is trying to delay as long as
possible a lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. That
is why we are greatly concerned at actions to mask the true
nature of Israel’s raid against Tunisia on 1 October and to
attempt to justify it.

145. The primary danger of Israel’s attack upon Tunisia
arises from its being an attempt by Israel to keep the
region locked in this spiral of violence, tension and instability. This policy will serve only the interests of the
extremists and the enemies of peace.
146. In conclusion, it is true that we are still caught up in
violence and extremism in the Middle East, but now we
must cut the Gordian knot and draw a distinction between
cause and effect. In our opinion, the Council is the right
body to deal seriously, objectively and impartially with this
thorny problem. The Council will, I am sure, strongly condemn Israel’s raid, denounce it and hold Israel responsible
for the losses Tunisia has suffered as a result, commit it to
reparations and adopt a resolution forcing Israel to change
and put an end to its senseless, irresponsible acts. L hardIy
need to say that if the Council adopted such an attitude, its
prestige and credibility would be restored, as would our
confidence in it and in international public order.

140. We take comfort from the growing wave of intemational indignation at this blatant act of Israeli aggression,
but what we are hearing from the capital of one country in
justification of this attack is very dangerous for the Middle
12

turned back. What is even more distressing is that this
cowardly act has been hailed by a super-Power, a permanent member of the Council.

147. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, Mr. Vincent Montsi Makhele. I welcome him, and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

153. We, the small countries, felt a chill go through our
spines, for, shockingly, we heard that today the mighty
and the strong have a right to hit left and right with impunity. Israel, a State that professes to yearn for peace, is being
encouraged to be a bully in the Middle East. Is that the
sort of peace Israel is asking for?

148. Mr. MAKHELE
(Lesotho): Allow me at the very
outset, Sir, to express my delegation’s sincere congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of October. Your qualifications,
expertise and diplomatic skills preceded your arrival here
as the new Permanent Representative of your country to
the United Nations. We are therefore more than confident
that you will guide the deliberations of the Council to a
fruitful conclusion. As a representative of a permanent
member, a great Power and a leader of the Western countries, your responsibilities towards your people and the
world community are onerous. The eyes of the world are
on you, and we are confident that you will live up to
expectations.

154. Unfortunately we see a pattern: on the southern tip
of Africa we see a State which has also elevated terrorism
to State policy. Like Tunisia, Angola has been subjected to
successive acts of aggression and State terrorism-from
South Africa. We speak out and condemn this lawlessness
because it was not so long ago that my own country was
wantonly attacked by a bully in our region, a bully that has
turned itself into a regional policeman.

149. Permit me to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the representative of the United Kingdom, for
the efficient manner in which he and the British Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs conducted the work of the Council during September.

155. The United Nations, and particularly the Security
Council, is the only body that can and must protect peaceful and powerless countries like Tunisia from the use of
force by bullies like Israel. We call upon all small countries
to speak out against this brutal misuse of force. It must be
borne in mind by .a11that these peace-loving and powerless
countries will always be victims of these types of acts of
aggression.

150. The events of 1 October 1985, in which Israel committed an act of aggression against Tunisia, a State
Member of the Organization and a member of the Organization of African Unity, compel me to express Lesotho’s
shock and dismay at that callous act. I need not rehash the
facts of that act, which has claimed the innocent lives of
over 50 persons, including Palestinian refugees-and the
Palestinian people has been denied a homeland and statehood for over 40 years.

156. We therefore strongly condemn this attack and call
upon Israel to rethink its policies and to embark on a path
of peace.
157. We shall conclude by expressing our condolences
and sympathy to the Tunisian Government and the Palestine Liberation Organization and the families that have
lost their loved ones. Israel must be called upon to desist
from these acts and be enjoined to resort to peaceful means
to solve disputes and to give fair and full compensation to
the Tunisian Government:

151. We are all gathered here to celebrate the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations in the name of peace. It
was only last week that the Council held a special meeting
at the ministerial level, at which members rededicated
themselves to the objectives and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, the basic thrust of which is nothing
but peace. They rededicated themselves to the settlement
of disputes by peaceful means and to renunciation of the
use of force as a means of resolving disputes. We have
heard statements, even during the general -debate in the
General Assembly, condemning terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

158. The PRESIDENT:
There are still a number of
speakers on my list. In view of the lateness of the hour, I
intend to adjourn this meeting now. But before we
adjourn, I shall call on the representative of Israel, who
wishes to make a statement in exercise of the right of reply.
159. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): With few exceptions,
the countries that are represented in this chamber comprise essentially two categories in connection with the issue
now under discussion. They are either the victims of terrorism or its backers and promoters. Yesterday I addressed
some of my remarks to the States in the first category, the
victims. Today I should like to say a few things to the
sponsors and supporters. We have listened to some of
them just now around this ‘very table.

152. My delegation fully associates itself with these condemnations. Yet it is under these circumstances, at this
very hour of the solemnization of peace, that the State of
Israel has negated all we are here for. By violating the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Tunisia, a small,
peace-loving country like Lesotho, Israel has not only violated international law but has proved beyond doubt that
it practises State terrorism against its neighbours and is far
from creating a climate conducive to peace. A sad day in
the annals of the Organization has again been registered,
for indeed Israel has demonstrated that international law
has been replaced by the law of the jungle, where might is
the rule. History has been rewritten and the clock has been

160. We have heard, for example, from Syria, the
butcher of Lebanon, a country which systematically practises terrorism, including such Syrian specialties as car
bombs and assassinations, from Tripoli to Sidon. Syria has
13

also recently acquired a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
PLO. And let me remind all members that it was Syria that
imported the Iranian Hezbollah into Lebanon in the first
place.
161. We heard yesterday from the Soviet Union, whose
press in the last few days has been unleashed to pour out a
torrent of abuse against Israel, accusing us-as the Soviet
representative did yesterday-of State-sponsored terrorism. The Soviets know whereof they speak when they discuss this subject. They have unstintingly and generously
supported terrorist groups around the world. They have
gone so far as to train terrorists in special camps in the
Soviet Union itself. The Soviet attitude towards indiscriminate violence ‘is well-evidenced in the bombings-not,
mind you, surgical strikes against military targets, but
carpet bombings-of
entire villages in the Panjsher Valley
in Afghanistan.
162. But when talking about the Soviet Union today, I
must note that at this very moment, and perhaps only for a
brief moment, the Soviet Union happens to belong to both
categories of countries. It is ‘now, both backer and victim.
Having nurtured the serpent of terror for so long, the
Soviet Union has discovered that it is not fully domesticated, as can be seen by the recent kidnappings and
murder of Soviet diplomats in Lebanon by groups which
the Soviet Union has uncritically supported in many
forums, including this one.
163. And what about Cuba? Its export of sugar and cigars has long ago been exceeded by Cuba’s principal export,
namely, terror and subversion throughout Latin America.
Cuba’s terror business is so successful, in fact, that it is
flourishing now not in just one but in both hemispheres.
164. And what shall we say about Libya, preposterous
Libya which sends terror squads to kill the leaders of so
many of the countries represented here-Libya,
which
shoots unarmed civilians from its own embassy in London, which hatches the maddest terrorist plots imaginable?
Or perhaps there is not much to say as to Libya but to
caution some here who have been offered “brotherly assistance” from Libya. If it patterns the brotherly assistance
given to Chad, to the Sudan and to Egypt, brother beware.
165. We are used to the techniques resorted to by those
countries of accusing others of their own practices. But let
me say that for Israel, which remains unshakably committed to the tight against terrorism, the condemnation of
such regimes is a badge ‘of honour.
166. Let me now go back to the other countries, those
that are on the receiving end of terrorism. We had
expected, perhaps from an incurable faith in human logic
and decency, that the victims of terrorism would be the
first to applaud the defensive action taken by Israel against
the nerve centre of world terrorism and indiscriminate
murder. Instead, we listened with amazement to the
incredible criticism, and even denunciation, of Israel’s
action by those who should know better, and worse, by
those who do know better. We had hoped that the pres-

sures exercised by the Arab countries and the other accomplices and apologists of terror would not, for once, be the
predominant consideration, at least not in this case. I say
“in this case” because, as surely as night follows day, it is
clear that our action was pinpointed against the terrorists
themselves and the extra-territorial base from which they
operated, not against the host country, whatever its
responsibilities. The false assertion that we somehow vialated the sovereignty of a State would appear even more
ludicrous here than it appeared in the case of Entebbe.
167. Since when did the rights of sovereignty include the
right to shelter professional murderers, whose web of terror covers the entire world? Consider the pirates of the
19th century who ravaged the Mediterranean from Cyprus
to Gibraltar and took refuge on the very coast of North
Africa that we are dealing with here today. Did they enjoy
immunity? Or are we going back to the distant times when
there, was no vestige of international order?
168. Terrorism, ,like piracy, can enjoy no political immunity, no, military protection, no legal privileges; the only
connection it has to sovereignty is the obligation of the
sovereign to exclude it from its domain. To assert that the
victims of terrorism should be handcuffed so that they may
be prevented from defending themselves, so that the terrorists roam free and unpunished, is to invite the rule of
lawlessness and savagery. The civilized world will commit
a terrible error if it plays politics with this issue. For what
is at stake here are the very foundations of society and the
future of freedom in the world.
169. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
170. Mr. FARTAS (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interprefaArabic): It seems that if a human being wants a
certificate of good conduct, he must perpetrate some massacres. We all know about those massacres, and we do not
have to recall them here because they would make one feel
disgusted. We all know what happened at Deir Yassin, at
Kibya, at Sabra and Shatila and at Bahr Al-Bakhar. While
we are sitting here and listening to this debate, bodies are
being dug out from the rubble in Tunisia, the bodies of
women and children. I do not want to talk about this
subject.
tionfiom

171. All those who spoke yesterday and today have con;
demned that barbaric aggressive,act. Nobody has deviated
from that position.
l72. I do want to explain one thing. I was sitting behind
my Minister when he was speaking this afternoon and there
was a mistake in the interpretation. What my Minister said
was that the international community must take action to
confront this type of aggression; otherwise it would be faced
with the situation that faced the international community at
the time of Hitler and Mussolini. The price for that would
be paid. by all peoples, including the American people, the
Libyan people and all peace-loving peopie.

173. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement in
exercise of the right of reply in my capacity as representative of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

recently a young American sailor was slowly and brutally
beaten to death. We have felt the acts of terrorism in the
flesh of our people.

174. I have heard here today a series of intemperate
attacks on my country from the representatives of Cuba
and Libya. My country has fought two great wars for
human freedom in this century. We have annexed no territory, nor.have we enslaved any people. In my countrythe
people are free to choose their own Government.

176. From States like Libya or Cuba we accept no lessons on international conduct, nor do we permit them to
determine our foreign policy.

175. My country has suffered grievously at the hands bf
terrorists. Many American ambassadors ‘have been killed.
Many Americans have been hijacked and terrorized. Very

NOTE

i%e meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

’ olfficial Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Plenary
Meetings, 7th meeting.

I

HOW TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

UnitedNationspublications
maybeobtainedfrombookstores
anddistributors
throughoutthe
world.Consultyour bookstore
or writeto: UnitedNations.SalesSection,NewYorkor Geneva.
CO%lMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lespublications
desNationsUniessontenventedansleslibrairieset lesagences
dCpositaires
du mondeentier.Informez-vous
auplpsdevotre libraireou adressez-vous
A : NationsUnies.
Sectiondesvent&. NewYork ou Geneve.
KAK

l-IOJIYYHTb

W3AAHMR

OPrAHM3A~Hl-l

OB’bEJ44HEHHblX

O6aenHHeHHbrx
HamB
MOXHO
KYllHTb
B KHHXCHblX
H areHTcmax
80 ncex pasoHax
MHpa.HaBonwTe
cnpamo4
06 H3nam4nx
B Baueki
Mara3mieHnHntim5fTeno anpecy: OpramisauHa
06bellHHeHHblX
HauHB,
nponaxce
H3XaHHfl.
HbKdOpK
HnH XtHCBa.
ki3LliSlWl

COMO

OpWM3iUViM

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

HAuHfl
MariUHHaK
KHHXHOM

Cexuwr

no

UNIDAS

Laspublicaciones
de lasNaciones
Unidases& en ventaenlibrerfasy casas
distribuidoras
en
todaspanesdetmundo.Consulte
a sulibreroo ditijasea: Naciones
Unidas.SeccidndeVentas.
NuevaYork o Ginebra.

Litho in UnitedNations,New York

00400

90-61439-January1995-1925
