S/PV.8958

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8958th meeting

Thursday, 27 January 2022, 5.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Polyanskiy/Mr. Chumakov
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-24121 (E)
*2224121*

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

estimates that the prison also held nearly 700 children.
I am appalled by the reports that Da’esh has used those
children as human shields.

The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, to participate in
the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I would like to thank you, Madam,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council. My
briefing will focus on the terrorist threat to international
peace and security, especially in the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
I look forward to soon briefing the Council in more
detail based upon the forthcoming fourteenth report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da’esh to
international peace and security, which will be issued
at the end of this month.
I am deeply concerned by the attack that Da’esh
launched last week against Al-Sina’a prison in
Al-Hasakah city, in north-eastern Syria, and the
ongoing fighting that has also affected the civilian
population. The attack has resulted in the escape of an
unknown number of Da’esh prisoners from a facility
reported to hold around 3,000 Da’esh fighters. UNICEF
2/16

27/01/2022

Although the group’s barbarism should come as
no surprise, those children have been left prey to be
used and abused in that way. Members may remember
that, during my briefing to the Council in 2020, I called
for the children to be taken out of harm’s way (see
S/PV.8839). I support the former UNICEF Executive
Director, Henrietta Fore, in saying that those children
should never have been held in military detention in
the first place, as Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths also echoed at the previous meeting today
(see S/PV.8957).
That incident was predictable. Da’esh has been
highlighting and calling for jailbreaks, of which there
have been previous instances in Syria and elsewhere
in the world. The Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team on Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida has regularly
warned of the precarious holding arrangements in
north-eastern Syria and said that an incident of that
kind was to be expected.
For the time being, Da’esh’s ability to strategically
exploit jailbreaks in the area may be limited. The group
cannot easily absorb or exfiltrate fugitives in large
numbers. It is therefore not surprising that many who
escaped the prisons have been killed or recaptured, but
it does not mean that the threat can be neglected.
I would like to recall the words of my colleague,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, who briefed the Council yesterday.
Speaking about the events in Al-Hasakah, he said that
“the episode brings back terrible memories of the
prison breaks that fuelled the original rise of ISIL
in 2014 and 2015. I see it as a clear message to us all
of the importance of uniting to combat the threat of
internationally proscribed terrorist groups and of
resolving the broader conflict in which terrorism
inevitably thrives” (S/PV.8955, p. 2).
That latest incident speaks to the urgent need
for concerted international efforts to address, in an
effective, sustainable fashion, the issue of the prisons
and camps in north-eastern Syria that hold suspected
Da’esh fighters and individuals with perceived links to
the group, including children. Most of those individuals
have never been charged with a crime, yet they remain
in prolonged detention, uncertain of their fate.
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

It is a reminder also of why Da’esh continues to
embed itself in Syria. Challenges to stabilization
in Iraq, as well as the continued conflict and elusive
progress on the political track in Syria, make this area
a favoured arena for Da’esh and other terrorist groups.
That is a tragedy not only for the Syrian people, but also
neighbouring countries and, indeed, the world. Only
hours after the attack in Al-Hasakah, Da’esh fighters
attacked an army barracks located north of Baghdad,
killing at least 11 soldiers. Such attacks highlight two
pressing areas of concern.
First, they are not isolated incidents. The SecretaryGeneral’s reports have warned that the threat posed
by Da’esh is growing, including in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Since its territorial collapse, the group has
focused on reconstituting its capabilities, continued
to maintain clandestine cells, pursued a protracted
terrorist insurgency and maintained sizeable numbers,
the majority of which are based in Iraq.
The group is organized in small cells hiding in
desert and rural areas, while they move across the
border between Iraq and Syria to avoid capture. This
also highlights the transborder nature of the Da’esh
core in the region.
The attacks could also embolden Da’esh affiliates
in the Sahel and Central and East Africa to mount
violent attacks. In recent months, Da’esh affiliates have
expanded into many subregions of Africa, spreading
from the Sahel, taking a further hold in Central and
southern Africa, including Mozambique and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Meanwhile, I am deeply concerned about the
political and security situations unfolding in Mali and
Burkina Faso stemming from the unconstitutional
takeovers of power in those countries. We may see
terrorist groups exploit and actively instigate the power
vacuum that State fragility creates, further undermining
State legitimacy in the Sahel region.
We are also witnessing a rapidly evolving
situation in Afghanistan that could have far-reaching
implications for peace and security around the world. I
would like to echo the Secretary-General’s concern that
terrorism remains a constant global threat, not only to
the situation of Afghanistan.
Secondly, civilians, especially women and children,
pay the highest price from this deteriorating security
situation. I urge that the Council heed the situation in
Al-Hol, Al-Roj and other camps and detention facilities

S/PV. 8958

in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. In Al-Hol
camp alone, more than 56,000 people are held, mostly
women and children, in dire humanitarian conditions.
The ongoing and increasing physical and psychosocial
violence is deeply troubling.
The Secretary-General has consistently stressed
the urgency of an adequate international response to the
dire humanitarian, human rights and security situation,
particularly for children. When I briefed the Council
in 2020 on the threat posed by Da’esh (see S/PV.8716),
I noted the urgency of getting the children in those
camps out of harm’s way. We have all seen reports that
as male children in the camps reach the age of 12, they
are transferred to other facilities.
Some of those children may be among those whom
Da’esh has now used as human shields. That would not
have happened if they had been repatriated in 2019,
2020 or 2021.
I commend Member States, especially in Central
Asia and elsewhere, that have taken on the numerous
challenges involved in repatriating their citizens,
as well as those that have worked to support the
humanitarian situation on the ground in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
However, as the situation festers, which is
unfortunately the case, it only exacerbates conditions
conducive to terrorism and poses a serious threat in
the mid- to long-term perspective. The significant
challenges faced by Member States in ensuring the
protection of vulnerable individuals, accountability for
gross violations of international law, including terrorist
crimes, and security are not becoming any less urgent
or complex with time. Such challenges and risks are
growing more serious with neglect and could have a
long-term impact not only in the region but globally.
In that regard, I would like to recall the Global
Framework and the Multi-Partner Trust Fund to
support requesting Member States on the protection,
voluntary repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals with suspected links to
United Nations-designated terrorist groups returning
from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Global Framework is co-led by UNICEF and my
Office. It provides a whole-of-United Nations approach
that responds to the humanitarian assistance and
protection needs of children and adults, and it supports
requesting Member States in promoting security
and addressing accountability in the repatriation,

22-241213/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration process.
The repatriation of third-country nationals from
Syria and Iraq remains a major priority for the United
Nations, and we stand ready as a reliable partner to
Member States in responding to those challenges.
Da’esh’s attempts to break its fighters free from
prison underlines the need to bring them to justice as
soon as possible and ensure accountability to break
the cycle of violence. I would like to pay tribute to
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in that
regard. I also welcome the new provisions on so-called
battlefield evidence adopted by the Security Council in
resolution 2617 (2021), extending the mandate of our
colleagues from the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.
For over 20 years, the leadership of a united
Security Council has been decisive for international
counter-terrorism efforts. A key lesson is that military
responses are necessary but not sufficient in addressing
the terrorist threat. We need consistent, coordinated
and comprehensive efforts across countries, sectors
and disciplines, anchored in human rights and the
rule of law, to address terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, while ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law.
The United Nations, working through the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, will continue
to support Member States in countering terrorism.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is with great concern that we are following
developments in the south of the Syrian city of
Al-Hasakah, where on 20 January, fighters from the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) captured the
Al-Sina’a prison — the largest penitentiary facility in
the Syrian territory out of governmental control, where
approximately 5,000 jihadists were held.
According to the latest reports, it was a carefully
planned attack that used two explosive-laden vehicles,
driven by suicide bombers. As a result, about 100 ISIL
members broke into the prison, where riots had started
shortly before. The terrorists managed to set free and
arm at least 800 inmates, some of whom immediately
joined the attackers. The fighters gained a foothold
4/16

27/01/2022

within the prison compound itself and also spread to
the adjacent residential quarters.
As we know, starting on 21 January, local armed
groups, supported by the United States Air Force,
have been engaged in counter-action activities. Bloody
fights have broken out, including in densely populated
areas, where the terrorists took shelter. Intensive air
strikes destroyed the buildings housing the technical
college and economic department of the local
university, demolished a fuel warehouse and disrupted
the energy supply to Al-Hasakah. The precise death toll
among civilians is currently unknown. We are deeply
concerned over possible indiscriminate air strikes by
the American air force following the recent attack,
because wherever it is involved, it often causes mass
casualties among civilians.
Recently, on 25 January, at the open debate of
the Security Council on the protection of civilians
(see S/PV.8953), the Permanent Representative of
the United States referred to very valid concepts: the
absolute imperative of the parties to an armed conflict
observing the norms of international humanitarian
law, and the growing importance of the protection
of civilians during urban warfare. She also recalled
how easily explosive ordnance can kill large groups
of civilians.
Yet what we see in reality is that the high-flung
rhetoric of the United States again runs counter to its
actions. Thus, when clearing Al-Sina’a prison and its
surroundings of ISIL terrorists, they used both their air
force and armoured vehicles. Such heavy equipment,
as one might easily guess, uses explosive ammunition,
and the massive outflow of civilians from the combat
zone — more than 45,000 people, as reported by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs — clearly indicates that measures for the
protection of civilians were ignored there.
All members of the Council, especially the
humanitarian penholders, must demand that the United
States provide a detailed account of casualties among
civilians; those responsible must be brought to justice.
Another clear example of this is Afghanistan. If
we look back, what comes to mind is the bombings of
Raqqa, Hajin and Baghouz. According to the United
Nations, no medical facility in Raqqa remained intact
after the hostilities. When Baghouz was bombed in
2019, at least 80 people died, the majority of them
women and children. Yet no one was held accountable,
despite the fact that Washington admitted its guilt.
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

That is yet another question about the high American
standards of accountability to which our Western
colleagues often refer.
We cannot but be concerned over the fact that, as
reported by UNICEF, there are 850 children in Al-Sina’a
prison, and there is no access to them. According to
humanitarian organizations, the number of internally
displaced persons is growing rapidly owing to recent
events. The United Nations estimates that 45,000 people
were forced to flee their homes to safety. Residents
of Al-Hasakah’s southern district are fleeing to
Government territory through the checkpoints opened
by the Syrian military. In that context, we commend
Damascus, which, despite the difficult circumstances
created by the sanctions, continues to assist those in
need.
We also welcome the efforts of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent and all humanitarian non-governmental
organizations that are helping with evacuations.
Approximately 9,000 families have found temporary
housing, but we are concerned that that number will
increase. All those who have lost their homes need
urgent help, including psychological assistance. We call
on humanitarians to respond and to provide appropriate
assistance. The local authorities must also allow
humanitarian access to the areas of Al-Hasakah that are
under their control.
We must note that the events that took place in the
United States-occupied territory of Syria are the result
of our colleagues indulging terrorist elements in the
Syrian Arab Republic. History has taught you nothing,
nor have your own mistakes. We have warned repeatedly
what could happen if terrorist elements are indulged.
That is why the Syrian armed forces, with the support
of the Russian Aerospace Forces, continue to seek out
and eliminate ISIL terrorists in Syria. That work will
continue. We have repeatedly offered to join efforts,
but, as we have seen, your political considerations
override the goal of eradicating terrorism in Syria.
Both north-eastern Syria and Idlib are suffering from
those double standards.
We call on the United Nations to maintain the
situation in Al-Hasakah under control and to report
promptly on the efforts of humanitarian workers to
prevent another humanitarian disaster.
We take this opportunity to focus once again on
the difficult situation that we are seeing in the northeast of Syria, which is once again illegally occupied
by our American colleagues. The areas where the

S/PV. 8958

Americans have been looting oil are suffering from
a true environmental disaster. However, the United
Nations has not assessed that situation in any way or
initiated any action. We note that the Trans-Euphrates
area is another grey area on the Syrian map, as is the
Al-Tanf area, where militants from Mahavir as-Saura,
with the help of the United States, enjoy impunity and
are protected.
The illegal presence of United States military
forces in Syria has created a lawless zone in the northeast, where foreign terrorists and militants, as well as
various criminal elements, feel safe. Lawlessness and
violence prevail in those areas. Terrorists there are
divided into good and bad, and they can start another
life and work to radicalize the local population. That
is characteristic of all those locations where United
States military forces arrive, both while they are there
and after they leave. The most recent example was
Afghanistan, where the United States left a tremendous
number of problems for those on the ground following
the American occupation.
ISIL was struck heavily in Syria. Terrorists were
eliminated or had to flee Government-controlled
territory. Problems remain where the Americans created
a power vacuum where Syria’s sovereign territory
remains occupied by foreign troops. We call for the
immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Syria.
The United States has clearly failed in the fight against
terrorism, both locally and globally. ISIL’s attack on the
prison in Al-Hasakah clearly demonstrates that.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for his briefing today.
In its remarks in the monthly meetings on the
political and humanitarian tracks, India has been
repeatedly reiterating the looming threat posed by
the resurgence of terrorist groups in Syria. Sadly, the
international community has been caught off guard in
recognizing that imminent threat. The attacks by Da’esh
last week in the north-east of Syria, in Al-Hasakah,
which resulted in the killing and displacement of
civilians, has once again underlined our oft-stated
concerns.
Reports of the Secretary-General have repeatedly
mentioned United Nations-designated terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Tahrir Al-Sham gaining strength in Syria. The latest
attack by Da’esh is a manifestation of that strength. Iraq
has also seen terrorist attacks by Da’esh and affiliated
groups in recent months. We strongly condemn those

22-241215/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

attacks and reiterate that the global fight against
terrorism cannot and should not be compromised for
narrow political gains.
The re-emergence of ISIL/Da’esh in Syria and Iraq
calls for urgent action by the international community.
We reiterate that terrorists cannot be defeated by
forming alliances with non-sovereign entities or by
pushing narrow political agendas. In fact, such a skewed
approach would be counterproductive to our collective
efforts. In this regard, we need to support regional
Member States in their measures against terrorists and
United Nations-designated terrorist groups.
While we are focusing on the region of north-east
Syria only, the problem has actually spread across the
country. We call for an assessment by United Nations
agencies to check the siphoning off of humanitarian aid
by terrorist groups.
There is also an urgent need to take steps to counter
the strengthening of these networks across Syria.
There have been reports of using internally displaced
young persons as human shields as well as attempts
by ISIL to recruit them. The countries of origin of
these vulnerable boys and their families need to take
responsibility for them. This problem should not be
allowed to fester forever.
In conclusion, the expanding terrorist activities and
strengthening of United Nations-designated terrorist
groups in Syria and the broader region is a matter of
critical concern and deserves serious introspection
and concerted action by the international community.
As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, India
will continue to take up this issue with all stakeholders
so that is a zero-tolerance approach to terror and
its perpetrators becomes the common call of the
international community.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I naturally thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
As we mentioned yesterday (see S/PV.8955), the
attack by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
on the Al-Hasakah prison last Thursday, 20 January,
the largest operation by this terrorist group since it
was declared defeated in Syria in 2019, shows that
the ISIL is regaining strength in the area, but also in
others such as the Sahel, thereby demonstrating that
the solution cannot be exclusively military in nature.
At the same time, we echo the concern of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
6/16

27/01/2022

Rights expressed last Tuesday (see S/PV.8949) about
the deplorable and scandalous conditions of detention
centres in Syria. The fact that approximately 700
minors are being held in the Al-Sina’a prison, which
houses more than 5,000 inmates associated with ISIL,
in conditions of overcrowding, insecurity and lack of
medical care, is simply barbaric.
But justice will come. And, in this regard,
we reiterate the call of the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism to
urgently repatriate those children who are victims of
terrorism to their countries of origin. Otherwise, in
addition to denying them their most essential human
rights and causing even greater physical and psychoemotional trauma, we will be sowing in these children
the seeds of hatred and hopelessness that trigger the
spiral of violence towards terrorism.
Undoubtedly, all acts of terrorism must be
condemned and punished in accordance with the law.
But we cannot cease to believe that all efforts to prevent
and combat terrorism must unreservedly respect human
rights. Otherwise, we will forever be cutting off the
heads of the hydra without the least result, while we
will remain in the Security Council still recriminating
one another.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Ivanovich Voronkov for his briefing.
France is doing its utmost in the international fight
against terrorism, and as we had the opportunity to state
yesterday (see S/PV.8955), we condemn in the strongest
possible terms the attack carried out on 20 January by
Da’esh against a detention centre in Al-Hasakah, in
north-east Syria. We commend the actions of the Syrian
Democratic Forces and the international coalition in
response to these events and extend our condolences to
the families of the soldiers who were killed in the attack.
This attack characterizes the resurgence of Da’esh
throughout Syria and particularly in the badiya,
which is unfortunately neither new nor a surprise,
as this threat has in fact never disappeared. That is
why we remain resolutely committed to the coalition
alongside our partners in the fight against terrorism
and impunity. France will continue to play its full part
in the international fight against terrorism in order to
eradicate it and at least contain this scourge.
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The acts committed by terrorists in Syria are
crimes. They may constitute war crimes or crimes
against humanity, and those responsible for these
crimes must be held accountable for their actions and
not go unpunished.
France’s position is unwavering. All jihadists who
have made the deliberate choice to join Da’esh must,
regardless of their nationality, be held accountable
before the courts as close as possible to the scene of
their crime, where their victims are and where the
evidence is. This is the reason for our position with
regard to the few French nationals held in detention
facilities in north-east Syria.
This should not make us lose sight of the obvious,
which is that the vast majority of those detained there
are of Iraqi, Syrian or, to a lesser extent, Central Asian
nationality. The question raised by the attack is therefore
that of the protection of places of detention in general,
and not that of the repatriation of a few Westerners who
represent only a small minority of the people who are
interned there.
To eradicate terrorism in the region, a solution to the
Syrian crisis is essential, and this solution can only be
political. We all know this. The road map is resolution
2254 (2015), which the Security Council unanimously
adopted, and we are determined to push for this by
supporting the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Geir Pedersen.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his briefing.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
the situation in north-east Syria, and in particular the
continued threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL).
We welcome the reports that local forces have
regained full control of the detention facility in
Al-Hasakah and have captured all ISIL fighters.
To be sure, enormous progress has been made
in the fight against ISIL, thanks to the efforts of the
global coalition. Stabilization initiatives and liberated
communities have been critical in preventing the return
of ISIL.
But as we have consistently told the Security Council,
ISIL is not yet defeated. The group has continued to
launch brazen terrorist attacks with no regard for the
safety of civilians or civilian infrastructure. That is

S/PV. 8958

why the global coalition has remained not only vigilant,
but actively engaged, especially in north-east Syria.
This recent ISIL attack underscores the threat that
ISIL continues to pose in Syria, as well as the risks
associated with holding ISIL detainees in makeshift
facilities in the region indefinitely.
The coalition is working to ensure that ISIL
detainees who remain in north-east Syria are safely
and humanely housed in accordance with international
standards. We call on Member States to support this
effort. Even prior to this attack, the existing facilities
were insufficient, and the damage caused will only
worsen the problem.
We know that thousands of civilians fled areas
near the facility and are seeking shelter elsewhere in
the city. We commend the work of the local authorities
and humanitarian organizations that are providing
urgent assistance, and we are committed to facilitating
that response.
United States armed forces are present in northeast Syria as part of the global coalition for the sole
purpose of continuing the fight against ISIL. We are
proud to work alongside local Syrian partners, and we
honour the sacrifices they have made in this campaign.
As ever, we encourage all States Members of the
United Nations to act alongside us to ensure ISIL
never again finds safe haven anywhere in the world.
We also encourage all Member States to support
the repatriation, rehabilitation, reintegration and
prosecution, where appropriate, of their nationals
currently in north-east Syria.
The United States is deeply grateful to Governments
and communities across the world that have brought
their nationals home. We stand ready to support any
Member State that wishes to do the same. We also urge
Member States to support the Global Framework for
United Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic and
Iraq Third Country National Returnees. This framework
is co-chaired by the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and UNICEF and enables the entire United
Nations to support Member States on individuals
returning from Iraq and Syria. This framework
combines human-rights-based, age-appropriate and
gender-responsive approaches in order to address the
different needs of women, men, girls and boys.
In response to the Russian representative’s comments
just now, which, unfortunately have turned this
platform into a rhetoric-driven mass of disinformation

22-241217/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

and, frankly, lies about the United States role in Syria.
Let me just say this — the United States is steadfastly
committed to complying with our obligations under
the law of armed conflict, including those obligations
that address the protection of civilians. As a matter of
policy, the United States routinely applies heightened
targeting standards that are more protective of civilians
than are required under the law of armed conflict.
The Russian representative mentioned the tragic
air strikes in Al-Baghuz, Syria, and the United States
Department of Defense has initiated a review of those
March 2019 air strikes. I would note that the United
States Government and the Department of Defense
did that in response to reporting by the media, the free
and independent media that exist in the United States
and something that, as an American citizen, I am quite
proud to point to. Of course, I cannot point to that
same press in Russia because there is no such free and
independent press in Russia, and if such an air strike
had occurred as the tragic result of a Russian military
mistake, there would be no independent press to report
on it, just as there is very little Russian opposition
available to raise the issue if a press could report on it.
That is an important thing to remember.
Let me close by noting that the situation in northeastern Syria is but one component of the broader crisis
in Syria, which, as we all know, requires a political
solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). This
discussion could have occurred alongside either our
discussion yesterday on the political file (see S/PV.8957)
or discussion that just took place on the humanitarian
situation (see S/PV.8953). The Council cannot discuss
the situation in north-eastern Syria without considering
the wider humanitarian needs in that region. Years of
hostilities and an ongoing economic crisis have pushed
thousands of families into poverty and displaced more
than 650,000. Many are now dependent on international
assistance for their survival.
We are grateful for the efforts of humanitarian
organizations working in north-eastern Syria, but it is
not enough for Council members to make expressions
of gratitude. We have the power to do more to help.
The Council can dramatically expand humanitarian
assistance, including by reopening the Al-Yarubiyah
border-crossing between north-eastern Syria and Iraq.
If we were to take that step, Council members would
restore the flow of critical supplies like medicine
and coronavirus disease testing kits to a region in
desperate need.
8/16

27/01/2022

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Russia for requesting this open meeting,
and I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
the briefing that he just made. The terrorist attack on
a prison in Al-Hasakah carried out by the Islamic State
is very likely to have more serious consequences. The
exchange of fire between the parties for multiple days
have seriously threatened civilian safety and warrants
great attention from the Security Council.
First, we must pay greater attention to terrorism
and foreign occupation in Syria. In recent days, the
situation in north-western and north-eastern Syria
remains turbulent, with frequent attacks by the Jabhat
Fath Al-Sham terrorist organization and an escalation of
military operations by foreign troops illegally stationed
in Syria. Those movements have heightened tensions
in Syria, causing civilian casualties and displacement,
damaging civilian infrastructure, distracting the
Organization’s political settlement efforts, facilitating
a resurgence of the Islamic State and enabling it to take
advantage of the situation.
Secondly, we must promote the international
community’s efforts to strengthen cooperation on
countering terrorism in Syria. The international
community should adopt a unified standard in
accordance with the requirements of international law
and Security Council resolutions in order to jointly
fight against all terrorist organizations in Syria, as
listed by the Security Council. I want to emphasize that
respecting Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
is a principle that must be adhered to when dealing with
the Syrian issue. Counter-terrorism is not an excuse or
basis for foreign countries to illegally station troops in
Syria. The Syrian Government’s leadership in fighting
terrorism must be effectively respected.
Thirdly, the issue of foreign terrorist fighters must
be addressed. Both Syria and Iraq have a significant
presence of foreign terrorist fighters, which has
spillover effects. This festering issue represents a
common threat to the countries of origin for terrorists,
the countries involved and the countries of the region.
All parties concerned must work together to deal with
it. To our knowledge, the prison under attack houses
thousands of terrorists. Which countries do they
come from and when will they be repatriated and
stand trial? Those are all issues that the Council must
focus on. China calls on the Secretariat, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Group of
Experts of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8958

concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities to step up efforts in the
collection and integration of information on foreign
terrorist fighters so as to enable cooperation for the
resolution of this issue.

to play its role as a member of the Global Coalition
Against Da’esh, but military options and means will not
be sufficient to eradicate terrorism. We must also tackle
its many sources — the social, political, historical and
religious grievances that lure young people to this
enterprise of death.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I too wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his briefing on
this issue.

The description of Syria that we have heard these
days, of the political process, of meeting the huge
humanitarian needs and of providing people with
prospects of a better future go in that direction. We
must work collectively to give people hope to live, lift
them up and remove their pretexts to die.

Ireland strongly condemns the recent Da’esh attack
on Al-Hasakah city and is appalled at the reports of
civilian casualties. The scale of the attack shows that
despite their territorial defeat, the Da’esh threat in Syria
is severe, The international community must remain
committed to ensuring the lasting defeat of Da’esh.
Ireland is gravely concerned at the scale of
displacement of the civilian population. We are also
deeply concerned about the situation of children, as
raised by UNICEF and others. We must recall that in
conflict children must be treated primarily as victims
and require the support appropriate to that status. It is
vital that full access is given to humanitarian actors
and that donors respond to the needs on the ground.
Ireland is also concerned about the broader
implications for the security situation in north-eastern
Syria overall. As with all attacks in Syria, there should
be accountability for this attack and for all crimes
committed in Syria. We call on all parties to adhere to
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to respect international human rights law, with these
events underlying, yet again, the need for substantive
and meaningful progress towards an inclusive political
solution in Syria.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this meeting. I too thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his information.
We join other speakers in condemning in the
strongest terms the heinous terrorist attack by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) at a prison
in north-eastern Syria. This attack is a rude awakening
that reminds us of the constant threat posed by terrorism
to the Syrian people and other people in the region and
beyond. We must remain vigilant and committed.
There are no good or bad terrorists; they are all
murderers. They should be treated as such, and they
must be brought before justice. Accountability for
crimes committed is not negotiable. All possible means
must be used to defeat terrorism. Albania continues

We must do everything in our power to rid Syria
and everywhere else of the plague of terrorism. We
deplore that in the prisons, where ISIS terrorists and
foreign fighters are held, there are hundreds of children
who have been born into a hellish place of darkness
surrounded by death. No effort should be spared to save
children and women from the inhuman and degrading
conditions in which they are being held. They need to
be repatriated and helped to reintegrate into society.
Since 2020, Albania, has done exactly that. We
have taken decisive steps to address the outrageously
dire situation of children and women of Albanian origin
caught in the several refugee camps in Syria and Iraq.
In the course of the past two years, some 24 women
and children have been repatriated. It is not an easy
subject to handle, but it is needed. We are working
in close cooperation with our partners to ensure their
rehabilitation, adaptation and long-term reintegration
into normal lives. In our view, they deserve to start
their life anew, and we are doing what we think is best
to help them do so.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I join others in thanking
the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
Terrorism in whatever form is deplorable and
should be condemned wherever and whenever it is
perpetrated. No act of terrorism whatsoever can be
justified. We recall the anguish visited on innocent
civilians by terrorist groups in recent years in several
countries across the world. My own country, Kenya,
has suffered from such heinous acts perpetrated by
Al-Shabaab- and Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist groups
against innocent civilians.
After nearly 11 years of conflict, the people
of Syria continue to suffer atrocious acts of terror.
Notably, civilians, particularly women, children and
other vulnerable members of society, are bearing the

22-241219/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

brunt of the impact of such terrorist attacks. That
is unacceptable. In that regard, we condemn the
20 January terrorist incident against the Ghweiran
prison in the city of Al-Hasakah, which claimed several
lives and injured many. We cannot overemphasize the
urgent need to deal comprehensively and decisively
with the continuing threat posed by terrorist groups and
their affiliates — whether or not they are listed by the
Security Council.
Such terrorist acts continue to jeopardize the peace
process in Syria, with negative implications for regional
and international security. The Security Council and the
relevant United Nations agencies must act with resolve
to strengthen counter-terrorism measures to ensure
that terrorists and their affiliates are held accountable
for their heinous acts and denied the opportunities and
resources to continue carrying out such acts. Let us
identify concrete steps that the Council should take to
combat the growing threat of terrorism in Syria and all
over the world.
In conclusion, Kenya calls on all players to focus
on and prioritize the interest of the Syrian people.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank Under
Secretary-General Voronkov for his briefing.
The evolving situation in north-eastern Syria
over the past week demonstrates how, even without
territory, Da’esh and its poisonous ideology continue
to pose a threat in Syria, Iraq and the wider world.
The international community must remain firm in
its determination to counter and defeat it. Yesterday,
we welcomed the news that the Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF) had retaken control of Ghweiran prison
in Al-Hasakah. We pay tribute to the courage and
sacrifices made by the Syrian Democratic Forces in
their efforts against Da’esh and offer our condolences
to the families of the SDF fighters killed.
In order to safeguard long-term stability in northeastern Syria, the Security Council should work together
and with the wider international community to explore
options to ensure that we are coordinated in responding
to those emerging challenges. The murder of four
women in the Al-Hol camp in December 2021 highlights
increasing threats against residents in the camps,
especially women and girls, who remain vulnerable
to exploitation, prostitution and kidnapping. We are
deeply concerned about reports that children were put
at risk by Da’esh during the attack in Al-Hasakah.
10/16

27/01/2022

It is vital that humanitarian actors be able to deliver
assistance safely and for the camp administration,
security forces and humanitarian agencies to agree
urgent steps to improve the situation to protect all
residents, especially women and girls. We will continue
to work with international partners in seeking justice
and accountability for those who have fought alongside
Da’esh. Any such justice mechanism must respect
human rights and the rule of law, as well as ensure fair
trials and due process.
As a leading member of the Global Coalition
Against Da’esh, the United Kingdom continues to
support the Syrian Democratic Forces, and we continue
to monitor closely the situation. Our work as part of the
Coalition fighting the enduring threat posed by Da’esh
will continue.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov for the briefing on the
prevailing situation in north-eastern Syria and make
the following points.
The attack in Al-Hasakah constitutes a grievous
violation of international law, having resulted in civilian
casualties and the displacement of persons, and putting
at risk the lives of the 850 children in detention at the
Ghweiran prison. The principle remains that terrorism,
committed by whomever and wherever, cannot be
justified by any motivation and is unacceptable. We
urge the authorities to take urgent action to secure
the release and repatriation of all children in prisons
and detention camps across Syria to their countries
of origin.
The recent developments in north-eastern
Syria should remind the international community
of the persistent threat posed by armed groups to
international peace and security and reinforce the need
for international cooperation on counter-terrorism
measures. Once again, we urge all parties to the
conflict to prioritize civilian protection and adhere to
their obligations under international law.
Addressing the challenge of armed groups in Syria
will be impossible without a resolution of the conflict.
Ghana therefore reiterates the importance of a political
settlement and urges all parties and regional actors to
support meaningful progress on the political track, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
for his briefing. The clarifications provided allow for a
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

better understanding of the circumstances surrounding
the terrorist attacks carried out by the Islamic State
a few days ago against the Ghweiran prison, which
held a number of jihadist prisoners, in Al-Hasakah, in
northern Syria. Gabon firmly condemns those hateful
acts, which can be added to the long list of such acts
committed since the beginning of the Syrian crisis and
deplores the loss of human lives and the unacceptable
trauma suffered by the civilian population, in particular
the women and children, living near the prison who
were used as human shields during the fighting between
the Kurdish forces and the jihadists.
Such attacks, which have become part of the
daily fabric of the Syrian people and are exacerbating
the cycle of violence and the scope of insecurity and
instability in the country, confirm the resurgence of the
Islamic State’s ability to cause harm in the region, since
it was defeated and expelled from its last fiefdom in the
east in 2019. The number of victims and the scale of
devastation resulting from such wanton violence must
remind us of the compelling and urgent need to act
with greater commitment in Syria. It is high time for
the Security Council to revive an in-depth discussion
on how to respond to the threat posed by Da’esh. Such
a response must transcend the military dimension.
The international community must rally to take action
meaningful and dynamic to counter international
terrorist groups and drain their breeding grounds
to rapidly conclude the political process and find a
comprehensive and viable solution to the Syrian crisis.
In conclusion, let me say that terrorism is a global
threat. Its ability to spread and grow is unquestionable,
and we must be unwavering in our response and
determination on all fronts to combat terrorism
throughout the world.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important and urgent meeting. We also thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office, for his
valuable and comprehensive briefing.
The United Arab Emirates condemns with the
strongest terms the terrorist attacks carried out by
Da’esh terrorist organization against Al-Sina’a prison
in Al-Hasakah governorate. These attacks have caused
nearly 45,000 people to be internally displaced,
including many women and children. They have also
led to casualties and the destruction of infrastructure,

S/PV. 8958

which exacerbates the humanitarian and security
situation in Syria.
We also express our deep concern about the use of
children as human shields by Da’esh, which is a blatant
violation of international law. Those recent attacks
serve to emphasize that our fight against this terrorist
organization continues and we should continue to build
on the tangible progress made by the international
community against Da’esh in Syria and Iraq.
We again stress the need to cut off Da’esh’s funding
sources, drain its military capabilities and put an end
to the recruitment of fighters, as well as the spread of
extremist rhetoric. It is also necessary to continue to
address the methods it develops and the strategies it
uses, such as launching attacks against prisons in order
to re-establish its influence.
The United Arab Emirates will spare no effort in
combating terrorist groups around the world, whether
Da’esh or others, in accordance with international law.
As we have recently witnessed, terrorist threats have
reached very dangerous levels in our region, especially
in terms of the use of advanced technology and weapons
by terrorist groups to target civilians and civilian
infrastructure, as happened recently in my country.
These challenges require concerted international
efforts as we work together diligently to prevent
extremism, fight terrorism and eradicate it completely,
inside Syria or outside, to maintain regional and
international peace and security.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of
establishing sustained security and stability in Syria,
meeting the aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people
and letting them live in a safe and stable homeland
away from extremism and terrorism.
Mrs. Espeschit Maia (Brazil): Brazil thanks
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing to the Security Council.
The continuing and growing presence of terrorist
groups around the world is a shared concern of the
Security Council. The episodes of violence that followed
those terrorist actions in Syria were appalling, especially
as they included the fate of hundreds of children, some
as young as 12 years old. We are still very concerned
about the safety and security of all civilians caught up
in this situation. Brazil echoes UNICEF’s call on all
parties in Syria to keep children out of harm’s way and
to protect them at all times. Brazil also underlines the
importance of giving due attention to the issue of the
repatriation of children to their home countries.

22-2412111/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

As mentioned by Special Envoy Pedersen yesterday
(see S/PV.8955), this episode is a clear message to the
Security Council and a call for action to resolve the
broader conflict in Syria in which terrorism inevitably
thrives. Brazil remains convinced that the Syrianowned, Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political
process is the only lasting solution to the Syrian conflict.
Brazil repudiates terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its motivations. The
Security Council has a special role in condemning
and countering terrorism in a coherent and universal
manner and in full accordance with international law.
Equally important, it has the responsibility to ensure
its decisions do not impede impartial humanitarian
assistance to civilians in need, nor cause more suffering
than it is mandated to avoid.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
his briefing.
Norway condemns the attack by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) on a prison in Al-Hasakah on
20 January. We are deeply concerned about the situation
for civilians in the area. It is especially worrying that
a large number of boys reportedly have been exposed
to or even injured or killed by fighting between ISIL
and the Kurdish-led Syrian Defence Forces. Children
should not be in prison.
The prison attack shows that ISIL is still present,
willing and capable and that it poses a significant
threat to peace and stability. We are concerned that
the continued lack of a political solution to the Syrian
crisis gives further room for ISIL to grow. It is critical
that we continue our efforts to defeat ISIL. We urge all
parties to the conflict to respect international law and
do their utmost to protect civilians, including children,
at every step in the planning and during military and
security operations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am forced to comment on the statement
delivered by my esteemed colleague, Mr. Richard Mills.
The freedom of the press and the opposition are
indeed very interesting topics in Russia and in all other
12/16

27/01/2022

countries. Indeed, we have quite a lot to say about this,
but that is not the topic of today’s meeting. In fact, we
heard no substantive answers to the questions that we
asked, and we hope that the questions that we raised will
continue to be followed carefully by Council members.
The President: I wish to again remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the permanent delegation
of the Russian Federation for having taken the initiative
to request this important meeting. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Mr. Vladimir Voronkov for
his briefing.
Al-Hasakah city has seen bloodshed for a number
of days now, beginning with the explosion of a car bomb
by Da’esh terrorist organization next to the industrial
secondary school in the Ghweiran district. The United
States occupation forces had turned the school into a
detention centre under the supervision of their affiliated
Kassad separatist militia. Subsequently, after Da’esh’s
attack, the Kassad militia invaded the neighbourhood,
and planes related to the United States occupation
forces carried out a violent raid on the detention centre,
which led to the killing of innocent civilian victims,
including women and children.
As a result, there was a wave of collective
displacement of tens of thousands of citizens living
in the region, in addition to extensive damage and
destruction of a number of homes as well as civilian
and service installations, including the fuel company
headquarters, the Basil bakery, the Al-Furat University,
an academic college, the municipality parking area
and others.
What the city of Al-Hasakah has gone through
in recent days is the inevitable result of erroneous
and hostile approach adopted by some Western
countries towards my country since 2011 until today.
It is the product of a number of serious violations of
the principles of international law and the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations by successive
United States Administrations and their allies, who
have bypassed the Security Council by erroneously
interpreting Article 51 of the Charter to form their
own illegitimate coalition, without the approval of, or
coordination with, the Syrian Government.
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

We must point out that the Governments of certain
countries participating in that alleged coalition have
recruited thousands of foreign terrorist fighters,
facilitated their move to Syria and provided them with
all kinds of support to spread terror and chaos and to
kill, destroy and destabilize security and stability. At
the same time, those countries prevented the Security
Council from responding to Syria’s numerous requests
to create a legal international coalition under the
auspices of the United Nations to combat terrorism and
support efforts to tackle that threat, to fully implement
Security Council resolutions and the relevant
international instruments.
The United States has used fighting terrorism as
a pretext to target Syrian civilian installations and
infrastructure, including schools, health centres,
bridges and dams. It was about to cause a humanitarian
disaster as a result of bombarding Al-Furat dam in
March 2017. It has destroyed the entire city of Al-Raqqa
over the heads of its inhabitants. It also targeted the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces that were fighting Da’esh
terrorist organization, whereby it enabled the fighters
of that organization to occupy new locations such as
Sarda Mountain in Deir ez-Zor in 2016.
In parallel, the United States occupying forces
regularly transferred Da’esh terrorists from detention
centres to their illegitimate military sites in Syria, with
a view to recycling and reusing them in order to execute
their plans. Between 7 and 13 April 2021, nearly 100
terrorists were trained and transferred by those forces
to the Al-Omar oil field, which is under illegal United
States control. In addition, between 21 and 22 June 2021,
United States forces transferred more than 60 terrorists
from a detention centre at a vocational high school to
their illegitimate base in the city of Al-Shaddadah, in
southern Al-Hasakah governorate.
Therefore, the recent events related to Da’esh’s
timing and invasion of the vocational high school
detention centre in Al-Hasakah clearly proves that the
intention is to recycle Da’esh terrorist elements and
to find excuses to justify the continued illegitimate
presence of United States forces on Syrian territory,
so that they can continue to interfere in our national
affairs, kill more innocent civilians and steal our
national resources, as well as to support the separatist
militia that is trying to remove Arab citizens from
the region. The United States must therefore be held
accountable for its crimes.

S/PV. 8958

In accordance with United Nations reports,
approximately 70,000 people, most of whom are
women and children, are detained in Al-Hol, Al-Areesh
Al-Roj and other camps under the control of Kassad
separatist militia, supported by the occupying United
States forces. Those camps are facing a very difficult
humanitarian situation, with high rates of crime, trends
of extremist ideologies and the recruitment of child
soldiers by Kassad militia, who are being removed from
their families from the age of 12. The events that took
place in Al-Hasakah city bolster our rightful demand
for the closure of those camps and detention centres,
which have become hubs ripe for the spread of violent
and extremist ideologies.
We reiterate our request that the countries
concerned repatriate their citizen foreign terrorist
fighters and their families to their countries of origin or
residence, while also guaranteeing that they will be held
accountable and their children will be rehabilitated.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the attempts by
certain Western countries to deny their responsibility
with regard to their citizens who are foreign terrorist
fighters and refuse to repatriate them by cancelling their
passports or citizenship, meaning that they are unable
to return to their countries. We also categorically reject
the involvement of certain countries in suspicious deals
with Kassad separatist militia, whereby they detain
foreign terrorist fighters and their families for selfish
private gain and for recognition purposes.
The Syrian Government, in cooperation with
the International Committee of the Red Cross,
managed to repatriate many foreign terrorist fighters
and their families to their countries of origin, by
coordinating and cooperating with the Governments
of those countries, including Russia, China, Albania,
Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, the Sudan, Egypt and South
Africa and others. Syria invites other relevant countries
to adopt the same approach and work with the Syrian
Government to repatriate their terrorist fighters.
In conclusion, the implementation of Security
Council resolutions cannot be selective; there can
be no double standards. The restoration of security
and stability in Syria requires, first and foremost,
guarantees for the country’s unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, as stipulated in
all relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as the
immediate withdrawal of the United States and Turkish
forces illegitimately present on Syrian territory.

22-2412113/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): Although Da’esh has
suffered major setbacks in Syria and Iraq, we have
seen its capacity to stage attacks. We believe that a
three-pronged approach is needed to effectively tackle
the threat posed by Da’esh.
First, genuine intelligence-sharing is essential.
Da’esh remains a common threat to humankind and
requires unified and coordinated strategies to eradicate
it completely.
Secondly, the repatriation of foreign terrorist
fighters is a necessary step in the fight against Da’esh.
Not only will it disempower Da’esh on the ground, but
it will have a ripple effect around the world, as the
repercussions for joining Da’esh will be made clear in in
every country, and thereby impede future recruitment.
Thirdly, we must address the root causes of the
problem. Da’esh and other terror organizations found
fertile ground in Syria because the regime had begun
attacking its own people. A democratic Constitution
and the implementation of universal human rights and
freedoms will go a long way towards preventing any
resurgence of Da’esh.
Since the outset of this fight, we have pointed to
the persistent wrongdoings and ill-advised strategies.
However, our warnings were not heeded. We have
consistently highlighted the mistake of subcontracting
a terrorist organization, namely, the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG)dominated Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) to defeat
Da’esh. It was clear from the beginning that its main
objective was never to defeat Da’esh. Its aim was
ethnic cleansing. As we mentioned here yesterday
(see S/PV.8955), the PKK/YPG continues to target
civilians, recruit children, target hospitals and kill
humanitarian workers.
Those are textbook examples of violating
international humanitarian law. Yet some actors in the
region continue to reach out to that terror organization
to do their bidding. We wish to remind them: Make no
mistake that there are no good terrorists.
Our concerns have been proved by the latest
development in Al-Hasakah. On numerous occasions,
we have informed the international community that
Da’esh members are being released in exchange for
bribes and other objectives under unclear schemes.
The recent prison break and subsequent incidents have
14/16

27/01/2022

yet again proved the unreliability of the PKK/YPGdominated SDF. We ask how Da’esh fighters managed
to bypass checkpoints with car bombs in such a sensitive
site. How did they gain such deep access inside that
sensitive site?
We have warned the international community that
the red carpet that it rolls out to terrorists will very
quickly become a veil of blood. The international
community should not once again be blackmailed by
the so-called SDF, led by the PKK/YPG.
Repatriation is the only viable way to bring foreign
terrorist fighters to justice. The so-called local judicial
process by the SDF or attempts to create international
mechanisms to put its suspects on trial is both a flagrant
breach of international law and a futile exercise to
create some kind of legal system that does not have
precedents. We strongly encourage the international
community to engage in legitimate partnerships to
achieve justice.
Our fight against Da’esh is resolute. Turkey is the
only country that has fought face to face with Da’esh.
We had been an active member of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh since its inception, and we have
eliminated more than 4,500 Da’esh members in Syria.
Just last year, 236 Da’esh members were eliminated
inside Syria as a result of operations conduct by Turkey.
The Syrian National Army has also been fighting
against Da’esh in areas controlled by the legitimate
Syrian opposition. We believe that, through cooperation
with the legitimate Syrian opposition and countries in
the region, it is possible to completely defeat Da’esh,
but to do that we need everyone to be on board with
such a plan. That needs to happen in tandem with our
efforts to achieve a political settlement in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation commends the efforts made by the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January for
quickly convening this emergency meeting on the latest
developments in north-east Syria related to the terrorist
attack by terrorist Da’esh gangs on Al-Sina’a prison in
Al-Hasakah governorate. The attack led to thousands of
terrorists escaping from the prison, including dangerous
terrorist leaders.
Iraq expresses its deep concern over those latest
attacks, which coincided with other dangerous attacks
22-24121

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

in Diyala governorate and other areas of Iraq, claiming
the lives of dozens of martyrs from the Iraqi armed
forces.
The Government of Iraq would like to thank the
Security Council for its significant solidarity and
support to the Government and the people of Iraq by
issuing two press statements condemning the terrorist
attacks that took place in my country between November
2021 and January 2022 (SC/14692 and SC/14774).
Given its transnational nature, terrorism poses
a significant, increasing and continuing threat to
international peace and security. Iraq has been one
of the country’s most affected by terrorist acts.
Terrorist groups have repeatedly sought to undermine
stability and security in my country by targeting
Iraqi State institutions and killing, terrorizing and
torturing civilians.
Iraq values the briefing by the Under-SecretaryGeneral and commends the efforts made by the Office
of Counter-Terrorism. We reiterate our commitment to
cooperating with the international community to combat
terrorism, whether through the Global Coalition to
Counter Da’esh, strengthening long-term partnerships
in different areas or multilateral cooperation with
the United Nations and other specialized United
Nations agencies.
Iraq has shown its commitment to repatriating
Iraqis stranded in the Al-Hol camp in Syria. The Iraqi
Government repatriated two groups of civilians. The
first group, on 8 December 2021, included 128 Iraqi
families, comprising 507 individuals, and the second,
on 8 January, included 111 Iraqi families, comprising
421 individuals. The groups were transported to
Jed’ah 1 camp in Ninewa governorate for psychosocial
rehabilitation. Since May 2021, Iraq has repatriated 450
families, comprising 1,796 individuals.
Iraq has also repatriated 1,900 terrorist fighters
from detention camps in Syria under the control of the
Syrian Democratic Forces (Kassad). Iraq calls on those
supervising the camps to hand over all Iraqi terrorist
fighters in order to prosecute them and bring them to
justice, particularly since Kassad forces have not yet
handed over to Iraq Da’esh leaders in its custody.
The irresponsible behaviour of Kassad forces,
including weak prison security and its reluctance
to hand over terrorist fighters and Da’esh leaders to
Iraq, undermines regional security. That is dangerous,
especially given the increasing risk of prison breakouts.

S/PV. 8958

Such breakouts would help Da’esh to regroup and
coordinate new attacks in Iraq and Syria, as well as the
region in general. Recent Iraqi intelligence information
points to concern over increasing Da’esh activities as
well as attempts to cross the border to carry out terrorist
attacks in Iraq. My country will make every effort to
protect and secure our border and prevent terrorists
from infiltrating Iraq.
Given
Iraq’s
experience
in
countering
terrorism, we stress the importance of promoting
international cooperation. The Government of my
country calls on the Security Council to urge Member
States to fulfil their obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions in order to stem the
financing of terrorism and terrorist access to logistical
support; to prevent terrorist gangs from trafficking
in Syrian and Iraqi oil, weapons and artefacts; and to
make concerted and tireless efforts to prevent foreign
terrorists from crossing the border and deprive them of
safe havens.
We make this appeal because of our concern for
international peace and security. Our experience with
countering terrorism has taught us that the threat is
not limited to one people or one geographical region.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq is committed
to cooperating with the international community to
combat terrorism, especially Da’esh terrorist gangs, to
eliminate them totally and to bring terrorists to justice,
thus promoting international security and stability.
Iraq calls once again for a stepping up of the
process of repatriating foreign terrorist fighters and
their families from Iraq and Syria, and to prevent
prisons and camps from becoming incubators for a
new generation of terrorists. We would warn against
the politicization of terrorism and the use of counterterrorism for political purposes. No country should use
the territory of another to settle scores, thus threatening
its stability and security.
We stress the importance of respecting the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, especially
respecting the sovereignty of other countries, goodneighbourly relations and strengthening cooperation.
We call on the Council to consider this matter seriously
and to call on Member States to comply fully with the
principles of the Charter.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq reiterates
its commitment to combating terrorism in all its forms.
We condemn all terrorist operations and call for united
international and regional efforts against terrorism,

22-2412115/16

S/PV.8958

The situation in the Middle East

regardless of its origins or appellations. We call for the
strengthening of security and intelligence cooperation
and the exchange of information and expertise,
bilaterally and multilaterally, to fight terrorism,
eliminate its gangs, uproot it and dry up its sources
of financing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting, and I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov for his informative briefing.
The most recent attack on a prison in Al-Hasakah,
which was claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS), in Syria’s north-east, is an alarm bell
indicating once again that ISIS, which is backed by
certain States, remains a real threat to regional security
and stability.
Iran is closely monitoring the developments in
the east of the Euphrates, especially in Al-Hasakah
province. What we are witnessing today in Al-Hasakah
is the result of the continued illegal occupation of parts
of Syria by foreign forces, including the United States.
More importantly, the free movement of terrorist
groups, including ISIS members, in territories under
the illegitimate occupation of foreign forces in Syria
and Iraq, as well as their transfer to other countries,
threatens regional and international peace and security.
We view the recent incident in that context.
The Al-Hasakah incident clearly shows that the
occupying force and its allies have been unable to
restore security and order in the occupied areas. That
has helped ISIS expand its influence in the region,
thus jeopardizing the lives of the civilians living there.
That incident reminds us once again that the presence
of foreign terrorist fighters and their accompanying

16/16

27/01/2022

families in the conflict zone remains a growing source
of insecurity and instability for the entire region.
It is deeply regrettable that those countries that
constantly and repeatedly claim to pioneer human
rights refrain from repatriating their own nationals,
especially women and children, who are trapped in the
appalling conditions in conflict zones. Considering the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters to the security
and stability of the region, the Security Council must
address their repatriation to their own countries as a
matter of priority.
Fighting terrorism must not be used as a pretext to
violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
The continued occupation of parts of Syria is the main
factor in creating conducive grounds for such terrorist
activities in Syria and must be ended forthwith. We
believe that the effective exercise of sovereignty by
the Syrian Government over all its territory is an
important element in restoring stability and security to
that country.
In that regard, as reaffirmed by Security Council
resolutions, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria must be respected. The Syrian Government has
the legitimate and inherent right to counter terrorist
activities on the territory under its jurisdiction, and any
measure taken to counter terrorism must be coordinated
with the Syrian Government. Counter-terrorism can be
effective only once all States carry out their obligations
fully and responsibly and refrain from using double
standards or a selective approach.
Iran will continue to support Syria’s efforts in
countering the threat posed by terrorist groups, thus
ensuring its unity and territorial integrity.
The President: Before I draw this meeting to
a close, I would like to wholeheartedly thank the
interpreters, who stayed with us into this late hour.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

22-24121
