S/PV.9398

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9398th meeting

Thursday, 17 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24318 (E)
*2324318*

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representative of the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Volker
Türk, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights; Ms. Elizabeth Salmón, Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea; and Mr. Ilhyeok Kim, civil
society representative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Türk.
Mr. Türk: This open meeting is a welcome
opportunity to reflect and act on the dire situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea — not least as human rights underpin peace and
security, humanitarian action and development.
Human suffering on such a scale and of such
magnitude engenders instability internally and has
wider implications. Rarely has the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea been more painfully closed to the
outside world than it is today. That is the result of
Government policies that were initially linked to
containing the coronavirus disease pandemic but have
grown even more extensive as the pandemic has waned.
Information collected by my Office, including through
interviews and drawn from public information issued
by the Government itself, indicates the increasing
repression of the rights to freedoms of expression,
privacy and movement, the persistence of widespread
forced labour practices and a worsening situation for
economic and social rights owing to the closure of
markets and other forms of income generation.
Anyone who views so-called “reactionary
ideology and culture” — a term used for information
received from abroad, in particular the Republic of
2/21

17/08/2023

Korea — may now face imprisonment of 5 to 15 years.
Any person found to have distributed such content
faces life imprisonment or even the death penalty. A
travel permit system enables the State to control all
travel within the country. It imposes, without trial,
prison terms of up to three months in a State labour
camp for violating travel orders. Following the closure
of the country’s borders in response to the pandemic,
border guards were explicitly ordered to use lethal force
against people who approach the border without prior
notice. Since the border shutdown, only a handful of
people have managed to leave the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The widespread imposition of forced labour by the
State has continued during the recent border closures.
According to our information, State-run institutions
have continued to rely on the forced mobilization of
men and women, without pay, to maintain the operation
of key sectors of the economy, such as construction,
mining and agricultural production. The longstanding and profoundly disturbing practice of forced
mobilization has extended to children, as noted by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child. In interviews, a
number of men sent to work in other countries for the
purpose of generating income for the State described
conditions that are tantamount to forced labour,
including the imposition of extensive surveillance;
physically arduous and sometimes dangerous work;
minimal health and safety measures; long working
hours without breaks or holidays; and inadequate
remuneration, as the major share of people’s wages is
taken by the State.
Within the country, markets and other private
means of generating income have been largely shut
down and such activity is increasingly criminalized.
That sharply constrains the ability of people to provide
for themselves and their families. Given the limits of
State-run economic institutions, many people appear to
be facing extreme hunger, as well as acute shortages of
medication. In March 2023, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations noted that,
“A large portion of the population suffers from
low levels of food consumption and poor dietary
diversity, with food security expected to remain
fragile in light of persisting economic constraints
and agricultural shortfalls”.
There are reports that starvation exists in parts of the
country. The authorities acknowledge some of the
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

challenges and have indicated that they are open to
international cooperation to address them. However,
to date offers of humanitarian support have been
largely rebuffed or have been made impossible owing
to border closures. International humanitarian actors,
including the United Nations country team, remain
barred from the country, together with almost all other
foreign nationals.
While in the past the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea have endured periods of
severe economic difficulty and at other times the severe
repression of their rights, currently they appear to be
suffering both. According to our information, people are
becoming increasingly desperate as informal markets
and other coping mechanisms are dismantled — while
their fear of State surveillance, arrest, interrogation and
detention has increased. That situation follows decades
of chronic human rights violations, some of which the
Government has acknowledged. Those violations have
been catalogued in detail by the commission of inquiry
on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, which was mandated by the Human Rights
Council a decade ago and the groundbreaking report of
which (A/HRC/25/63) contributed to the creation of this
agenda item. Recent reports of the Secretary-General
to the General Assembly, reports of my Office to the
Human Rights Council and the work of the Special
Rapporteur have echoed that litany of suffering.
The Government’s surveillance of its citizens, both
at home and abroad, has reached an intensity rarely
seen in other countries. People’s rights to privacy
are systematically violated. Homes are subjected to
random searches. Neighbours and family members
are encouraged to report on each other. Punishments
for even minor infractions can be severe, possibly
amounting to gross violations of human rights. The
exercise of the fundamental human rights to freedom
of expression, thought, conscience, religion, peaceful
assembly and association can be sanctioned by
extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances into
one of the country’s political prisons or other severely
disproportionate punitive measures. Thousands of
enforced disappearances have been perpetrated by
the State over the past 70 years, including enforced
disappearances of Koreans from both north and south
of the Korean Demilitarized Zone and the abduction
of other foreigners, mostly Japanese nationals. I
sympathize deeply with the families of those who were
abducted or disappeared and who now are or would be

S/PV.9398

aged in their eighties and nineties. It is imperative that
we exert all efforts to ensure some measure of justice
before it is too late.
The same consideration applies to the north-south
cross-border family reunion scheme, which has given
hope and deeply valued connection to tens of thousands
of separated families. The scheme has been cruelly
stalled since 2018, owing to political tensions. For all the
victims of the many violations and crimes committed
over decades in and by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, accountability is essential. In the
absence of any meaningful action to achieve that goal by
the authorities of the State, I encourage action by other
Member States or in international forums, including
the International Criminal Court. Non-judicial forms
of accountability must also be considered, including
truth-telling, the recovery of remains and reparations
programmes — which were particularly requested by
victims during the consultations that my staff held in
Seoul. Meanwhile, my field presence in Seoul continues
to monitor and document human rights violations
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to
explore pathways to accountability while preserving
information that might be used for that purpose in a
central repository.
It is estimated that thousands of North Koreans
are currently at risk of being repatriated involuntarily
to their home country, where they may be subjected
to torture, arbitrary detention or other serious human
rights violations. The precarious human rights situation
that I have just described means that North Koreans
have an undeniable, compelling need for international
protection. I therefore urge all States to refrain from
forcibly repatriating North Koreans, and to provide
them with the required protections and humanitarian
support. The persistence of severe, widespread and
long-standing human rights violations in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea cannot be seen in isolation
from peace and security issues on the peninsula and
within the wider region.
Many of the violations I have referred to stem
directly from, or support, the increasing militarization
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. For
example, the widespread use of forced labour, including
labour in political prison camps, the forced use of
schoolchildren to collect harvests, the requirement for
families to undertake labour and provide a quota of
goods to the Government and the confiscation of wages
from overseas workers — all support the military

23-243183/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

17/08/2023

apparatus of the State and its ability to build weapons.
The Charter of the United Nations makes it clear that
human rights violations of that order are a matter of
international concern. Sustainable peace can be built
only by advancing human rights and its corollaries:
reconciliation, inclusion and justice.

have been particularly affected given their rising
involvement in commercial activities. Some people
are starving. Others have died due to a combination of
malnutrition, diseases and lack of access to health care.
Access to food, medicines and health care remains a
priority concern.

The international human rights treaties and human
rights bodies provide a shared framework in which to
identify challenges, address disagreements and measure
progress, thereby helping to reduce tensions both
within and between States. In the past, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was an active participant in
a number of those mechanisms, despite its criticisms
of various aspects of their work. Regrettably, in recent
years it has cut itself off from those much-needed
sources of dialogue and guidance.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Korean Armistice Agreement, signed in 1953. Yet there is
currently no visible sign of peacemaking on the horizon.
On the contrary, the frozen conflict is being used to
justify continued militarization within the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, with devastating effects on
its people. North Korea’s military-first policy, known
as songun, gives priority to the allocation of resources
to the military, thereby reducing the limited resources
for respecting and fulfilling the people’s human
rights. Militarization also promotes the systematic
exploitation of the population. The leadership in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
demand that its citizens tighten their belts so that the
available resources can be used to fund its nuclear and
missile programmes. It strengthens gender stereotypes
regarding the roles and responsibilities of women within
the family and weakens their political participation. It
creates the ongoing demand for forced labour across the
country and for workers sent abroad. It has caused the
systematic abduction of its people and other nationals,
notably from the Republic of Korea and Japan, creating
cycles of separated families. And it has triggered
economic sanctions, with a detrimental impact on the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
in particular women and children. The international
community must look again at the use and impact of
such tools.

My Office continues to encourage the Government
to respond positively to my offer of technical assistance.
The next universal periodic review of the country, to
be conducted in November 2024, provides a window of
opportunity for engagement, confidence-building and
progress. I also hope that the country will reopen to the
world, paving the way for other forms of interactions
with the United Nations. The return of the United
Nations country team to Pyongyang and the conclusion
of a new partnership framework would be crucial to
advancing coordinated work to address the suffering
of the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. In the spirit of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, I urge
the authorities to engage in meaningful dialogue and
to reset much-needed freedoms as a foundation for
enduring peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Türk for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Salmón.
Ms. Salmón: It is my honour to brief the members
of the Security Council and to bring to their attention
the pain of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, whose human rights have continued
to deteriorate under the current state of tensions and
unprecedented isolation.
The prolonged border shutdown, which started
in early 2020, has brought increased hardship. The
informal markets in the country, known in Korean
as jangmadang, have been significantly repressed,
depriving a vast number of people of their livelihoods
and preventing many from buying food. Women
4/21

My particular concern is the situation of women
and girls. Women are detained in inhumane conditions
and are subjected to torture and ill-treatment, forced
labour and gender-based violence by State officials.
Women escapees who are forcibly repatriated to the
country are subjected to strip searches and invasive
body searches, aimed at searching for money hidden in
their body cavities and genitals. Gender-based violence
against women, including domestic violence and sexual
violence, is prevalent and impunity is widely accepted.
Victims and survivors have no access to reporting
or protection mechanisms. Third countries must
refrain from forced repatriation in compliance with
the principle of non-refoulement, which is customary
international law and applies to individuals who are
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

at risk of being subjected to torture and ill-treatment,
regardless of their migration status.
I strongly encourage the members of the Security
Council to consider peace beyond the absence of
violence or fear of violence. Peace and security must be
approached in a comprehensive manner that combines
stability, equality, truth and justice, guided by human
rights norms. Similarly, the necessity of justice must
be recognized. The members of the Security Council
could discuss what the accountability mechanism for
human rights violations would look like. Member States
are also encouraged to support victims and civil society
organizations in both their judicial and non-judicial
accountability efforts.
The preparations for any possible peacemaking
process need to include women as decision makers.
That process needs to start now. Negotiations to end
the state of conflict should include clear benchmarks on
progress on human rights — for instance, a set number
of country visits each year by special procedures
mandate-holders, including access to detention
facilities, a set number of family reunions per year
and the implementation of the recommendations that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accepted
during the universal periodic review conducted by the
Human Rights Council.
We cannot remain indifferent. The pain is there.
Seven decades have made it evident that neither
continuing the status quo nor a build-up in military
activities is an adequate response to the suffering of the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
nor do they contribute to the creation of an environment
for sustainable peace on the Korean peninsula.
We must refocus international efforts to take steps
to end the ongoing state of conflict, and we need to do
so while prioritizing the human rights of the population
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I call
on the Security Council to place the protection of
human rights at the centre of a reinvigorated peace and
security agenda.
The President: I thank Ms. Salmón for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ilhyeok Kim.
Mr. Ilhyeok Kim: My name is Ilhyeok Kim. I
was born and raised in a small village in North Korea.
Owing to my country’s poverty, I was forced to do
unpaid labour from a young age. When I should have
been studying hard, instead I was soaked with sweat

S/PV.9398

while planting and harvesting crops. Most of that grain
went to the military, and all we were left with was the
worry of what we could eat that winter.
Extreme pandemic restrictions have made the lives
of North Koreans harder than ever. We also face a reign
of fear that isolates North Koreans and harshly punishes
people just for accessing foreign information. Even
when we starve, the North Korean Government has
no policy to help us. The Government turns our blood
and sweat into a luxurious life for the leadership and
missiles that blast our hard work into the sky. We used
to think that the money spent on just one missile could
feed us for three months, but the Government does not
care. It is concerned only with maintaining its power,
developing nuclear weapons and creating propaganda
to justify its actions.
Even with such hardship, North Koreans cannot
express any dissatisfaction to their Government. Our
people have no human rights, no freedom of expression
and no rule of law. Anyone who disagrees is taken to a
political prison camp, where they will do hard labour
until they die or are simply shot dead. The North
Korean Government has eradicated basic human rights
from my homeland.
When my family left North Korea to go to South
Korea, my father’s sister knew we were leaving and
said goodbye to us. North Korea’s secret police found
out and arrested, tortured and beat her for several
months because she did not report our escape. My aunt
ended up in a political prison camp for the supposed
crime of not reporting her older brother’s family. At
that time, she had a five-year-old son and a three-yearold daughter. She was forced to say her last goodbye to
her beloved children. I cannot understand how my aunt
and two cousins could have deserved that fate.
I desperately hope that those inhumane things will
stop happening in North Korea. I hope with all of my
heart that the day when all North Koreans can enjoy the
same freedom that we take for granted will come one
day soon, just as I now have the freedom to come here
and address the Council. On that day, all North Koreans
will be able to travel to the rest of the world and meet
the people from Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russia,
Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Albania, Brazil, China,
Ecuador, France, Gabon and Ghana, and will be able
to work together for world peace and a better future for
humankind. On that day, the people of those countries

23-243185/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

will come to know the true character and potential of
the people of my homeland.
Nine years ago, Ambassador Oh Joon of the
Republic of Korea addressed the Council and said:
“We only hope that one day in the future, when
we look back on what we have done today, we will
be able to say that we did the right thing for the
people of North Korea” (S/PV.7353, p.21).
If we all do what we can to guarantee the rights and
freedom of North Korean people, in the future we will
be able to proudly say that we did the right thing. Until
that day comes, I urge the Council to continue to care
about the North Korean people, to continue to discuss
the human rights of North Koreans and to work to
overcome the North Korean Government’s physical and
digital self-isolation so that the people of my homeland
can see, hear and feel the vast and wonderful world that
lies outside their borders.
Lastly, I want to say something to the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
our language.
It means: “No tyranny lasts forever. We North
Koreans also have the right to choose lives of dignity
for ourselves — therefore, stop committing such crimes
against our people and choose the path of humanity.”
The President: I thank Mr. Kim for his briefing.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.
Let me start by thanking High Commissioner Türk
and Special Rapporteur Salmón for their sobering
briefings and their recommendations to the Council.
The human rights violations and abuses they detailed
are so horrific that they are almost unfathomable.
But today, we heard from someone who lived those
horrors — and who shared his story with the world. I
am inspired by Mr. Kim. I am inspired by his bravery.
By speaking out, he has helped advance the dignity and
the rights of people in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. I thank him profusely for his presence today
and hope all members of the Council heard his appeal
directly to all of us.
This year, we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
recognizes that “the equal and inalienable rights of
all members of the human family is the foundation of
6/21

17/08/2023

freedom, justice, and peace”. The vast majority of the
world — and every Security Council member — has
signed on to that foundational document, and the Council
has repeatedly affirmed its responsibility to protect
human rights, given their inherent connection to
conflict and stability.
Now, the Council has not always lived up to that
responsibility, but there have been recent flashes of
progress. In April, for example, we unanimously adopted
a resolution condemning the Taliban’s restrictions
on women and girls (resolution 2681 (2023)), and last
December, we adopted a resolution on Myanmar that
called on all parties to respect human rights (resolution
2669 (2022)). Still, the Council has been silent on a host
of other human rights abuses, including abuses carried
out by one of the most repressive and totalitarian States
in the world: the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We all just heard from all three of our briefers,
who described the situation that we are faced with in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Inaction is unacceptable, which is why the United
States joined Albania and Japan in requesting this
long-overdue meeting. It is an undeniable matter of
international peace and security — one that demands
the Council’s attention, especially because the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has not improved since the commission of inquiry
on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea issued its landmark report (A/HRC/25/63)
almost a decade ago. The commission found that the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea had committed systematic, widespread, and gross
human rights violations and that in many instances, the
violations entailed crimes against humanity.
Reports indicate that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues to hold more than 80,000
individuals in political prison camps, where, according
to reports, they are widely subjected to arbitrary or
summary executions, torture, starvation, genderbased violence, forced abortions and forced labour.
The Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has also engaged in acts of transnational
repression against its own citizens and foreign
nationals. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s activities abroad have included assassination,
surveillance, intimidation, abduction and forced
repatriation, sometimes with the assistance of other
Governments, and sometimes without the consent
of other Governments, which shows the Democratic
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9398

People’s Republic of Korea’s lack of respect for
State sovereignty.

injustice and its destabilizing impact on regional and
international peace and security.

We cannot have peace without human rights, and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a case in
point. Kim Jong Un’s repressive, totalitarian control of
society and the systemic, widespread denial of human
rights and fundamental freedoms ensure the regime
can expend inordinate public resources developing its
unlawful weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile programmes without public objection. That
war machine, which stands in violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions, is powered by repression
and cruelty. But make no mistake: the regime neglects
the well-being of people in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Its food distribution policies favour
the military and lead to chronic malnourishment among
its citizens. Pyongyang also relies on forced labour
and the exploitation of workers — domestically and
overseas — to power its unlawful weapons programme.

The United States has made human rights a key
focus of our presidency of the Security Council this
month, and we will continue to promote human rights
and fundamental freedoms at home and around the
world. No country has a perfect human rights record.
We all have our flaws. But in open societies, people
can protest — they can drive progress forward. In the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — a closed,
hermetically sealed country — everything is shrouded
in secrecy. People are under constant surveillance, and
those who speak out can be thrown in prison, or worse,
even executed. Therefore, we must give voice to the
voiceless, and we must take up their cause.

Security Council resolution 2397 (2017) required
all Member States to repatriate nationals of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea earning income
in their jurisdiction no later than December 2019.
Unfortunately, instead of repatriating some individuals
and fulfilling their Security Council obligations, some
Council members have repatriated people who have fled
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — people
seeking a better life, people seeking freedom, people in
need of protection, like Mr. Kim.
I recently met with 10 young defectors from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who risked
everything for freedom, and I was brought to tears as
they told me about their dangerous escapes — sometimes
twice, as they were returned after their first attempts.
They told me about the harrowing conditions from
which they fled and about what it is like to be separated
from their loved ones. One defector said that he wants
nothing more than to see his dad again. He told me how
much it pains him not to be able to wish his dad a happy
birthday. However, while the defectors I met are cut off
from their country, they have never — never — stopped
dreaming of a brighter future for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. They have never stopped
fighting for those who still live under tyranny. We
must follow the example of those young activists,
like Mr. Kim. The modern world has no place for the
brutality of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and the international community
and the Council must continue to speak out against that

I suspect some in this Chamber will shrug off
Mr. Kim’s brave testimony or call this meeting another
demonstration of United States hostility. That is deeply
cynical, and it is absurd. This meeting has always had
a singular objective: to fight for the rights of the people
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to
fight for international peace and security.
It is unfortunate that some continue to try to protect
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea from international accountability. But courageous
defectors, United Nations experts and reporters will
continue to expose further abuses. They will continue to
demand accountability. And the Security Council must
continue to call out the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea regime’s human rights violations and abuses.
Let us therefore, in the words of Mr. Ilhyeok Kim,
work together for world peace and for a better future
for humanity.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking
the United States presidency of the Security Council,
and you, personally, Madam President, for organizing
today’s important meeting.
I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Volker Türk, for his insightful
briefing. We fully concur with his assessment on the
importance of this meeting and the direct link of the
human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea with peace and stability in the Korean

23-243187/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

peninsula and beyond. I also thank Special Rapporteur
Salmón for her sober assessment. Of all United Nations
rapporteurs on human rights issues, Ms. Salmón has
something close to an impossible task. We commend
her for her efforts and commitment to addressing the
disastrous human rights situation in the most secretive
and tyrannical of States, one that has turned into an
information black hole.
I was deeply touched by Mr. Ilhyeok Kim’s powerful
account because it resonated with me personally, and,
I am sure, with anyone who has lived under a brutal
dictatorship. I thank him for being in the Chamber
today and helping us to seriously reflect on how the
international community should react in the face of
the brutal misery that over 25 million North Koreans
continue to experience daily, with no end in sight.
The last meeting on this issue in the Council was
held six years ago (see S/PV.8130). Today’s meeting is
therefore long overdue and could not be timelier. We are
not going back in time; we are just bringing the Council
up to speed. As we heard clearly and explicitly from all
our briefers, during these six long years, the situation of
human rights in North Korea has not improved; rather,
it has worsened. The number of people suffering from
violations has increased, and the collective misery
brutally imposed by a draconian, paranoid and criminal
regime has expanded.
Let me briefly explain why this meeting is necessary,
important, timely and useful. This meeting provides us
with a moment to shed a bit of light on the darkness of
a country where the regime does not tolerate pluralism,
where independent media, civil society organizations,
and trade unions are banned, where all basic liberties,
including the freedom of expression, public assembly,
association and religion are systematically denied. The
North Korean regime uses fear and inflicts collective
punishment to silence dissidents. It routinely sends those
perceived as opponents to secretive political prison
camps where they are subject to torture, starvation and
forced labour.
North Korea is the bizarre place in the world
where the Government decides on what people read,
what people watch, even what people should think.
If, God forbid, a person is caught watching a foreign
movie not sanctioned by the Government or speaking
to a foreigner, such “reactionary behaviour”, as they
call it, will be severely punished, including with
death sentences.
8/21

17/08/2023

For all those reasons, today’s meeting sends a
strong message of solidarity with an entire population
trapped inside a country-wide prison. The message is
“we will not forget you”. It is an expression of sympathy
and support for all those who, after having escaped the
labour camps, are praying not to be repatriated to the
Democratic People’s Republic in compliance with the
principle of non-refoulement. It is a manifestation of
support for all political prisoners and all those forced
to work in concentration camps. Today’s meeting is
for all the malnourished children who are entitled to
a healthy childhood, not starvation, who need quality
education, not military parades. This meeting is for all
the women and girls who have been forcibly trafficked
and subjected to sexual violence from high-ranking
military officials in detention centres, held in inhumane
conditions and deprived of food.
This meeting is also a call to a regime whose
priority and obsession is and remains militarization,
more weapons, more missiles and more warmongering
policies. The unlawful weapons-of-mass-destruction
and ballistic-missile programmes are developed — and
we know it — with open disregard for Security Council
decisions, and the systematic, widespread and gross
human rights violations committed by the institutions
and officials of the Democratic People’s Republic serve
the regime’s unlawful activities. The regime is stealing
food from the family table, denying medicine to
hospitals, starving people in labour camps and abusing
children, only to invest in its nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes.
All of the foregoing has been reported continuously
by independent United Nations rapporteurs and in other
credible reports. It was also confirmed this morning
by the High Commissioner and the other briefers.
Today’s meeting is therefore another attempt to rally
the Security Council to stand up to policies and actions
that put peace and security in the Korean peninsula in
serious danger. As the Special Rapporteur highlighted,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime must
be held accountable, not shielded from responsibility,
for its repeated flagrant breaches of international law
and human rights. This is so because shielding the
regime means opposing the people.
There is so much more to say, but I would like to
conclude with a few words that, it is my wish, will,
in one way or another, be heard somewhere in North
Korea. It is a personal account, like the one we heard
from Mr. Ilhyeok Kim.
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

A bit more than three decades ago, like most of
my compatriots, I was living under a regime not unlike
the current one in North Korea. It was a regime so
paranoid that it had crumbled upon itself, totally selfisolated and forgotten in its madness, having invested
for decades in what it considered to be the best weapon
of defence: bunkers. Hundreds of thousands of concrete
monsters of all sizes were built and planted everywhere
and used as an effective propaganda tool to convince a
reclusive population — of which I was a part — that we
could resist every foreign attack — an attack that never
came, because no one had any intention of attacking
my country. These bunkers were merely the expression
of the sick thoughts of the nomenklatura that needed to
subjugate its people with fear. When youth fomented
change, in the early 1990s, when our part of the Berlin
Wall fell, we discovered that the only things we were
left with were our absolute misery and the bunkers.
Fast-forward 30 years and we see that, in the course
of three decades, my country has developed more than
it had done in the previous 300 years. This did not
happen by any miracle, but simply as the result of one
simple thing: we understood that we could go faster and
further by investing in people, rights and freedoms,
in cooperating with neighbours and in openness with
the world. Those who for decades were considered our
worst enemies turned out actually to be our best friends.
If ever North Korea was looking for a lesson
learned, I offer the following. Weapons will never
change the country, they will never feed the population,
they will never bring prosperity. Instead, freedom, rule
of law, education, health, investment in human capital,
cooperation and trade with neighbours will shorten the
path to the future — a future North Koreans deserve.
They do not have to go too far; all they need to do is
take a look across the demilitarized zone to the south.

S/PV.9398

Mr. Ilhyeok Kim, civil society representative, for
sharing his truly heartbreaking first-hand account of
the situation in North Korea. We appreciate the courage
he has shown in being with us in the Chamber today.
Today, after nearly six years, we reconvene in the
Security Council Chamber to discuss the human rights
situation in North Korea, one of the most egregious in
the world, and its implications for international peace
and security. Over a decade ago, the commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea identified the systematic, widespread
and gross violations of human rights in North Korea,
many of which were labelled crimes against humanity.
Today, as pointed out by briefers, we see that the same
troubling patterns persist. The dreadful human rights
situation in North Korea remains stagnant, showing no
improvements or even hints of it. Japan finds that deeply
alarming and unacceptable. The briefers’ insights also
underscore the Commission’s assertion that North
Korea is unparalleled in its human rights violations in
the contemporary world.
The reason for that stagnation is clear. North
Korea staunchly imposes on its people the regime’s
pursuits, in particular its unlawful nuclear and missile
developments. That alone compellingly illustrates the
inextricable link between North Korea’s human rights
abuses and its pursuit of militaristic ambition, but it
does not end there. The relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions reveal another facet of
North Korea’s disturbing scheme: the exploitation
of its people overseas sent to foreign shores. Those
individuals are trapped in a life of servitude, their
efforts directly supporting North Korea’s unlawful
nuclear and missile programmes.

That is why we, as Council members and, I hope ,
friends of the people of North Korea, should consider
it to be our duty to raise our voices against all human
rights violations, because rights or the absence thereof
determine everything for people — for those whom
we have all made the commitment to putting at the
centre of our attention and work — and they have been
proven to have a direct impact on peace and security
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
everywhere else.

Worse still is the regime’s the denial to people
at home. North Korea has been diverting essential
resources towards its unlawful development of nuclear
weapons and missiles at the expense of the welfare of
people in North Korea, while they have great unmet
needs. According to the 2023 report The State of Food
Security and Nutrition in the World, nearly half the
population is undernourished in North Korea. That is
a staggering number — 12 million people. How many
mouths could have been fed, how many lives uplifted,
including those of the young generation, had those
resources been properly channelled?

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Mr. Türk and
Ms. Salmón for their insightful briefings. I also thank

For perspective, consider that North Korea
launched a record number of 70 or more missiles

23-243189/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

last year, and it has already launched four times this
year intercontinental ballistic-class missiles, most
likely capable of reaching all parts of Asia, Europe,
North America, Africa and even some parts of South
America, in violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions. North Korea has also indicated it will
continue such unlawful and dangerous acts, including
mass production of nuclear warheads.
The intertwining of human rights violations
with international peace and security cannot be more
obvious in the case of North Korea. I must stress that
addressing such deep concerns is clearly central to the
mission of the Security Council.
Please allow me to raise a particularly serious
human rights violation by North Korea: abductions.
Many Japanese citizens, including a girl as young
as 13, were kidnapped by North Korean agents.
The act of international abductions infringes on a
nation’s sovereignty and jeopardizes the well-being
and safety of its citizens, thus posing a serious risk to
the international community. The abductees remain
trapped, their agonies renewed each passing day, and
has High Commissioner Türk noted, with every tick
of the clock, aging families despair, as their dreams of
reunion remain unrealized. Many have unfortunately
passed away with the pain of separation as their last
memory of their loved one.
But Japan is not alone. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recognizes that nationals from the Republic of Korea,
China, France, Lebanon, Malaysia, Romania, Singapore
and Thailand have shared that sorrow.
The urgency is palpable. I urge the international
community to come together to achieve the speedy
return of each and every abductee.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. While strides
have been made, the grave human rights landscape
in North Korea and its unsettling implications for
international peace and security stand out starkly.
It is imperative that North Korea heed the messages
from the Council today. It is high time it embarked
on tangible measures to address serious human
rights violations, ceased its unlawful nuclear and
missiles programmes, fully complied with all relevant
resolutions and returned to dialogue.
10/21

17/08/2023

At the same time, it falls upon the Security Council
to consistently bring the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to the fore until North Korea
recalibrates its stance on human rights and genuinely
commits to fostering international peace and security.
We must continue our work.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Volker Türk, and the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ms. Elizabeth
Salmón, for their informative briefings. I would like to
commend the courage of Ilhyeok Kim for his moving
testimony. I thank him for joining us.
France fully supports the holding of this meeting,
as human rights are one of the fundamental pillars of the
United Nations. The Security Council must continue to
address the massive and systematic violations of human
rights in North Korea. Those violations undermine
regional and international peace and security.
While the North Korean regime pursues its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes at an unprecedented
pace, in defiance of all Security Council resolutions
adopted in this Chamber, the human rights situation in
North Korea remains alarming.
Despite repeated calls by the international
community to respect human rights in North Korea,
nothing has changed and nothing is changing.
Widespread ill-treatment, arbitrary detentions and
arrests, separated families: the fundamental rights and
freedoms of North Koreans are systematically flouted
by the regime. Nor should we forget the victims of
enforced disappearance, including in South Korea
and Japan.
The humanitarian situation also remains tragic.
The population continues to suffer from food
insecurity, alarming detention conditions and dire
health conditions. Nearly 20 per cent of North Korean
children suffer from stunted growth.
Despite repeated calls from the international
community, the Pyongyang regime refuses to engage
with the various United Nations human rights
protection mechanisms.
France commends the work of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the work and
the mission of the Special Rapporteur. Despite a lack of
access to the country, they continue to document the
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

human rights situation and the violations committed by
the regime. They must continue to be supported in their
mandate, as their mission is essential.
North Korea must cease its serious violations.
It must resume cooperation with the United Nations
and comply with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law without delay.
France calls on North Korea to resume its dialogue
with the international community and facilitate
the return of international humanitarian staff and
diplomatic missions on its territory. It is essential that the
Pyongyang regime allow United Nations staff to return
to North Korea and guarantee full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout the territory, so that all
necessary aid can reach its population.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the briefings by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Volker
Türk, and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ms. Elizabeth Salmón. I am also grateful for the
testimony by Mr. Ilhyeok Kim. I recognize the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea at this meeting.
When the United Nations asked the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for its opinion on the
implementation of resolution 46/17 of the Human Rights
Council, the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea responded that it does not recognize
the resolutions of that Council, whose resolutions it
considers to be products of hostile policies. How then
can it be argued that the situation of human rights in a
country must come under the exclusive purview of the
Human Rights Council, when that country refuses to
comply with the provisions of the relevant resolutions
of that body or even those of the General Assembly?
With the adoption of General Assembly resolution
77/226 on 15 December 2022, the General Assembly
condemned the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
for diverting its resources from ensuring the welfare of
its people to the development of nuclear weapons and
ballistic missiles.
I am obliged to recall that the Security Council
itself has responded to the issue through its resolutions
2321 (2016), 2371 (2017), 2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017),
which underscore the need for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respect and ensure the welfare and
inherent dignity of its people, while also deploring the

S/PV.9398

severe hardships to which the people of that country
have been subjected. Moreover, in each of those
resolutions the Council condemned the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea,
“for pursuing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
instead of the welfare of its people while people in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have
great unmet needs”.
Of course, Ecuador believes that there is no justification
for anyone having nuclear weapons and that they must
be entirely eliminated, especially given that in 2022
they represented global expenditures of more than
$82 billion dollars at a time of growing food insecurity
and famine in the world. But the continuing deterioration
of the situation of the population of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is a sharp counterpoint to
the arms build-up and nuclear programme, which by
itself is responsible for exacerbating tensions on the
Korean peninsula and in the world.
Furthermore, in the 2017 resolutions that I
mentioned, the very same Council refers to the highly
food-insecure situation of the population of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including a
very large number of pregnant and lactating women
and children under the age of five who are at risk of
malnutrition, with one quarter of the total population
suffering from chronic malnutrition and 41 per cent of
the population undernourished. My delegation urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to end its human
rights violations and weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missile programmes in a complete, verifiable
and irreversible manner. We also urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to resolve the issue of
abductees and immediately return them, including
Japanese nationals and nationals of the Republic of
Korea. The conclusions that the commission of inquiry
on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea reached 10 years ago remain valid today. I
therefore reiterate the need for the Security Council
to continue to consider them with a view to making
decisions that will ensure accountability and promote
peace and stability in the region and the world.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I begin by noting the
objectives for this meeting and reaffirm Ghana’s
support for the human rights pillar of the work of the
United Nations.
We thank the briefers for their perspectives and
encourage the further efforts of relevant United Nations

23-2431811/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

bodies in helping the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to completely fulfil its obligation to promote
and protect the rights of its citizens. In that regard,
we welcome the work of United Nations human rights
mechanisms concerning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and appreciate their efforts to raise
awareness on the gaps that need to be addressed in
order to ensure full respect for the human rights of the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We support the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and will continue to constructively
engage within the Third Committee on the situation of
human rights in that country.
As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, we
underscore the importance of respect for the entire
spectrum of human rights in upholding the dignity of all
persons and for the progress and stability of societies.
We emphasize the need for human rights issues not to
be politicized and for the same attention to be given to
economic, social and cultural rights as is given to civil
and political rights. That is important to sustain peace
across the globe. This year also marks the seventieth
anniversary of the Korean Armistice Agreement. The
commemoration should spur us all on to foster peace
and promote reconciliation. Securing the reunion of
separated families is one way of building trust among
the Korean people, and it could also play an important
role in promoting reconciliation, peace and stability
on the Korean peninsula and the region in general. We
therefore encourage the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea to prioritize work
on finding ways to resume reunions, online or offline.
We appeal to the authorities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to release and return
the 17 Japanese nationals officially recognized by
the Government of Japan as having been abducted.
We further call on the authorities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to provide the families
of all persons who have been abducted or otherwise
considered as forcibly disappeared with comprehensive
information on their fate and whereabouts, if they have
survived, and to allow those who are still alive and their
descendants to return immediately to their countries of
origin and, in close cooperation with their families and
nations of origin, to identify and repatriate the physical
remains of those who have died.
12/21

17/08/2023

Ghana notes the increasing challenges of gathering
independent and credible information on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We urge for a constructive engagement
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and United Nations to support efforts to ensure the
human rights of its nationals and address the growing
humanitarian needs.
While we are concerned by the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, we firmly hold the view that countryspecific human rights questions should be dealt with
by the relevant United Nations human rights bodies,
with the narrow and limited exception being instances
in which a systematic and widespread violation of
human rights aggravates an ongoing conflict situation
and in which a State is either incapable of addressing
or unwilling to address the matter, as verified by
independent sources. We therefore express reservations
concerning the Council’s further consideration of the
matter and urge the appropriate United Nations human
rights bodies and mechanisms with existing mandates to
continue their efforts to gather all available information
and data and report on the human rights situation of the
North Korean people.
In conclusion, Ghana reiterates its support for the
human rights pillar of the work of the United Nations,
and encourages global respect for human rights and
the fundamental freedoms of all persons without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as
called for by Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Volker Türk, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, for
his briefing. We listened closely to the briefing by
Ms. Elizabeth Salmón, Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We also listened to the moving
briefing and call made by Mr. Ilhyeok Kim, civil
society representative.
The United Arab Emirates condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for continuing
the development of its nuclear and ballistic capabilities,
which poses a clear threat not only to neighbouring
States but also to international peace and security. We
call upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

respect international law, stop its flagrant violations and
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including by stopping its continued launching of
ballistic missiles.
The United Arab Emirates attaches great importance
to international human rights law, especially the
primary responsibility of States to protect and promote
human rights within their territories and jurisdiction,
which is a fundamental principle of the United Nations
system. We are deeply concerned about United Nations
reports of continued violations of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well
as sexual and gender-based violence against women
and girls, the abduction of foreign nationals and other
violations. United Nations reports have indicated that
more than 40 per cent of the population suffer from
acute malnutrition and approximately 20 per cent of
children suffer from stunted growth.
In that context, my country stresses the importance
of strengthening cooperation frameworks between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the organs,
mechanisms and committees of the United Nations
concerned with human rights, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and of engaging positively and effectively
with them in a way that contributes to enhancing and
protecting human rights.
My country notes that humanitarian organizations
provide their services on the basis of the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality, and their active
and non-politicized work has previously contributed to
improving conditions for civilians in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We therefore hope that the
relief organizations of the United Nations will soon be
able to return to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to support and assist those in need. We also urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to prioritize
the safety of its people and channel its limited resources
to ensure food security and meet all development needs.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
the importance of ending the cycle of escalation,
confrontation and stalemate through constructive
dialogue and quiet diplomacy, in the absence of threats
and provocations. That is the best way to reduce tensions
and rebuild trust with a view to achieving security and
stability on the Korean peninsula. We encourage the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate
with the United Nations organs and the international

S/PV.9398

community on all issues related to peace, security,
non-proliferation and human rights. At the same time,
we also stress the importance of the Council adopting a
unified approach to dealing with threats to international
peace and security, including on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mr Volker Türk, and the Special Rapporteur
on the situation on human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ms. Elizabeth Salmón, for
their briefings. We also welcome Mr. Ilhyeok Kim’s
participation in today’s meeting and thank him for
sharing his courageous account.
Every month throughout this year, the Security
Council has had to meet to address the issue of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear and
ballistic missile programme — and for good reason,
given the threat that those weapons pose to peace and
security. At the same time, it has been almost six years
since the Council formally discussed the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Today’s meeting therefore comes at just the right time.
We just heard about the grave and systematic violations
of human rights continuing in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, some of which may even constitute
crimes against humanity. We also know that by
allocating its resources to costly military and nuclear
programmes, the country sorely lacks the capacity
to meet the needs of its population. It is a population
that — let us not forget — faces increased levels of
food insecurity and poverty, and whose situation was
made even worse by the heightened isolation of the
pandemic. The situation worsened owing to both the
Government’s political choices and the lack of rapid
and unhindered access for humanitarian actors, which
must be guaranteed.
In the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
surveillance, coercion, fear and punishment are used to
stifle freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly. The list of human rights violations in the
country is long, including torture, arbitrary detentions
and the forced transfer of political prisoners to camps,
which are just a few examples of those serious and
systematic violations. In view of that bleak prospect,
we recall that human rights are universal, indivisible
and inalienable. We also recall the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s obligation to put an immediate end
to all violations and its obligations under international
human rights law. In particular, it has ratified the

23-2431813/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights.
While every violation of human rights requires a
response, the situation of Korean women and girls is
also a cause for concern. As the Special Rapporteur
mentioned, there is a need for effective protection of
victims and survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as a policy on prevention. That
is in the interest of every society. In addition, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is also required
to adhere to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. Only justice
and accountability can prevent the recurrence of such
violations. The fight against impunity for serious human
rights violations is therefore vital. The perpetrators of
human rights violations must be held accountable for
their actions. We suggest that the Council examine all
the options at its disposal to ensure that those violations
do not continue to go unpunished.
Finally, in order to respond to human rights
challenges, we need credible information. That is why
we appreciate the efforts of all those, including civil
society, who are conducting research on this issue. We
also call on the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to grant access to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Special Rapporteur.
The grave human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea threatens stability and
peace in the region and beyond. Therefore, the Council
cannot forget the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and must work for positive and
lasting change for the Korean people. Switzerland
encourages Member States to continue to engage with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the issue
of human rights, and we call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to enter into dialogue and cooperate
with international mechanisms.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Mozambique
would like to pay tribute to Mr. Volker Türk, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, not
just for his important contribution to this topic but also
for his tireless work in the promotion and protection of
human rights around the world. We thank Ms. Elizabeth
Salmón, Special Rapporteur on the situation on human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
and Mr. Ilhyeok Kim, member of civil society, for their
14/21

17/08/2023

briefings. We acknowledge the presence at this meeting of
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea.
Since its inception, our Organization inscribed in
the Charter of the United Nations in very clear terms
our collective faith in fundamental human rights, the
dignity and worth of the human person and the equal
rights of men and women. That is why we believe that the
protection of human rights is of the utmost importance
for international peace and security. Moreover, the
mandate of the Human Rights Council includes to “[c]
ontribute, through dialogue and cooperation, towards
the prevention of human rights violations and respond
promptly to human rights emergencies” (see General
Assembly resolution 60/251, para. 5(f)). Therefore, on
the eve of celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Mozambique reiterates the need for full compliance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and all the United Nations instruments related to the
protection and promotion of human rights. They can
play a major role in creating a peaceful environment on
the Korean peninsula.
In that connection, the situation on the Korean
peninsula deserves our attention. We need to take
constructive measures aimed at ending the current
tensions and all activities that undermine peace and
stability in the region. It is also imperative to build
bridges through dialogue, foster mutual trust and
relaunch peace talks between the two neighbouring
countries and in the region as a whole. Mozambique
supports all efforts by the members of the Council,
as well as by all other Member States, to promote and
maintain international peace and security, ease the
persisting tensions on the Korean peninsula and initiate
a constructive and trustful dialogue leading to lasting
peace and stability.
In conclusion, all efforts by the members of the
Council should be focused on promoting dialogue and
building trust between all the parties through diplomatic
efforts and initiatives for dialogue, to promote peace
and security in the region with a view to ending the
tensions on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Mr. Volker
Türk and Ms. Elizabeth Salmón for their comprehensive
briefings. I also thank Mr. Ilhyeok Kim for his testimony.
Brazil’s position has consistently been that debates
on human rights issues should take place in the
appropriate forums. Those discussions are most effective
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

when they avoid accusations of selectivity and seek to
implement rights for all. Brazil defended the creation
in 2006 of a constructive, universal, non-selective and
non-politicized forum for human rights in Geneva. For
that reason, we are an active participant in the Human
Rights Council, as well as in other bodies dedicated to
that vitally important matter. While recognizing that
rule 2 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure
provides that the President shall call a meeting of the
Security Council at the request of any member of the
Council, it is our duty to remind members that the
subject of the meeting must come under the mandate
of the Council.
Brazil remains concerned about the persistent
reports of systematic violations of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
has participated in discussions on the subject in the
appropriate United Nations bodies. Brazil has also
supported resolutions concerning the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea both in the Human Rights Council and in the
Third Committee of the General Assembly. We have
been equally vocal in drawing attention to the grave
humanitarian situation facing the country’s civilian
population. We continue to be troubled by findings
of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) that conclude that
the sanctions regime in itself has had unintended
effects on the humanitarian situation. We must do more
to mitigate them.
We therefore reiterate our call for a sustained
process of engagement with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Only through dialogue can the many
issues in the file begin to be addressed, including the
human rights situation in all its dimensions. Isolation
does not help the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, nor does it bring us closer to our
goal of a Korean peninsula that is peaceful, stable and
free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
opposes the Council’s consideration of the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Our position is crystal clear. According to the Charter
of the United Nations, the primary responsibility of the
Council is the maintenance of international peace and
security, not addressing human rights issues. The human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea does not pose a threat to international peace
and security. At present, the international situation is

S/PV.9398

fraught with change and turmoil and with crises and
challenges of all kinds. The world we live in is facing
rising instability and uncertainty. The Council should
focus on fulfilling its responsibility under the Charter,
striving to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes,
resolve geopolitical confrontations and deal with the
major and urgent issues that threaten international
peace and security.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has remained
tense and confrontations have intensified for some time
now. All the parties should exercise calm and restraint,
make greater efforts to achieve peace and stability and
refrain from provocative and escalatory words and
deeds. At this complex and sensitive time, the Council
should play a constructive role in resuming dialogue
and easing tensions. Pushing it to consider the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will not help to ease the situation but will
rather escalate it. It is irresponsible, unconstructive
and an abuse of the Council’s power. If the countries
concerned are genuinely concerned about the regional
peace and stability and the welfare of the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, they should
take concrete action and make concrete proposals to
promote mutual trust and resume talks. They should
support adjusting provisions regarding the sanctions
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
especially in the area of people’s livelihoods, and
immediately lift the unilateral coercive measures that
have led to a deterioration of the human rights situation
in the country.
The question of the Korean peninsula has continued
to this day as a remnant of the Cold War. It is essentially
a political and security issue. The hype created in the
Security Council regarding the human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is an
attempt to divert attention, shirk responsibility and
exert pressure. It will not help to resolve the issue and
will only do more harm. What the countries concerned
should really do is demonstrate political will and take
practical action to respond to the reasonable concerns
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, making
efforts to create conditions conducive to a resumption
of talks.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China
remains committed to the maintenance of peace and
stability, the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and the settlement of disputes through dialogue and
consultations. We stand ready to continue playing a

23-2431815/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

constructive role in promoting a political solution to the
question of the Korean peninsula and in realizing longlasting peace and stability in North-East Asia.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank High Commissioner
Türk and Special Rapporteur Salmón for their valuable
contributions. I also thank Mr. Ilhyeok Kim for his
powerful and courageous testimony.
Malta recognizes the inextricable link between
human rights and advancing international peace and
security. We commend the work of human rights bodies
and mechanisms such as the Human Rights Council
that continue to highlight the long list of human rights
violations occurring within the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, despite the complete lack of
cooperation by State authorities.
It is almost 10 years since the commission of inquiry
on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea exposed systematic, widespread and grave
violations amounting to crimes against humanity. The
violations have continued and are intrinsically linked to
the threats posed by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to international peace and security. We call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to adhere
to its international obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It must completely,
verifiably and irreversibly abandon its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes and return to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards. We
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Civilians in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continue to live in a climate of Governmentinduced fear. As we have heard today from our
briefers, the humanitarian situation in the country
remains dire, with severe levels of food insecurity and
large segments of the population enduring chronic
malnutrition. Children are especially impacted by the
situation. The North Korean authorities must allow
international humanitarian organizations to bring
rapid and unhindered assistance to the most vulnerable
groups, including prisoners.
We deplore reports of the regime using food as a
method of State control, with the diversion of resources
to military objectives, including the numerous ballistic
missile launches witnessed in the past year. The
systematic restrictions of the freedoms of thought
and expression and of movement are deeply troubling.
16/21

17/08/2023

Arbitrary arrests, detentions and forced disappearances,
which also affect the extended families of those accused
of being “traitors”, continue through the regime’s vast
use of detention centres and prisons.
Discrimination against women and girls as a result
of widespread gender stereotypes and normative deficits
prevents the achievement of gender equality. Their lowlevel market activities have made them targets of regime
control. As Special Rapporteur Salmón noted, the
North Korean authorities subject women in detention to
inhumane conditions, including torture, forced labour,
sexual violence and deprivation of food. We concur
with her recommendation to address the patriarchal
root causes of gender-based violence, promote women’s
awareness of their rights and engage men as part
of the solution to ending violence against women.
Furthermore, reports concerning forced child labour
are disturbing, despite the claims by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea denying such practices,
which constitute a grave violation of children’s rights.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
also abducted foreign nationals outside its borders,
many of whom remain unaccounted for. Malta calls on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to provide
full information about all persons who have been
kidnapped and unlawfully detained and to immediately
release all abductees. We stress that the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must be
held accountable for its abhorrent practices against its
own people, including the trafficking of women and
girls and the exploitation of children. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must meaningfully
cooperate with United Nations human rights bodies
and initiate a dialogue with the Special Rapporteur and
special procedure thematic mandate holders and invite
them to carry out official country visits.
We further call on States to fully implement their
obligations under the sanctions regime and refrain from
engaging in, or assisting with, any sanctions violations.
The use of revenue generated by North Korean workers
overseas to fund the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s illegal weapons programme also constitutes
human exploitation. We call on States to repatriate all
nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
earning income in their jurisdiction, in full accordance
with international law. In conclusion, I would like to
remind the Council of our shared objective: peace
on and the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Human rights are not optional, nor are they an isolated
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

concern. They are the foundation upon which a stable
and peaceful Korean peninsula must be built.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today, we once again witness a brazen attempt
by the Western countries on the Security Council and
the United States presidency to use the Council to
advance their own self-serving, politicized agenda.
This meeting is in no way linked to developments on
the ground and was not initially included in the draft
programme of work proposed by the United States
presidency at the beginning of the month. It is clear
that, having understood how provocative that idea
was, our United States colleagues tried to avoid the
well-founded criticisms of Security Council members.
The fact that the provocation was clearly planned in
advance is indicated by the fact that Albania, the United
States and Japan circulated among Council members
a concept note that they had concocted, calling for
Council members to focus discussions on the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in the context of international peace and security.
I would like to underscore that based on longstanding practice, such concept notes are circulated by
the presidency of the Security Council only in relation
to the signature events that it is organizing, in which
case the presidency genuinely has the opportunity to
determine the subject and format of the discussion. We
therefore wonder, Madam President, whether today’s
meeting is another signature event of your presidency
and if so, why was it not properly announced at the
beginning of the month? If not, on what basis do the
United States, Albania and Japan arrogate to themselves
the right to steer discussions at the Security Council?
Such actions are nothing more than a gross violation of
established practice in the Council’s work.
The steps taken are unjustified, serve purely
propaganda-related purposes and contravene the
mandate of the Security Council. As is well known,
human rights issues are not part of that mandate. Those
issues are discussed in the relevant forums, primarily
at the Human Rights Council and the Third Committee
of the General Assembly. Any attempt by the sponsors
of today’s meeting to link human rights with threats to
international peace and security is absolutely artificial.
Moreover, attempts to introduce into the Security
Council’s work issues that do not fall within its mandate
divide its attention, politicize the discussion and thereby
undermine the Council’s overall authority. It is clear
that convening today’s meeting is nothing more than a

S/PV.9398

cynical and hypocritical attempt by the United States
and its allies to advance their own political agenda, step
up pressure on Pyongyang, and divert attention from
the reckless escalatory actions of Washington and its
allies in the region. They are the ones that are creating
a real threat to international peace and security.
There is no need to describe in detail yet again
what we are talking about. Everyone is well aware that
the United States of America, Japan and the Republic
of Korea, as part of their so-called extended deterrence
policy, are continuing to build up their military activity
in the region. One of the main trends is the increasingly
large-scale nature of the exercises they are carrying
out and their increased military cooperation. Recently,
the world also witnessed the appearance of a United
States nuclear submarine off the Korean peninsula
and United States-South Korea air drills involving
United States fighter jets and strategic bombers. Nor
should we forget the plans to redeploy part of NATO’s
military infrastructure to the region. We have also
heard dangerous warnings about the plans of Japan and
the Republic of Korea to bolster nuclear cooperation
with the United States, going as far as the possible
deployment on their territories of American nuclear
weapons and the development of their own arsenals.
Russia has consistently opposed any military
activity that would jeopardize the security of the
Korean peninsula and the countries of North-East Asia.
Dangerous actions and statements directly oppose
the goal of easing tensions around the peninsula and
finding ways to resolve the situation by political and
diplomatic means, as set out in the relevant Security
Council resolutions. That is against the backdrop of the
clearly expressed position of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the lengthy history of the issue,
which clearly indicates that there is no way to resolve
the problems that exist, other than through dialogue
and constructive interaction, taking into account
the legitimate concerns and rights of all the States
involved, including of course the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Recent events further confirm that
refraining from provocative acts and returning to the
negotiating table represent the only possible way to
resolve any problems. In that connection, I would like
to draw attention once again to the Russian-Chinese
plan of action on the comprehensive settlement of the
situation on the Korean peninsula, which provides for
concrete steps in various areas.

23-2431817/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This meeting is an instance of blatant hypocrisy
on the part of the United States of America and its
allies, which even as they speak about human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continue
to consistently oppress the North Korean people with
inhumane unilateral sanctions. Today, we have not
heard anything from United Nations representatives or
our Western colleagues about how people are suffering
as a result of those measures. That further indicates the
futility of today’s discussion, the only aim of which is to
cater to Western double standards with respect to both
the work of the Security Council and human rights.
We are convinced that the Council and the United
Nations in general should not indulge the policy of the
United States and its allies of using human rights as a
pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. Those actions are the ones that represent the main
threat to peace and security, something that dozens of
States in various regions of the world have been able
to see for themselves. No amount of manoeuvring by
Washington and its allies is going to fool anyone here.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank High
Commissioner Türk and Special Rapporteur Salmón
for their briefings. I also, like others, pay tribute to
Mr. Kim for his powerful testimony, and I welcome the
presence of the representative of the Republic of Korea
at this meeting.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the appalling human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is clear that
human rights violations remain widespread, systematic
and completely lacking in accountability. I therefore
also thank Albania, Japan, the Republic of Korea and
the United States for bringing this issue back to the
Security Council for the first time since 2017.
Human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and international peace and security are
inextricably linked. The authorities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea divert resources from
peoples’ basic economic needs towards their illegal
nuclear- and ballistic-weapons programmes. These
illegal weapons are financed through forced labour,
with workers sent overseas, often under modern slavery
conditions. I urge all States Members of the United
Nations, especially the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, to fully implement resolution 2397 (2017),
including on overseas workers, and end this exploitation.
18/21

17/08/2023

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to reject United Nations resolutions on the
situation of human rights in North Korea. It refuses
to cooperate with the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights or with the
United Nations Special Rapporteur. The regime fails
to acknowledge the 2014 report of the commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (A/HRC/25/63) that concluded that
wide-ranging human rights violations taking place in
the country may amount to crimes against humanity.
The United Kingdom also recognizes the suffering
of other nationals who have been abducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and we call
for their return. Forced repatriations, State-sponsored
abductions and enforced disappearances demand
action. We remind all States Members of the United
Nations to respect the principle of non-refoulement
and not forcibly return those who have escaped the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to face threats
to their safety and human rights.
The human rights situation has not improved while
the Council has remained silent. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to prioritize the well-being
of its citizens over the development of its illegal weapons
programmes. We remind the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that its restrictive coronavirus
disease measures must be proportionate and not used
as a tool to further constrain the freedom of its citizens
or to restrict the ability of the international community
to engage with authorities in Pyongyang. We urge
them to engage in a genuine and positive spirit with
the United Nations Special Rapporteur to bring about
permanent change and improvements for the people of
North Korea.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Volker Türk, and the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ms. Elisabeth
Salmón, for their respective briefings. I listened
carefully to Mr. Ilhyeok Kim’s briefing. We welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Korea at today’s meeting.
I would like to highlight two concerns that
seem essential to us. The first is that my country is
committed to the unconditional respect of human rights
wherever they are threatened, and that all situations in
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

which human beings are deprived of their fundamental
rights, including economic rights, must be the subject
of sustained attention. We condemn any impediment to
human rights and reject any attempt to politicize human
rights issues or to treat them in a lopsided manner,
because human rights are universal, indivisible and
inalienable. Accordingly, my country’s position is
unambiguous with respect to the fact that human rights
situations, including those concerning the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, must be addressed within
the Human Rights Council and the Third Committee,
which are the competent forums par excellence within
the United Nations system for examining human
rights violations.
The second concern is the need to resolve the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s military
situation through diplomatic channels. For several
months now, we have been noting with concern a
hardening and radicalization of positions, reflected in
an unprecedented escalation of military deterrence,
marked by the increased frequency of missile launches
on a scale that raises fears of the irreparable, including
nuclear risk. This climate of high tension is a threat not
only to the Korean peninsula as a whole, but also to
international peace and security. On every occasion, my
country has clearly expressed its opposition to missile
diplomacy and the outrageous rhetoric supporting it.
We reiterate our call once again for all parties to give
priority to dialogue and negotiation on the basis of
international law, with a view to ending the threat to
the Korean peninsula.
The President: The representative of Japan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I wish to respond to the
reference by a Council member to the Japan’s security
policy in relation to nuclear weapons. I want to make the
following point crystal clear: the Three Non-Nuclear
Principles of not possessing, not producing and
not permitting the introduction of nuclear weapons
continues to be our basic policy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Joonkook Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would
like to begin by thanking the United States presidency
of the Security Council for convening today’s important
meeting, as well as the Council members who supported
the meeting. My gratitude also goes to United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Volker

S/PV.9398

Türk, and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ms. Elisabeth Salmón, Ms. Elizabeth
Salmón, for their excellent briefings, and to the special
briefer, Mr. Mr. Ilhyeok Kim, for his courage in sharing
his precious and personal account.
Earlier this year, 61 States Members of the United
Nations and the European Union— double the number
from last year — sent a letter requesting that the Security
Council remain seized of the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in pursuit
of a public Security Council meeting (S/2023/157). On
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Korea
and the Korean people, I am grateful to see that this
request was granted today, after waiting for more than
five years.
As a fellow Korean, I am aware of the immensity
of the critical task before me: to inform the world of the
grim reality facing 25 million North Korean people by
delivering a statement only several minutes long. Today
we are not addressing human rights violations in any
conflict or war zones, as we often do at the Security
Council. We are instead addressing human rights
violations in one of the most tightly controlled Member
States in the world, where systematic, widespread
and gross human rights violations amounting to
crimes against humanity take place. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is an example of a perfectly
functioning totalitarian system that controls the
physical, mental and intellectual activities of its entire
population on a daily basis. The landmark report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, released in
2014, stated that:
“[t]he gravity, scale and nature of these violations
reveal a State that does not have any parallel in the
contemporary world.” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s human
rights violations are in clear contravention of the
universal values enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and constitute a threat to international peace
and security.
The report of the commission of inquiry clearly
recommended that the Security Council refer the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea human rights
situation to the International Criminal Court. It also
recommended that the Council adopt targeted sanctions

23-2431819/21

S/PV.9398

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

against those who appear to be most responsible for
crimes against humanity.
Regrettably since its last meeting on this subject
(see S/PV.8130), in 2017, the Security Council has not
been able to convene publicly to address human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, while
the situation remains desperate and with no signs
of improvement. In addition, severe economic hardship
and associated chronic food shortages have been
exacerbated by the self-imposed isolation of the regime
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea during
the pandemic and a new market-distorting policy it
adopted last year banning private transactions of grain.
At the same time, over the past year and a half,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has been
engaging in an unprecedented escalation of its weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) provocations, including
the launches of 12 intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Instead of addressing its critical food shortages, the
regime of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has continually squandered its scarce resources on
a dangerous show of force and advancement of its
WMD technology.
The human rights abuses of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are not only a problem of the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but also
a critical national security issue for the Republic of
Korea. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
reckless pursuit of a nuclear arsenal and its totalitarian
control of its own people has the same root cause: the
desire to justify and perpetuate the rule of its bizarre
dynastic regime.
As highlighted at today’s meeting, the human rights
and WMD issues of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are intertwined in very real ways. Focusing on
WMDs at the expense of its own people’s well-being by
diverting resources is possible only in a country where
all political dissent is crushed. Moreover, domestic
and overseas forced labour under heavy surveillance
has served as one of the major sources of funds for the
regime’s unlawful weapons programme.
Therefore, by failing to address the human rights
situation, we cannot hope to resolve the nuclear issue
either. We should take a holistic approach towards the
issues of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in the Security Council and clearly demonstrate that
justice must prevail.
20/21

17/08/2023

There are still roughly 100,000 people detained in
political prison camps enduring a life of acute misery
with only the remotest chance of being released alive.
The regime also operates a long-standing system that
punishes citizens for offences allegedly committed by
members of their family.
Furthermore, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea regime is a perpetrator of human rights
violations beyond its territory. In her report to the
Human Rights Council this year, Special Rapporteur
Ms. Salmón detailed the Japanese cases of 12 abductees
and the Korean cases of abductions and enforced
disappearances: up to 100,000 Korean civilian
abductees during the Korean War, 516 Korean postwar abductees and roughly 500 surviving prisoners of
war held in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
since 1953.
Yet another astonishing recent development is the
adoption of a series of highly oppressive laws, including
the so-called Law on Rejecting Reactionary Ideology
and Culture, in 2020; the Youth Education Guarantee
Law, in 2021; and the Pyongyang Cultural Language
Protection Law, in 2023. As a result, simply watching
or sharing South Korean television dramas or movies
is now punishable by death in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Those horrendous living conditions have
continually forced the North Korean people to flee
across the border, mainly to China, despite draconian
measures such as orders to shoot to kill on sight. It is
both horrifying and heartbreaking to witness North
Korean escapees risking everything, including their
lives, on their long arduous road to freedom.
We are deeply concerned about the issue of
defectors from the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea detained in third countries. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights continues to document serious human rights
violations when a third country has repatriated them to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
torture and other cruel, degrading treatment. In that
regard, we would like to remind Member States that the
principle of non-refoulement should be observed.
Against that backdrop, we cannot simply turn a
blind eye to that reality by insisting that discussing the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in the Security Council risks politicizing human rights.
In fact, it is the regime of the Democratic People’s
23-24318

17/08/2023

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Republic of Korea that uses human rights abuses as
a critical means of governance to achieve its political
goals. What it does to the outside world is a natural
extension of what it does inside. The Security Council’s
neglect could put international peace and security at
further risk.
The Republic of Korea remains the country most
affected by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s human rights violations and its violent attacks,
including presidential assassination attempts, while
being within direct range as a military target. However,
we never forget that people in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are our brothers and sisters.
Bearing that in mind, my Government released its
first-ever public report on the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea this year.
The Republic of Korea, during its upcoming term on
the Security Council, will continue to make every effort
to improve the situation — related to both human rights

S/PV.9398

and non-proliferation — in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea by building upon the momentum
gained at today’s meeting.
In conclusion, I would like to share my reflections
from a recent encounter with 10 young North
Korean defectors, all of whom shared their own
extraordinary stories, like that of the briefer today. We
should all contemplate the lives of the North Korean
young people, who are growing up in a society with
rampant brainwashing and indoctrination, completely
disconnected with no outside information.
What the international community, including my
country, ought to do is to figure out how we can give
the hope of freedom and human dignity to that young,
future generation and take action to that end. After all,
our sisters and brothers in North Korea should live the
lives they deserve, just like all of us.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-2431821/21
