::.'
j i.'Z',,..'

'_, :,

30 JUI,Y

1976

tt1

MEETING:

>'

'

,,

-’

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l948)

. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . #. . .

1

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargi d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent
Mission of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1948

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of Wpitul lctterS Wilbined with figures. Mention of such 21symbol indicates 81rcfcrcncc to i\ United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) arc normally published in
quarterly S~pp/e/nolr.~ of the Qfkitrl R~YY~N/.s of’thc Src.l/rir.v C’(u//rc’i/. ‘I’k dale
of the document indicates the supplement in which it nppeurs or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in xxordunce
with a
system adopted in 1964, ire published in yearly volumes of R~~.so//~(ion.s u//t/
fk*i.sion.s o.f the Sccn/*it?, Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1948th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

30 July 1976, at 3.30 pm’.

(Italy).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l948)

of the agenda

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12147)

Adcption

3. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have received a
note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Mauritius
requesting that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mauritius, Sir Harold Walter, be invited to participate
in the debate in his capacity as current Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). I therefore propose that the Council
agree, in accordance with the usual practice, to invite
him to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote.

of the agenda

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the ChargC d’affaires,
a.]., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147)

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will continue
consideration of the question before it.

1, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings [/944th to 1947th
ffzeetif?g.s] I shall now, with the consent of the Council,
invite the representatives of Zambia, South Africa,
Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Guinea, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Qatar, Sierra
Leone, Uganda, Yugoslavia and Zaire to participate in
the Council’s discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

its

5. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, tnay I start by extending to you my congratulations and those of my delegation on your nearing the
end of your month as President of the Security Council.
6. On a more serious note, however, may 1, before
I turn to the item on our agenda, -join other delegations
in extending our deepest sympathy to those who have
suffered in the terrible earthquakes at Tangshan in
China, and 1 would ask the Chinese delegation and
people to accept our condolences.

2. In accordance with the Council’s further decision,
1 shall also renew the Council’s invitation, under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to the Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
and the other members of the delegation that Council.

7. On a happier note, I want to welcome to our midst
the Foreign Ministers of Zambia, the United Republic
of Tanzania,
Mozambique
and * Mauritius.
They
represent countries which are deeply involved in the
unfolding pattern of events in southern Africa, and
we all know how heavy is the responsibility
which
1

of southern Africa. I agree entirely with the representmative of South Africa when he said that peaceful solutions are still possible. They will however requi,re
great statesmanship on South Africa’s part, and a
readiness by that country to accept what for it was
once quite unacceptable. Such solutions will also
require, I must add, a like degree of restraint, statesmanship and flexibility
on the part of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). But the
more incidents there are such as the one at Sialola
-whoever
is responsible for them and for whatever
reasons they occur-the greater will be the obstacll:s
in the way of negotiation and the attainment of a just
settlement.

they carry. My own Government
has worked closely
with theirs and with the Government
of Botswana
in an effort to resolve the problems which still confront
us all in Southern Rhodesia and in Namibia. I wish
to assure the Foreign Ministers that we shall continue
to do so. I believe that our objectives are the same,
namely, self-determination
and majority rule as soon
as possible.
8. On this occasion, however, I do not want to
dwell at length on the problems of Southern Rhodesia
or of Namibia; which lie somewhat outside the main
thrust of.our debate. In any event, we shall have a
chance to discuss the situation in Namibia in depth in
the near future. I shall only make two general points.
First, my Government considers that South Africa
is in unlawful occupation of Namibia,
and that the
Territory cannot and must not be used as a base for
any attacks on neighbouring
African countries.
Secondly, we continue to believe that a peaceful
solution is possible, and by that I mean the negotiation
of a genuine independence for the Territory. We do
not believe that war or, indeed, increased guerrilla
activity, is either inevitable
or desirable. We do
believe that independence may not be too far away
and thai now is the time to attempt to reconcile the
various currents of Namibian opinion.

11. Mr. HAMMARSKJOLD
(Sweden): May I he
permitted
first to associate my delegation most
sincerely with those speakers who have expressed
their sympathy to the representative of China for the
severe natural disaster which has struck his country.
12. I should also like to join those speakers who have
acknowledged the presence here of the Foreign
Ministers of Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Mozambique and Mauritius-a
presence which still
further underlines the importance of our proceedings.
13. The Security Council has already gathered no
less than four times this year to take a position on
South Africa’s racist and aggressive policies. In
January, the Council expressed its condemnation of
South Africa’s illegal occupation of the Territory of
Namibia [~.eso/utiorl 385 (1976)]. In March, the Council
dealt with South Africa’s open aggressiotl against the
People’s Republic of Angola, and it condemned that
aggression [~.eso/rltion 387 (1976)]. In June, after largescale killings of African people, including school
children and students demonstrating
against racial
discrimination
in South Africa, the Council strongly
condemned the South African Government for its
resort to massive violence [wso/ufio~7
392 (197h)l.
Now the Council is meeting at the request of the
Republic of Zambia concerning recent repeated South
African violations of Zambia’s territory, which culminated in an incursion on 11 July, causing the death
of 24 people. These different events have one thing in
common: their origins can be found in the inhuman
qxrrfkeiti
policy of the Pretoria Government.

9. The Foreign Minister of Zambia in his address to
the Council talked about the need to establish in
southern Africa “a just order and the respect for
human dignity” [/944rh /~zeeting, pcrrcr. 171. This is
surely the heart of the problem. The Government of
Zambia is uniquely qualified to make this appeal to
us. We all admire President Kaunda’s total ‘commitment to the cause of multiracialism
which, if I may say
so, has stood out like a beacon in the otherwise sad
story of much of southern Africa. For many years
Zambia has shown great restraint in a hideously
difficult situation. We all know how exposed Zambia
is geographically
to economic pressures and how
great its sacrifices have been. Zambia has suffered
more than most countries from the application
of
economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. It
deserves the full and the continuing
support of the
world community.
I am glad that my own country,
in conjunction
and together with the European
Community, has been able to assist it in some degree.

14. Turning to the item before us today, the Zambian
complaint concerning South African incursions into its
territory, we note that as early as in 1971 the Cound.
in resolution 300 (1971), called upon South Africa to
respect fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Zambia and declared further that if South Africa
renewed its violations of Zambian territory, the COUW
cil would meet again. As is clear from the report ‘lye
heard some days ago by the Zambian Fore@]
Minister, Mr. Mwale [1944t/z /1lc~~ti/lg], South Africa
has not complied with that call from the Council.

10. We are considering here a complaint by Zambia
against South Africa. The Foreign Minister of Zambia
gave us disturbing details of the raid on Sialola and
of earlier incidents this year. The representative
of
South Africa [1944tA mcefing]
told us that his Government had no knowledge of the raid and had not
authorized it. But whether it was authorized or not, we
are satisfied that such an attack took place. We therefore associate ourselves with those who have condemned South Africa’s action and we deeply regret
the loss of life and the violation of Zambian territory.
We urge all concerned to ensure that these incidents
are not repeated. This is a crucial stage in the history

15. Mr. Mwale reported not only one but a lo@
series of violations during this year by South African
2

military forces. By far the gravest of these incursions
took place on II JLIIY in a SWAP0 transit camp,
30 kilometres
into Zambian territory. As of now,
24 people have been reported dead, and 45 injured.

22. I admit that it is easier to speak than to act; I admit
that it is sometimes very difficult for the Council to
maintain such an approach when members have the
feeling that the interests of their countries are involved
in the issues. Sometimes-and
unfortunately
very
often these days--their
feelings become aroused to
such an extent that, though not involved directly in
behave more like
those issues, they sometimes
royalists than the king himself. Such a phenomenon
is, in my view, harmful to the work of the Council.

16. The Swedish Government
strongly condemns
South Africa’s renewed violation of the territory of
Zambia, an independent and sovereign State and a
Member of the United Nations. My delegation can
therefore give its full support to the draft resolution
[S//2/58] just presented to us. It contains a strong
and unambiguous
condemnation
of South Africa’s
armed attack against Zambia.

23. We also know only too well that there have been
a number of cases on which the Council was unable
to take effective action. What I should like to emphasize here is the approach with which the Council
has tried to discharge its duties, rather than the seeming
success or failure with which it has had to terminate
its consideration.
I say this because, if the Council
takes. up the approach that I have recommended
-namely,
that of objectivity,
fairness and comprehension-it
is most likely that today’s failure will
become tomorrow’s success. This is at least the basic
approach of my delegation in the present debate.

17. Over the years my Government has, both in the
United Nations and in other forums, clearly expressed
its re.jection of the unacceptable rrptrrtlleitl policy of the
South African Government.
On numerous occasions
it has also condemned South Africa’s illegal occupation
of Namibia, and has given political as well as material
support to SWAPO, which is leading the liberation
movement in Namibia. My delegation expressed its
views on the matter in the debate in January on the
Namibia question, and we intend to do likewise in the
forthcoming debate on the same subject.

24. The complaint by Zambia was lucidly and amply
explained by Mr. Siteke Mwale, the Foreign Minister
of Zambia, a few days ago in the Council [/Y#41h
~zcetin~]. According to him, on 11 July 1976, a South
African military aircraft, flying from the south-east
to the north-west, hovered over and dropped armed
men in Sialola, 30 kilometres inside Zambian territory,
who, in turn, attacked the transit camp of SWAP0
and planted land-mines around the camp. This armed
attack resulted in 24 people dead and 45 others in.jured.

18, My delegation would take great satisfaction in
seeing a unanimous condemnation by the Council of
South Africa’s armed attack against Zambia. We have
always been of the opinion that sustained international
pressure against the internal as well as the external
policies of the South African Government is of vita1
importance to bring about the necessary changes. A
unanimous vote by the Council would be a forceful
reminder to the Pretoria Government of the reaction
of the world community on South African policies.

25. In reply to the complaint by Zambia, the representative of South Africa [ihid.] stated that the South
African Government had no knowledge of an attack
on a village at Sialola on 11 July, and that it had at
no time authorized
attacks on Zambian villages.
Naturally, we around this table of the Security Council
were not witnesses to the incident and we have no
evidence that the particular statement by the representative of South Africa is contrary to the facts. None
of us was there on the spot at the time when the
incident occurred. But simply because of this, should
we take the statement by the South African representative as conveying the truth?

19, Mr. ABE (Japan): May I first of all express OUI
deep grief and sorrow on the terrible calamity which
recently struck the country of our Chinese friends in
the area of Tangshan in northern China. In the name
of the Japanese delegation, I should like to extend our
profound condolences and great sympathy to the
delegation of the People’s Republic of China.
20. This time the Security Council is seized of a
complaint
by Zambia against South Africa. The
presence in the present series of meetings of the
Council of the four distinguished Foreign Ministers
-namely,
the Foreign Ministers of Zambia, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mozambique and Mauritiusto whom my delegation extends its whole-hearted
welcome, shows how deeply the African countries
feel about the case now before us.

26. The Japanese delegation has been left with the
impression that the statement by the representative of
South Africa was very unresponsive to the complaint
and that it has failed to give a clear picture indicating
that South Africa was not involved in the incident.

21 I The basic approach of my country as a member
uf the Council to the issues brought before it is to
consider those issues with objectivity and fairness,
and in particular to show the maximum comprehension
of the positions of the various parties involved. I feel
that such an approach is a correct one for the Council
itself,

27. Futhermore,
if it is true that the South African
Government had no knowledge of the incident Zambia
has complained about, we may wonder if the South
Africans had any knowledge, either, of a similar case
that happened shortly before or after 11 July; because,
from what we have heard from both Zambian and
South African sources, there seems to have occurred
3

:’

Mr. President, I would like to thank you, and through
you the members of the Security Council, for having
given me the opportunity of supporting the just and
unchallengeable cause of Zambia, my sister State of
the Organization of African Unity, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity. I have chosen the French
language as my vehicle of expression todaY to
emphasize the French concept of the universality of
man and its connotation of le pleirl Pptr,lorri.ssP,~~l~/~r
L/P I’hon7me.
The last time I addressed you, Mr, President, I commiserated with you. Today it is with pride
and pleasure that I congratulate you on the skilful
an’d masterly way in which you have conducted the
debate during the few days that I have had the privilege
of watching you. I will sum it up: an iron hand in a
velvet glove.

a number of border violations on different dates even
since the beginning of the year. If the South African
Government
never authorized such acts, can we
assume that such acts were conducted without the
authorization of the South African Government?
28. If the South African Government intended to
deny that any armed incursion by South Africa did
take place, its representative should have stated so
and provided us with detailed facts supporting this
-by, for example, explaining the movements of the
South African army during that period, as was
mentioned by the representative of Liberia two days
ago [1945th meeting].
29. As a matter of fact, the representative of South
Africa admitted in his statement that a number of
incidents have happened on both sides of the frontier.
If the South African Government never attempted or
authorized armed incursions into Zambia, did the
representative of South Africa mean to say that all
these incidents were incursions from the Zambian side
towards the South African side? With all due efforts
on our part to understand the situation as it actually
occurred, we are left with certain important points
unanswered.
,
1

35. First of all, I should like to take this opportunity
to address my condolences to the Government and the
people of the People’s Republic of China in the time
of trial through which they .are passing.
36. I should also like to transmit my condolences and
my sympathy to the President and people of the
Republic of Madagascar because of the misfortune that
has cruelly attacked them.

30. Therefore, my delegation could not help concluding that things must have happened as Zambia
has complained, contrary to the statement made by
the representative of South Africa. Then there should
be no doubt that the armed attacks by South Africa
constitute a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Zambia, and the United Nations
cannot but condemn this. The South Africans must
be called upon to desist henceforth from all similar
acts and from the use of the international
Territory
of Namibia as a base for launching armed attacks
against Zambia.

!

j

37. This is an age of tribulation.
I return here,
following my statement before the Security Courlcil
the other day [1943& meeting], in the hope that, in
spite of everything, it will bring about some understanding among States. This is an age of tribulation
for the continent of Africa, where we see wars breaking
out as if they were natural occurrences and where we
see hatred and violence wreaking their destruction.
It is an age of tribulation, where pompous meetings
discuss the limited or unlimited use of thermo-nuclear
forces in the next war.

3 1. In this connexion, it would be particularly
relevant to point out that the principal cause of such
situations is deeply rooted in South Africa’s aptrrfh<~id policies, which are universally held in contempt
by the international
community,
and also in South
Afric&s illegal holding of Namibia.

38. The nations, protest, OAU meets in an effort to
bring back reason. But the major interests, or what are
called thus, are indifferent to protestations. Q~rarrs~
tandem, Cntilirza?

32. The?efore, my delegation strongly urges South
Africa seriously to reflect on the international situation
surrounding the country, to desist from its entirely
erroneous political measures, and to seek a solution
through which all people in Africa can enjoy fundamental human rights and come to live together in peace,
harmony and prosperity.

39. Nothing is more tragic than to listen objectively
to the history of the recent events between South
Africa and Zambia when those events arouse halfextinguished passions. The sources are abundant,
perhaps too abundant, and there is a.host of witnesses.
40. We have a series of accounts, mainly of dramas
now taking place between two countries, when one of
those countries should understand the other and show
a spirit of good-neighbourliness.
Yet, UnfortunatelY,
one finds nothing better to do than to attack the other:
it is still a case of the stronger against the weaker. SO
beware of a just reversal of roles. He who lives by the
sword shall die by the sword.

i

33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius, the current
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, Sir Harold Walter.
34. Sir Harold WALTER (Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity}:
4
i,’

41. In this exalted tribunal composed of members of
the world community, the sacred custodians of peace,
the aggressor’s claim that it is defending its so-called
civilization has already been used enough in trying to
justify its blindest crimes. It forgets that it is thus
laying bare the evil deeds perpetrated in the name of
an already disfigured and outdated ideal.

oblivion;
it wishes to make its voice heard and its
voice will be heard, While others have taken centuries
to create united states-be they of America, of Kussia
or of Europe-in
a few years you will have to deal
with a United States of Africa, the foundations of
which are being laid today.
47. Whatever the outcome ‘may have been in Viet
Nam and in other conflicts of the same kind, there is a
twofold lesson to be learnt: on the one hand, there
is the risk of a war of national liberation whenever the
great Powers make no commitments;
and, on the
other hand, the aggressor suffers an immeasurable loss
of prestige and moral authority, far more than it does
of men or money.

42. Of course, many of you still remember Sharpeville. It is now only the morrow of Soweto, of Sialola,
and what is going to happen now? Thirteen other
attacks have taken place since January 1976. The
remainder is better left untold, for history to record in
its black pages. And now this aggression the Council
is considering.
What a shameful and degrading
catalogue of oppression, repression and crime! An
exalting spectacle, indeed! And this is what the Fascist
South African regime calls peaceful dialogue. That is
the point we have reached. To oppose with unjust
violence a peaceful people which asks only to live and
build a nation, that is the watchword of npcrrtheid,
which calls upon God, Joan of Arc and patriotism to
help it.

48. True, South Africa does have the material
resources to keep under arms a body of a half-million
men, if it so wishes, without imposing privation upon
its population
and without even slowing down the
progress of its economy. This tragic war bears witness
to the country’s enormous resources. It also reveals
the threat posed to the unity of a nation which calls
itself democratic by the bad conscience of some of
its people and the barbarity of that country’s conception of humanity.

43. All South Africa’s neighbours-Namibia,
Angola,
Zambia-are
under the yoke of this hideous monster
and are constantly threatened by it. There has not
been a word of pity for the victims imprisoned without
trial, not even a call to order to the killers and assassins. That is what is described as the “defence of
civilization”
in the twentieth century.

49. It is difficult for us to know just how far racial
tension can be aggravated.
In the last few years,
South Africa has not only acquired the conventional
weapons it needed but has also now a nuclear potential,
and military equipment suitable for other forms of
conflict. Total war, using nuclear bombs or conventional
weapons, between adversaries who are
unequally matched would be catastrophic for all and we
could then fear that the apocalyptic predictions we have
heard might one day come true.

44. May I admit that, as a witness to all these
horrors perpetrated in th name of freedom, and as a
Christian, I was doubly horrified. First, I was overcome with shame for our human race and secondly,
with anxiety and concern for our black peoples. All
I can do is console myself with the certainty that
it is not crpcrrtheitl
which is right. But it is to you,
members of the Council, that all the peoples of Africa
are appealing and it is from this pulpit that we wish to
demonstrate clearly to the eyes and ears of the world
what justice should be and what human dignity should
bc.

50. That is a serious situation. Even the mourning,
ruin, tears, bloodshed, torn flesh and millions of
deaths caused by seismic movements
have not
exceeded the horrors caused by the evils oftrplrr*r/r(JiLI.
On the Zambian frontier there are human beings-01
persons in theguise of human beings-who
deliberately
choose as their victims innocent men and children.
With an insolent and cowardly “courage”
they are
throwing human life into the balance against the
achievement of their ambitions.

45. Noting this state of affairs with repugnance,
I can categorically state that South Africa is tragically
mistaken and is acting out of step with the age in
which it is living. Nor are we completely free of this
confusion and this inversion of historical chronology.
Each one of you members of the Council should, as
of now, shoulder his responsibilities.

5 I, Certainly, there exist-to
the same of the human
species-colonialist
countries,
and how powerful
and voracious they are. Indeed, in their international
policy, their finest words are only inflated lies that
grossly camouflage the appetite of these great carnivores. One wonders why they exist. No one believes
them anymore, and everyone sees clearly shining,
behind the flags they brandish, the rows of pointed
teeth of jackals.

46. It is true, however incredible it might seem,
that the Vorster regime is reactivating the myth of
omnipotence.
It is also true that South Africa is
capable of reducing the whole of black Africa to
ashes with its arsenal of murderous weaponry and its
nuclear-weapon potential.
Let our mother country
aw’aken and close her ranks. But will South Africa be
able to bend the will of a people of such determination
as the African people? That people has come out of

52. Yet the word “coexistence”
exists, and South
Africa-which
calls itself developed and civilizeddoes not have that word in its vocabulary:
the
5

coexistence of two Powers or two groups which can
agree that the existence of one does not require the
disappearance of the other. If peaceful coexistence
is to last, there must be a balance in the arguments
that impose mutual respect and the safeguarding of
national sovereignty. Unfortunately,
that philosophy
is held only by truly civilized nations, not by a
barbarous nation that is conditioned by apcr&zeid.

has dishonoured
and discredited
the liberation
movement. Internationally,
it is playing a card that is
steeped in fresh blood. It is giving the entire world
the horrible impression that all the jackals of the world
can come and eat their children and, in addition, they
will be given a piece of sugar. What ignoble cowardice,
The success of this kind of person says a great deal
about the spiritual vacuum of our age.

53. Uhfortunately
too, thanks to its military
superiority, South Africa benefits from a freedom of
strategic action that neighbouring regions do not have.
But that it nothing new. After all, thanks to the cooperation of the racist nations, thanks to the passivity
of the great Powers, the Vorster regime is able to
indulge itself to the full in its machiavellian leanings.

59. The word “Country” is one of the most majestic
words spelled with a capital letter. It is a divinity
protected by lightning like the Ark of the Hebrews,
Whoever dares to violate it is committing a sacrilege
against it and the security of those whose task is the
maintenance of social order. It is the heritage of a
nation. Would you wish to give a helping hand to such
an invader of what is most sacred to a people?

54. We, the peoples of the world who wish prosperity
for posterity, have the duty to ensure respect for the
rights of the oppressed against the aggressors, whoever they are and from ‘wherever they come. The
human being is the son of God, and therefore we are
all equal.

60. We have a heavy responsibility-you
have a
heavy responsibility-as
regards the fate of Africa.
Law and morality are perfore interlinked. A posith/e
law in force must necessarily be based on moral values
which more or less define good and evil, justice arid
injustice, what is permitted and what is prohibited.
The facts are there, and you have taken note of them.
Therefore, draw your own conclusions.

55. South Africa has no right to attack Zambia. That
is the first principle of good behaviour between contiguous nations. Nor has South Africa even the right
to maintain its presence in Namibia.
The United
Nations, as everyone here knows, has ruled against
this type of serfdom over peoples exercised by a
suzerain. The feudal era is gone. Would anyone wish
to see it re-established in the twentieth century? The
hands of the clock cannot be turned back. History is
irreversible.

61. In the life of nations, and more particularly in
the stormy moments in the life of nations, when tha!je
nations feel the need for liberty, the citizens keenly
sense the importance of that law which is inscribed in
the Declaration of Human Rights and which is most
precious; for when the time of trial comes, all others
will depend on it. Let us fight for law and human
dignity, for the safeguarding of independence and the
respect for national sovereignty. Thus, like judges,
condemn this inhuman and barbarous act unreservedly
and unconditionally.
May the draft resolution now
before you unreservedly and unconditionally
receive
unanimous support. May this meeting bring us clos~er
to the spirit of understanding, closer to the ideal ‘of
brotherhood, closer to the blessing of peace.

56. If all economic solidarity-above
all trading in
arms-and even all moral solidarity are not refused in
a struggle waged against the maintenance of a colonial
regime, where, then, is human justice? Where are the
principles that we have been asked and are still being
asked to heed? No one can easily avoid that kind of
logic, which creates a deep malaise or even deep pain.
But if a sense of common interest does not suffice to
convince States to co-ordinate their action, is not an
act of faith needed to imagine the swing of national
independence to universality? The ineluctable choice
is in our hands-between
tragedy and universal
killing, on the one hand, and peace and prosperity
for all, on the other. It is to ensure the triumph of
one of these frauds of ~rparrkeid that bombs are raining
on Zambia.

62. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtim
jh~
Fwnd~):
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritiin
for the kind words he addressed to me. I must S:LY
that I was very touched by his use again of Latin
sayings and maxims, only a few weeks after the
preceding debate in the Council, which cannot but
warm the heart of a Roman.
63. The next name on the list of speakers is that Iof
the representative of Guinea. I invite him to t&C Lt
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

57. All of us here have the duty to demand respect
for the sovereignty and independence of the Namibian
people and forcefully to call for the withdrawal of South
African troops from the territories of others-in
the
present case, Namibia.

64.

Mr. DOUKOURE

(Guinea) (i/lloprrtrrficl/~

~~~l~~f

French): Mr. President, exactly 18 [1940th IIICC~~~&‘~
days ago the delegation of Guinea expressed to YOU
from this same place and in this same room the fee1iniJs
of sincere friendship which unite Italy, your coullttY~
and Guinea and paid a sincere tribute to your qtialiti~:s
as an experienced diplomat called upon to assume the

58. In order to improve-as
it thinks-its
position,
South Africa has gone so low as to try to capture the
neighbouring regions, That, it must be admitted, is
an initiative combining
piracy and hooliganism.
It

6

presidency of the Security Council. We now find
ourselves confronted with similarly dramatic circumstances for Africa, since the racist Pretoria rkgime has
effectively dug its claws into the sister Republic of
Zambia.

69. Out of love one might spare a pet animal suffering
from rabies, so long as it does not represent a threat
to the safety of the n,eighbours:You
can all see that
South Africa is a pathological case, for there is no
lack of symptoms of neurosis. Mr. Botha, the representative of the Republic of South Africa, declared:

65. Before coming to the heart of the matter, my
delegation wishes to discharge a brotherly duty vi,+
il-lli,y the delegation,
Government
and people of
Madagascar. We have just learned with sorrow and
consternation of the sad loss suffered by the Malagasy
people. It is with sorrow and consternation that we
learned of the demise of our brother Joel Rakotomalala,
the Prime Minister of Madagascar, who died in a
helicopter accident. Colonel Rakotomalala,
whose
death occurred today in the region of Dsanganan
Ganeve, about 100 kilometers south of Tananarive,
will remain for us the example of a conscientious and
dedicated worker committed
to the service of the
Malagasy socialist revolution and of militant Africa.

“At the outset I wish to state that the South
African Government had no knowledge of an attack
on a Zambian village at Sialola” [I!Wth
meeting,
parw . 481.

Either South Africa committed this aggression while
it was asleep-which
would amount to sleep-walkingor the massacre
at Sialola
was perpetrated
unconsciously.
70. Allow me to give my diagnosis, poor psychiatrist
that I am, and to conclude that sleepwalking and the
unconscious state are expressions of mental pathology
-in other words, madness. To put in the hands of
such a madman any weapon, whether it be a penknife, a pistol or a machine-gun, a Mirage aircraft or
a nuclear reactor, is to show the scant regard in which
the neighbours of such a madman are held.

66. May we request that our heartfelt condolences
be conveyed to his family and to the brotherly people
of Madagascar. May we also express our feelings of
solidarity with the Chinese people, whose country
was struck by a violent earthquake.

71. The Guinean delegation ventures to believe that
those who arm South Africa are aware of their acts and
understand this. Let them not reproach us for wishing
to kill with a stick, if necessary, the rabid beast they
have in full awareness let loose in the crowd.

67. Allow me also to thank the representative of
Zaire for his statement’of 28 July [I945th meeting],
which recalled the warning issued by Guinea in the
Council, when we declared, quoting Mr. Jim Hoagland:

72. The Africa of today has had enough of thi
ignominious
practice of apurtheid. The imperialist
press can be very loquacious when, in a few days, it
manages to publish a book entitled 90 Mi/zsrte.r NI
Eutehhe. It is quite ready to cry scandal when Africa
refuses to pin Olympic medals on to the shackles
of slavery which bite into its neck and wrists. It is
silent about the Soweto massacres; it is silent when
Africa unmasks the schemes plotted by imperialism
against the sovereignty of our States. It is loquacious
when, in Dublin, the Ambassador of the United Kingdom suffers a regrettable accident. But it is silent
about the murders at Sialola; silent about the South
African attacks against Mozambique,
Angola and
Zambia; silent when, before the Security Council,
Africa reveals the underlying reasons for the barbarous
acts of piracy perpetrated against us.

“To Afrikaners, the parallels are as obvious as
they are embarrassing to the Israelis. They and the
Israelis are essentially white, Europeanized peoples
who have carved their own nations out of land
inhabited by hostile, non-European majorities that
would destroy the two nations if Afrikaners and the
Israelis listened to the United Nations and depended
on world opinion. Their religions are similar, each
being a ‘chosen people’. . .
“C. L. S&burger,
the astute foreign affairs
columnist for 7%~ New York Times, reported in 1971
from Johannesburg that the Israeli 1967 tactics are
given major attention in ‘South Africa’s military
manoeuvre schools.” [I940th meeting, prm. 41.1
Later on we said:

73. The position of the revolutionary
people of
Guinea is clear. The Supreme Leader of our Revolution Comrade Ahmed SCkou Tour&, explained it
recently in Conakry, when he stated the following,
published in the Noroya, No. 2228:

“May we not wonder whether a secret South
African mission was not to learn, in this new school
of 4 July 1976, the art of invading Luanda, Maputo,
Conakry or-tomorrow
perhaps-Algiers?”
[Ibid.,
PWCI. 42.1

“In South Africa,
the imperialist
offensive
progresses from escalation to escalation. Thus those
who still speak of dialogue can see spread before
them the dialogue begun in South Africa. Vorster,
their friend, is in the process of massacring thousands
and thousands of .our brothers and sisters in South

68. There is a saying that an alert man is worth two
men. We may well wonder what is in store for the
Council, alerted two weeks before the ,opening of the
debate on the aggression by South Africa against
Zambia.
7

withdrew South Africa’s trusteeship over that
Territory. The Security Council pronounced itself
in favour of the independence of Namibia. The OAU
also met and pronounced itself in favour of the
independence of Namibia. All international organizations have already decided along the same lines. But
South Africa refuses to respect this will of the
peoples. It imposes force and does not heed
reason. It does not understand the sense of historic
justice. What can we do? We too can use force to
put an end to oprrrtheitl.

Africa. We say ‘No’ to such a policy of resignation
and indignity.
“Africa
has suffered too much; it has been
humiliated
too much, and has been exploited too
long. It is now our duty to defend ourselves.
Thousands of Africans have died under torture.
Those of us who are ilive embody and express their
hatred of npn~~heicl, imperialism, colonialism
and
neo-colonialism.
The crime committed is so heinous
that even the imperialist Powers raise their voices
in condemnation of the attitude of South Africa, their
bridgehead in Africa. The newspapers, radio and
television
in the United States of America, in
France, in the United Kingdom, in West Germany,
and in all the Western countries are crying out
against apartheid. This is at the very time when
unworthy, corrupt, anti-African African Governments still support apartheid against Africa. Thus
Africa must defend itself, and we must be among
those who invite the African States to assume their
responsibilities by defending the cause ofjustice and
freedom in South Africa against the partisans of
apartheid. Paradoxically,
only uprwtheid is spoken
about! It is like speaking of the smoke without
mentioning
the fire. Or speaking of the shadow,
but not of the object casting that shadow. The
determining cause here is colonial domination. That
is the real cause of the racial discrimination of which
our brothers in South Africa are the victims. Africa
must intensify its fight, adopt a radical position,
be willing to die a little for the sake of safeguarding
our dignity. And in that struggle, Europe, America
and the other continents cannot all unanimously
dissociate
themselves from Africa, which is
indispensable to them. They must choose between
Africa, its freedom and dignity, and the racist
minorities and the colonialists in South Africa. If
a position is firmly taken by OAU along these lines,
there is no doubt that all countries such as the United
Slates, France, the United Kingdom, the Federal
Republic of Germany, as well as the socialist countries, will choose Africa and immediately abandon
up~wtheid and its partisans.

.“They say that South Africa has the atomic bomb.
So what? Africa will still be living long after rrprrrthcid and its partisans have been buried.
“There will not be two victories, only one: that
of the peoples. And all the Powers that know that
Africa is determined to take up the challenge and
defend its cause will hestitate to support South
Africa. And if out of obduracy they were to do so,
that would not prevent us from assuming our
responsibility with honour and dignity until the final
victory of Namibia is won.
‘6 . . * There is a permanent conspiracy against
Africa. We must denounce it, and Africa must
defend itself at all times. The countries of America
and Europe, whether they be from Western or
Eastern Europe, have all declared, and rightly so,
that African problems concern first and foremost the
peoples and Governments of Africa...
“We have but one solution left: to fight.
“Dignity is not given as a present; it is won;
freedom is not offered as a gift; it is won; progress
is not given away; it too is won.
“Africa must defend its dignity, and we have but
one solution, as we have said before: to fight.
Indeed, all continents, with the exception of Africa,
have at least one p.ermanent member on the Security
Council enjoying the right of veto. Only Africa is
missing from the number of permanent members of
the Security Council that enjoy the right of veto+
The United Kingdom, the United States of America,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany and all
countries, Catholic or Protestant, respectful of the
religious principles of their countries, speak of God,
But can they say that there is an American heaven,
an English heaven, an African hea.ven? There is
just heaven. There is no discrimination
in the eyes
of God. The Church makes no distinction; there is no
discrimination in Islam as regards either heaven or
hell.

‘I. ,. ‘In southern Afi;ica, we must liberate Namibia
and Zimbabwe and bury qurtheid so that the black
majority can exercise legitimate power over its own
territory. As wil! be recalled, it was after the war
of 1914 to 1918 that the German colonies were
placed under the trusteeship of certain Powers. The
League of Nations thus gave South Africa trusteeship over South West Africa-in
other words,
Namibia. Thus it was that France came to exercise
the same trusteeship power over part of Togo and
part of Cameroon. Finally, the United Kingdom
was given the trusteeship of Tanganyika, part of
Cameroon and part of Togo.

“We have long been asking for the abolition of the
right of veto, but this we have not achieved. NOW it
would appear normal for an African State also to be
a member of the Security Council, That country
would exercise, on behalf of the African continent,

“Let us now look at the geopolitical
map of
Africa: All these countries are now independent,
except for Namibia. The United Nations met, and
8

the right of veto in order to protect
interests of the African continent.

the higher

79. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea is not
unaware of the designs of those who protect South
Africa in deed while condemning it in word. We are
not deceived by simple condemnations.
South Africa
laughs at our resolutions. As proof of this, South
Africa has been declared the world champion in the
Olympic contest in condemnations
for serious violations of the Charter of the United Nations.

“We shall then see imperialism in action, because
each Power says that it is not imperialistic.
It is
those that oppose our proposal to grant a permanent
seat on the Security Council to an African State
that will reveal themselves to the world as imperialist, racist, colonialist, neo-colonialist,
and antiAfrican Powers. ”

80. We have shown how Israel and South Africa are
Siamese twins who will only have us wasting the time
of the Council because they feel they will go
unpunished.

74. A number of repre.sentatives and observers would
like to help us expose the militant supporters of spar?/w-id, the racists, who find such a proposal unthinkable-those
who, without realizing it, also practise
apartheid.

81. We knew that South Africa was going to echo
the chant of terrorism against Africa and, in its turn,
invade Zambia, Angola and Mozambique.

75. Africa is the arena where the fate of the world
will one day be played out. The South African State
is important.
It is natural that the highly developed
Western countries that have vast interests in South
Africa should be the very ones which guarantee the
survival of the racist minorities by providing Pretoria
and Salisbury with the military assistance they require.

82. We respect the Council and its members. We
respect it so much that we have always accepted
resolutions expressing condemnation.
Permit us now
to be somewhat more demanding in asking the United
Nations for the real and immediate
liberation
of
Namibia and the restoration to Africa of all its rights,
including its most lawful right, that of opposing those
who mock it and trample upon it.

76. The policy of the United States concerning
South Africa. for example, has changed with the
different Presidents occupying the White House. In
the days of President Kennedy, the United States
almost
adopted an anti-npn,*//zc’id position. With
Mr. Nixon we saw the supply of arms to South
Africa,

83. If it is true that all nations are equal in the
United Nations, if it is true that the use of force for
political
ends is a violation of the Charter we all
should respect, it would seem that Africa is not yet in
possession of all the means it should enjoy. Every
continent occupies a permanent seat at this table and
has at its disposal the weapon called the veto-except
Africa. It is time justice was done to us. We have heard
the confessions of the wolf turned shepherd.

77. Two journalists, Jack Anderson and Tad Szulc,
have revealed the existence of files compiled in 1969
concerning the United States policy in South Africa.
According to those files, Mr. Nixon’s Administration,
in pursuing its option known by the name of “TarBaby”,
called for tolerance of the white regimes of
southern Africa. With regard to the construction by
the United States of America of the Diego Garcia
base for the militarization
pf the Indian Ocean, there
was an open dispute between the Central Intelligence
Agency and the State Department, on the one hand,
and the Department of Defense and Presidents Nixon
and Ford, on the other. For further details we recommend a reading of “Why we are in Johannesburg”,
of September 1974, from the pen of Mr. Szulc.

84. During the debate on the Israeli aggression against
Uganda, we were edified by the way in which our
probIems are treated. The delegation of the PartyState of Guinea took note of the South African
statement on the avoidance of war. That war can be
avoided if those who have the right of veto decide
at once, this very day, to abolish the trptr/*thcitl regime
and the rule of the racial minorities in southern Africa.
But how many declarations of intent, how many professions of faith have we heard, that were never
honoured !

78. There is no logical reason to expect that the
Western Powers and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) will abandon the idea of militarizing
the maritime
route round the Cape of Good Hope;
hence their sympathy for South Africa requires no
demonstration.
The provision of nuclear reactors to
Pretoria does not exculpate the authors of an action so
unfriendly
towards Africa. More than 200 major
United
States companies account for one fifth of all
foreign
investments
in South Africa. Economic
interests have blinded many countries, and thus we see
the fatal error of choosing Pretoria and trpcc/‘tl?cit/
over Africa as a whole.

85. South Africa mocks us, it casts scorn on the
Council, it flouts the resolutions we. adopt. There are
more than 50 resolutions which it is violating without
a qualm. Thus we should realize that mere condemnation has no effect on South Africa and that it above
all will not listen to the United Nations,
as we
demonstrated on I2 July [11)4&/l n~~rtirl~].
86. So what is to be done’? We must take concrete
action, by chasing first of all the total liberation of
Africa, thus promoting the exercise by Africans of their
inalienable
rights. For that purpose. the capitalist
Powers, South Africa’s natural allies, must immc9

diately discontinue all aid, of any kind, to the South
African Republic. The African countries must stop all
attempts, to engage in a dialogue with the Vorster
regime, because we now have flagrant proof of what a
dialogue in the Israeli style, or in the style of Pretoria,
means. All the developed nations must refrain from
recruiting in our States leaders committed
to the
betrayal of Africa. Finally, the United Nations must
intervene in a practical fashion, even militarily, with the
liberation movements for the liberation of Namibia.
We believe that the Security Council could perform this
task not only by taking steps to condemn the Pretoria
regime for its aggression against Zambia, but also by
taking all the requisite measures to ensure compensation for the damage done by the Fascist soldiery.
We believe, above all, that the United Nations will
finally clear itself of the insult aimed at it by Zionism
and rrprr&pic(, which have labelled it an ineffectual
and useless organization because of its flabbiness, its
opportunism and its collusion.

the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, and
indeed their friends and well-wishers around the world,
rejoiced together during the handing-over ceremony
of the great Uhuru Railroad, Zambia’s lifeline to the
sea. The railway line is a monumental symbol of 1:he
close and brotherly relations between the Chinese,
Tanzanian and Zambian peoples. It is therefore witlh a
deep sense of genuine grief that I woukl like to ask
the Chinese delegation to convey to the Chinese
Government
and people the condolences of my
delegation over the national disaster that has struck
China.

87. The truth of the Entebbe affair has been ignored.
Perhaps the South African
aggression
against
Zambia could also be ignored. But everyone knows
that “the snake-charmer always ends up being bitten”.

93. Now that the debate is almost over and the
Security Council is about to consider and decide on the
draft resolution before it [S/12158], I feel I should
make a few comments in order to underline again the
importance my Government attaches to this meeting,
and to leave no doubt in anybody’s mind as to the
Zambian position on the aggression committed against
us by the racist white minority
regime of South
Africa.

92. My delegation has also learned with great shock
and deep regret of the death of the Prime Minister
of Madagascar. We admired him as a wonderful
African statesman, whom we shall greatly miss. We
offer our deep sympathy and heartfelt condolences
to the Government and the people of the Republic of
Madagascar, and to the bereaved family.

88. May I be allowed to express, on behalf of the
militant people of Guinea, our firm solidarity with the
fraternal people of Zambia. We assure them that our
support for the liberation movements
will be unflagging.

94. We have listened with great attention to all the
statements made in the general debate. We are most
grateful to all our friends, members and non-members
of the Council, who have given us enthusiastic and
unqualified support. We also most sincerely appreciate
the role played by our friends, particularly the nonaligned members of the Council, in connexion with the
draft resolution now before the Council. This group of
countries, led by the very able and articulate representative of Guyana, Mr. Rashleigh Jackson, has done
a commendable job in the very difficult negotiations
which have taken place over the last few days.
Throughout, they have enjoyed our fullest confidence.
We owe them a debt of gratitude.

89. The people of Guinea stand by the statement
made by President Kenneth Kaunda at the thirteenth
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization
of African Unity held in Mauritius a
few days ago:
“Africa is a dynamic continent. Consequently,
when faced with the problems of the war against
racism, there must be a determination
on our part
to win; when we are faced with devisive issues we
must seek solutions in unity, which requires selfdefence. ’ ’ :%
90. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Zarnbia, on whom I now call.

95. We hope that the draft resolution now before
the Council, sponsored by the friendly delegations of
Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania and the United Republic of Tanzania, will commend itself to unanimous adoption. I must
say very frankly that it is a draft resolution which
represents the minimum which we in Zambia are
prepared to accept. We accept it with great reluctance.
We would certainly
have preferred a stronget
res$ution.

91. Mr. MWALE
(Zambia) As I am speaking for
the first time since the sad news of the devastating
earthquake in the People’s Republic of China, I wish
to associate my delegation with the sentiments and
condolences expressed by you, Mr. President, and
other speakers in connexion with the tragic death of
many Chinese nationals and the destruction of property
caused by the earthquake.
We are all the more
saddened because of the deep affection that the people
of Zambia feel for the people of China and because of
the very close relations existing between China and
Zambia. Hardly a fortnight ago, the people of China,

96. Our position remains that the overall queslion
of Namibia cannot be divorced from any reahstic
consideration of the South African act of aggressictl
against Zambia, That act of aggression was a direct
consequence of South Africa’s continued illegal

*’ Quoted in English by the speaker.

10

of Namibia.
It was committed
using
Namibia as a base and, indisputably, for the purpose
of perpetuating
South Africa’s continued illegal
occupation of the Territory. Therefore, as far as we
in Zambia are concerned, continued South African
illegal occupation of Namibia was the basic cause of
the aggression, and culmination of the illegal occupation of Namibia would be the only guarantee against
similar acts of aggression in the future.
occupation

97. Since such acts of aggression against us are bound
to recur for as long as South Africa persists in its
illegal occupatian of Namibia, we feel that the Council
has a duty to act against South Africa beyond mere
condemnation. If, each time we come to the Council
to complain about South African aggression against
us, the Council limits its action to condemnation
only, I fear the racists in Pretoria might become so
saturated with condemnation that in their sick minds
condemnation
will come to mean commendation.
But equally serious will be the fact that the Council
-which,
because of its special responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations, is the hope for the
security of small and weak countries like mine-will
surely have failed to be useful.
98. In the light of the foregoing, my delegation would
have preferred a categorical and unequivocal undertaking by the Security Council at this meeting that, in
the event of repeated aggression by South Africa
against Zambia, it will have no alternative but to
resort to the application of the full force of Chapter VII
of the Cha’rter and punitive action against those white
minority racist outlaws. Such a warning is necessary
now, so that the clique in Pretoria does not regard
our coming to the Council as a mere ritual.
99. Those who argue that the situation in southern
Africa does not constitute a serious threat to international peace and security are, I must say in all
candour, at the very least not being objective in their
assessment. Their recognition of this fact may come
too late, for there can be no question that the continued
existence of the racist white minority rCgimes in
southern Africa, coupled with their belligerent attitude
towards independent Africa, will in no time lead to a
racial conflagration the scare and horrors of which
have not been experienced anywhere. It is now time fol
the Security Council to act decisively. Tomorrow may
be too late.
100. Let me now make it quite clear that, as far as
Zambia
is concerned, there can no longer be any
question of dealing with South Africa. Together with
other front-line States we have done our best to foster
peaceful change in southern Africa in accordance with
the Lusaka Manifesto’
and the Dar es Salaam
Declaration on southern Africa adopted by the Council
of Ministers of OAU in April. I wish, to say that we
made contact with South Africa specifically with a
view to bringing about the independence of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the destruction of upartheid in South

Africa itself. These contacts ended at Victoria Falls.
They failed because of the intransigence and delaying
tactics of the illegal rkgime of Ian Smith. I am proud,
however, to say that* we have a clear conscience and
are irrevocably
committed
to supporting armed
struggle for the liberation of southern Africa, knowing
full well that we have left no stone unturned on the
road towards a peaceful solution.
101. During the period in which we attempted
peaceful change, South Africa was given ample
opportunity
to show its good intentions. However,
instead of demonstrating
good will, South Africa
stepped up its acts of aggression against Zambia. These
culminated in the wanton murder of the largest number
of people killed to date in our territory by South
African armed forces. This certainly cannot be
testimony of a South African commitment
to the
peaceful solution of the problems of southern Africa.
102. At this juncture, let me also state categorically
that at no time did Zambia exchange notes with the
racist rCgime of South Africa over border incidents
and violations, as alleged by the representative of
South Africa on 27 July [I944t/l mering]. The lack
of a Zambian reply to the so-called South African
inquiry regarding the aggression of 11 July, which he
admits, is itself proof that we have had no dealings
with the South African racists. Even at the time of the
negotiations for peaceful change, there was no question
of Zambia discussing border incidents with South
Africa. The racist r6gime of South Africa naturally
took advantage of the occasion to complain about the
activities
of liberation
movements,
particularly
SWAPO. Our reply at that time was that the best way
to prevent the activities of the liberation movement
was to remove the basic causes of the conflict. In
other words, that majority rule should be granted to
Zimbabwe and Namibia
and apurtlwid should be
destroyed in South Africa itself. To this day, that
remains the crux of the matter. Indeed, to this day that
remains Zambia’s uncompromising
stand.
103. Let me fully associate my delegation with the
important comments made yesterday by Mr. Jaipal,
Acting President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia
[19446t/2 mretirzg], in connexion with the
proposal of the representative of Liberia for a Security
Council fact-finding mission and the reply of the reprcsentative of South Africa contained in document
S/12157. The reply from the representative of South
Africa states that: “The authorities of the areas concerned have been consulted and have indicated their
willingness to co-operate fully.” That is an obvious
reference to the puppet chiefs of Namibia and South
Africa’s military establishment in the Territory. It is yet
more proof of the intransigence of the South African
r&gime and its determination
to maintain its stranglehold on Namibia. That such a shameful communication
has been sent to the Security Council at all is in itself
an insult to the Council. South Africa has once again
demonstrated its lack of seriousness in connexion with

,

-

the question of Namibia and its utter contempt
authority and prestige of the Council.

on 11 July last. Many persons were killed or wounded.
A violation of Zambia’s territorial integrity took place.
That evidence and what we have been told about
other incursions are the major facts before the Council. They are facts of which we must specifically take
account.

for the

104. Zambia has nothing to hide, and it has already
catalogued all the necessary details pertaining to the
incidents that gave rise to this particular complaint
against South Africa. It must be emphasized that the
area around Sialola and, indeed, the entire length of the
border between Zambia and Namibia
has .been
extensively mined by the racist rkgime of South Aprica.
Therefore, any fact-finding mission will have to carry
out its work at its own risk, as Zambia cannot
guarantee the safety and security of the mission’s
members.

111. Of course, I wish to be objective and not to
overlook the views expressed by the representative of
South Africa [1044th meeting],
views of which my
delegation has taken note. Nevertheless, I must say
that for a long time, there had been a danger that
the Caprivi Strip and the entire northern border of
Namibia would become the scene of serious incidents.
It had also been clear for some time that Zambia
might be caught up in the dangerous current of political
tensions in the region. It was just as clear-alas, it was
almost in the very nature of things-that
if the situation
were not remedied, the Council would again be faced
with facts characteristic of the tensions to which
I have just referred. r

105. Finally, the Council’s positive and effective
decision will go a long way towards helping Zambia
in its difficult role of observing the United Nations
resolutions pertaining to the liberation
of Namibia
and Zimbabwe and to the eradication of trpcrrthcid
in South Africa.
106. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretution
jkm
French): Mr. President, at the outset I should like to
tell you how pleased we have been to see you leading
our work, in this difficult month’ of July, to such a
successful conclusion.

112. And’s0 we come back to the deep reason for 01.11
debate: the completely abnormal situation of the people
of Namibia. My delegation has frequently set forth its
position on this point and will revert to it in detail
during, the debate to take place in the Council at the
end of August. It understands why many representatives wished to state here, in connexion with the deadly
raid on Sialola, a truth as undeniable as it is simple:
there would not have been any violation of Zambia’s
sovereignty if Namibia were exercising the true selfdetermination
and independence that, on 23 February
last, the nine countries of the European Community
urged that Namibia and its people and the people of
Rhodesia should exercise.

107. I would say also how happy the representative
of France was to hear Sir Harold Walter addressing
the Council in French and even Latin, languages
which he speaks so well.
108. My delegation
now has the sad duty of
expressing to the representative
of the People’s
Republic of China, my friend and neighbour at this
table, the deep sympathy of the Government
and
people of France at the cruel fate that has befallen
the province of eastern Hopei. We know that the
Chinese people are courageously facing the serious
losses in human life and property caused by the recent
earthquakes. We ask the representative
of China to
transmit to his authorities
our condolences
and
sincerest wishes.

113, Like the peace-loving and justice-loving African
countries, France wishes, in this debate as in others,
to express two basic concerns. On the one hand,
it cannot but be alarmed at the failure to put into
effect in Namibia the necessary process of selfdetermination
through a democratic consultation of
its inhabilants, under United Nations control. On the
other hand, it must deplore the fact that South Africa
is isolating itself so much from the other African
countries, and particularly from its neighbours. The
wall of injustice separating it from the region of which
it should naturally be a part is the main obstacle to
the establishment of peaceful relations in southern
Africa. In that respect, we are only too well aware of
the important role played by the internal tensions
created by the indefensible system of apco~lwirl
in
the worsening of the situation. Indeed, hardly a month
ago we set forth the political and technical limits that
France has established for itself in order to take into
account the more and more justified concerns of
Africa.

109. Finally, my delegation wishes to express to our
colleague from Madagascar its shock at learning this
morning of the tragic death of the Prime Minister.
France and the’French people have too many past and
present ties of friendship and solidarity with Madagascar for me not to share most particularly
the
mourning of the people of Madagascar and to associate
myself with the cablegram sent to Tananarive today
on behalf of the Council.
110. I turn now to the item before us. The discussion
that began on Tuesday last has made it possible for us
to hear almost 40 speakers, including several African
Foreign Ministers. One of them was the Foreign
Minister of Zambia, who clearly and sincerely set
forth his country’s complaint against South Africa. A
Zambian village and a SWAP0 camp were bombed

114. In Africa, nothing can be done without the
Africans, and above all the Africans. France for its
part is entirely convinced of that fact It hopes that
2

South Africa will abandon a unilateral policy that is
without any future, will listen to the legitimate claims
of the men of Africa and will very rapidly take the
necessary measures.

120. In this connexion, I should like to recall that
more recently, in the statement I made in the Council,
on 19 June last, I referred to the action that, together
with our European partners, we are in fact pursuing.
I said then:

11.5. My delegation expresses its thanks to our nonaligned colleagues for their efforts and their spirit of
compromise. We would of course have liked the text
submitted to us for decision to contain slightly different
formulas-for
example, in regard, as I said just now, to
the imperative need for the people of Namibia to
accede to independence through the exercise of its
inalienable right to self-determination.
That principle
is, it is true, accepted and recognized by our international community
as a whole. We shall no doubt
revert to it in our forthcoming
debates. What we
regard as most essential is to be able today to give
the Government and people of Zambia evidence of
support equal to the confidence evidenced by President
Kaunda and Foreign Minister Mwale in deciding to
appeal to the Security Council. We understand
Zambia; we sympathize with it in its trials; we recognize the legitimacy of its cause. It is in the forefront
of all the countries of southern Africa that are suffering
from a situation that the Government of Pretoria must
remedy by taking without
delay the measures
demanded by the United Nations, including the
Security Council.

“Together with our partners in the European
Community,
we are engaged in relentless contacts
with the Government of Pretoria in order to convey
on each occasion, I assure the Council, our...
criticism
and open dissent.”
[193&h ~llccling,
pum. 317.1
The debate which then took place was, as is well
known, on the subject of the shocking events in
Soweto, but I should like to be clear on this point.
The essence of the “critical
dialogue”
that the
European countries are conducting with South Africa
aims at radical changes not only with’regard to trprrrrheid but with regard to Namibia and Rhodesia as well.
121. Having said that, I should like to add that we
listened with great interest to the various statements
made by several participants
in this debate and
particularly by the representatives of African States.
The Council has indeed been honoured by the presenci
among us of Foreign Ministers-Siteke
Mwale of
Zambia, Ibrahim Kaduma of the United Pepublic of
Tanzania, Joaquim Chissano of Mozambique
and
Sir Harold Walter of Mauritius, the current Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity. By their very presence here they have
given us vivid evidence of their state of mind, of their
apprehension and of their expectations with regard to
the abnormal, turbulent situation prevailing in southern
Africa, which gives rise to incidents such as the one
we are considering. At the same time, they have thus
shown in a most significant way how closely and
strongly united are all the members of the OAU in
firmly upholding
some main principles for thei
brothers still under alien rule, whatever the price
they are called upon to pay. I refer, of course, to
decolonization and to the right to self-determination,
independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity
which are all enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations.

116. The PRESIDENT:
Since there are no other
names inscribed on the list of speakers at this final
stage of our debate, I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as representative of ITALY.
117. The item on our agenda, the complaint by
Zambia against South Africa, is indeed not new to
me personally, for I believe I am the only representative sitting in the Council now who took part also in the
debate held in October 1971 at the request of Zambia,
for a reason not different from the one that prompted
its present complaint.
May I say that this circumstance fills me with a feeling more of sadness than of
anything else.
118. We have met in fact to consider nothing else
than a new act of aggression by South Africa against
the Republic of Zambia, an act which took place
nearly five years later only because of the continuation
of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa,
a most deplorable situation that should long since
have ceased to exist.

122. As to the statement by the representative of
South Africa [/944//l nIwti/lg],
‘my delegation was
no less surprised and puzzled than other delegations
by the position taken from the outset by Mr. Botha.
According to his opening affirmation the Government
of Pretoria knows nothing about the raid which took
place on I I July and certainly had not authorized
it. Should we interpret such a disclaimer as implicitly
disapproving of that action, we could draw only one
logical conclusion, namely, that the attack must have
been undertaken by some milittiry units in the Caprivi
Strip on their own initiative and witliout previous
consultations with headquarters in Pretoria. If this is
the case, while, on the one hand, we feel somewhat
uneasy about the free rein which the South African

119. Indeed, I believe I am recollecting correctly
when I say that in October 1971 all of us round this
table shared the feeling and the confidence that Namibiwn independence would come about soon. Unfortunately, those expectations did not materialize-not
even half way. It is only too obvious that if South
Africa had simply complied with its duties, fulfilling
ils obligations towards the international Territory of
Namibia, the regrettable incident we are dealing with at
present would not have occurred.
13

some time in some main quarters. To seize this last
opportunity requires on the part of South Africa the
same quality of statesmanship and vision which the
whole world recognizes in President Kaunda.

military forces or some of them seem to enjoy, we
could, on the other, take it as an indication or signal
from the central Government in Pretoria that it is more
alert and aware of the vital issues at stake for the
future of its land than-if
I may be allowed to use
such an expression-its
runaway military.

126. This is also the spirit which has inspired the
sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document
S/12158-Benin,
Guyana, the Libyan Arab Repulblit, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania
and the United
Republic of Tanzania. My delegation has greatly
appreciated the spirit of understanding and conciliation the sponsors have shown in order to formulate
a text which can command the unanimous support
of the Council. In the same spirit, the Italian delegntion is glad to support that draft resolution, which
was so effectively introduced
by our colleague,
Mr. Jackson.

123. On the basis of this assumption, if correct, we
might be led also-however
slim our hope-to
give
more credence to the professed intentions of the
Vorster Administration
to introduce the necessary
and long-awaited changes in its overall policy. And we
would like in this connexion to believe that priority
will be given in these changes to withdrawal from
N,amibia. However, I am sure I am right in saying that
our patience-the
patience not only of our African
colleagues but of all members of the Council-has
long ago run thin. So I am afraid that, in,order to
keep alive our belief in the good intentions which
Mr. Botha expressed to us in the name of his
Government-the
last time on.27 July-action
this time
must shortly follow his words.

127. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
since no
representative wishes to speak at this stage, and there
are no explanations of vote before the vote, I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution which is
contained in document S/12158.

124. Turning now to the specific item under consideration, I should like to state simply and firmly our
condemnation
of the act of aggression by South
Africa, as denounced by Zambia, which resulted in a
high number of victims and amounts to violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State Member
of the United Nations.

A ate wm taken by show of hands.
In ~LII-YX/Y: Benin, China,
France, Guyana, Italy.
Japan, Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panarutt,
Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania.

125. I wish at the same time to take this opportunity
to convey the deep and sincere solidarity of my Government to the Government of Zambia. I further want to
express the appreciation
of my Government
to
Mr. Siteke Mwale, Foreign Minister of Zambia, in
particular for the well-known policy which his Government has long maintained with regard to the problems
of southern Africa. I should like to assure the Government of Zambia of our awareness of the difficulties
they face in maintaining their very responsible position,
the more so at a time when the message of peace is
once again disregarded by its addressee, the Government of South Africa. In these circumstances,
we
particularly
appreciate
the fact that the Lusaka
Manifesto’
has been reiterated in the exemplary
address delivered to the Council by the Foreign
Minister of Zambia [ibid.]. May the voice of reason
as expressed by the leaders of Zambia prevail. We
urge South Africa, as my delegation did in 1969 at
the 1815th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
to seize the hand stretched out by the African countries. If I understand well the feelings voiced by the
Foreign Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania
[194&h /neeti/lg] who has also forcefully recalled the
Lusaka Manifesto, and by his Afridan colleagues, who
have honoured the Council with their presence and
their active participation
in our deliberations,
they
fundamentally
share this position. In other words, if
I read well the writing on the wall, the outstretched
hand has not yet been completely withdrawn, in spite
of the erosion of the confidence which prevailed for

Agtrimt:

None.

Abstrrining:

United States of America.

128. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on tho:$e
representatives who wish to explain their vote.
129. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of Americtl0:
Mr. President, may I first say to you how gratefill
we all are for the leadership you have shown in thiis
month of your presidency; we knew that this would
be the case. And may I add, to follow up my comments
when you took this office, that I think Leonardo.
Michelangelo and Galileo would be proud.
130. Secondly, and very seriously, I wish to con?
to the representative of the People’s Republic of China
the deep condolences of my people and our Government for the victims of this hideous earthquake that
has beset his country, and I sincerely hope that 11~
will transmit to his Government and to his people OUI
full sympathy. Furthermore, may I say that we have
aheady noted from the reports in the papers and elsewhere the tremendous courage shown by the Chinese
people in these very difficult circumstances.
131. Last, but by no means least, we are very apprcciative that the distinguished gentleman from Maim14

tius-another
Foreign Minister-has
joined us, and
we appreciate enormously
his being here on this
occasion.
132. The United States delegation has followed this
debate with particular
interest and concern. As
members of the Council know, my Government is
involved in a most significant and important effort
to assist the nations and the peoples of southern
Africa to find a solution to the complicated political
and human problems of their region. We were therefore deeply alarmed at the announcement
by the
Government of Zambia of an incursion into its territory
on II July. We were deeply distressed to hear of the
loss of 24 lives and the wounding of 45 other
individuals. We were also concerned that the sensitive
and delicate process of consultations
concerning
southern Africa would be materially harmed by this
incursion.
133. Let me state first-and
forcefully-that
my
Government
condemns this incursion into Zambia;
we oppose unequivocally
the violation of Zambia’s
territorial sovereignty and integrity. We deeply deplore
the loss of life and the destruction of property. Further,
it is important to record that South Africa has no legal
right, in our opinion, to continue to administer the
Territory of Namibia; it has no legal right to station
troops on Namibian ,soil. Thus it has no basis to
complain of incursions into Namibia. If the South
African Government was responsible for this raid and
utilized the Territory of Namibia as the base for its
operation, then South Africa is clearly in violation of
international
law.
134. In spite of our very strong views on South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia, my Government has a comment on the evidence brought forth
during this debate to determine responsibility for the
raid of 11 July. The Foreign Minister of Zambia has
made a very impressive and well-documented presentation of the outrages to which his country has been
subjected. No one has denied that the attack on Sialola
took place. The representative of South Africa, in
reply, has simply said that his Government has no
knowledge whatsoever of this event.
135. In such circumstances, we believe that this was
a case in which investigation could have produced a
more careful and authoritative
statement on the part
of this body, and we regret that there was no inclination
qn the part of the members of the Council to authorize
such an investigation,
which we think could have
resulted in strong Security Council action.
136. As a result, several paragraphs of the resolution just adopted contain language which, in our view,
is too categorical in the light of the evidence that has
so far been made available here. Secondly-and
this
is ,very important
to us-the resolution has another
major shortcoming:
there are currently efforts of a
serious nature being made to make progress towards

solutions in southern Africa which the Council has
long advocated., We believe that it would be appropriate.for
a resolution whi,ch addressed any issue
beyond the imm’ediate incident concerned to have
welcomed these efforts, and to have encouraged every
possible assistance to them.
137. For those reasons, my delegation abstained in
the voting.
138. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (ilztL~~prPtatiotzJiom
Russim):
We voted in
favour of the draft resolution submitted to the Council
by Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Pakistan, Panama, Romania and the United Republic
of Tanzania. As in every resolution based on compromise, we see the merits, but even more the shortcomings of this draft resolution.
139. This year, the Security Council has already
broken the record for the number of meetings it has
held. But if, in Montreal, young people, men and
women have achieved records which demonstrate what
human will and reason can accomplish, the record
number of our meetings in itself does not prove that
we have attained positive results. A great number of
meetings does not always mean that concrete results
have been achieved.
140. We were ready to adopt a more decisive, more
specific resolution, because we consider the act of
aggression against Zambia, just like the internal and
foreign policy of South Africa, as a threat to peace
and security-not
only as a possible threat, but as an
actual threat to peace and security in that region of
Africa, and perhaps in all of Africa. That is why we
would have been ready to adopt, as had been requested
before the meeting by a number of African countries,
a more concrete, more decisive resolution, condemning
the racist regime of South Africa and its actions against
its neighbours,
against Namibia, and against the
indigenous people of South Africa. We would have
been ready to adopt a resolution which might have
been the last resolution of the Council on the question
of the situation in South Africa, a resolution which
would have listed concrete measures-broad
sanctions and the means for implementing that resolution.
We would have been ready also to demand that
South Africa withdraw immediately from Namibia.
In short, we would have liked to see a resolution
that would have helped halt the acts of aggression of
the racist South African regime. Therefore, while
voting for this draft resolution, we are also aware of
its shortcomings.
I would express the hope that
when we begin discussion of the problem of Namibia
at the end of August, the Council will be able to
adopt a resolution which will bring to an.end the long
process that the United Nations has gone through in
its discussion of the situation in that vast area; which
will put an end to colonialism, racism and crpnrtlzeid;
which will terminate the oppression of the indigenous
people of that country and that entire region of Africa.

141. We were hoping and expecting that the Council
would today most appropriately
adopt a paragraph
recognizing SWAP0 as the legitimate representative
of the Namibian people. We were also hoping that
the resolution would indicate concrete ways and means
of implementing
it as a final resolution to bring about
a basic change in the situation in South Africa.
142. In voting for the draft resolution, as I say, we
are aware of its virtues but we also see its shortcomings, and I hope &at the Security Council will
succeed in remedying them in the near future.
143. Mr. President, as far as you personally are
concerned, I believe everyone here will note with
satisfaction that, thanks to your guidance of our
discussion of this question, the Council has been
able to conclude its deliberations
under your Presidency, so that you have not had to pass on to your
successor a question of such difficulty and compIexity.
144. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
In accordance with the well-known position of principle of the
United Kingdom, I would like merely to say that we
support the reference to the “‘struggle”,
in the fifth
preambular paragraph and in operative paragraph 4
of the draft resolution, on the basis that this is a
struggle by peaceful means. We consider that solutions to problems of this kind are best solved by the
means set out in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations.
145. Mr. KADUMA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
First of all, Mr. President, I should like to express
my Government’s gratitude for the efforts which you
have indicated your country and its European partners
are seeking to exert with reference to our dealings with
South Africa and in an attempt to reverse the contradictions that have constituted a threat to the peace in our
region.
146. I should like also to do the same with regard to
the Government of the United States for the efforts
they are making in this regard. But at the same time
I feel [hat I shall not be doing justice to the Council,
and definitely to the principles that my country stands
for, if I do not express our disappointment
at the way
in which the Government
of the United States has
treated this matter, which in our view is so serious as
to warrant the concern of the Council, and particularly
so because the aggression that the racist rCgime has
committed against Zambia is an aggression against a
State Member of the United Nations which has firmly
held, ever since its birth, to the principIes
of the
Organization. I think this is important-the
Fact that
the Republic of Zambia has assumed the responsibility
of defending the principles of the Charter only a year
after its accession to independence.
It is really a
miracle that they have been able to survive against
these great odds. The Council agreed to assist Zambia
in its efforts to implement
the sanctions, But, as we

know only too well, the response has not been ,RS
good as had been expected of a responsible organim
tion like the United Nations.
147. In our opinion, there would have been no real
contradiction between the efforts the United States
Government is making to resolve this problem and
a vote in favour of the present resolution. Indeed, the
resolution was very much watered down, because a
number of concessions were made in an attempt ta
achieve unanimity. In my view, the fact that the
United States Government has reserved its position
has nullified the very stand it expressed in its state.
ment-namely,
that it condemns the acts and policies
of the South Affican Government. Perhaps it is good
that we now know the stand of the United States
Government. I can only hope that I am mistaken in
asserting that its stand is irrelevant. Let me also
express the hope that I am mistaken in thinking that
the abstention of the United States delegation here will
not help the efforts of the United States Government.
148. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania
for his kind references to me and especially for the
appreciation he expressed for the efforts my country
is making, in close association with all its partners in
the European Community, in order to bring about the
necessary and long-awaited changes in the overNaIl
policy of South Africa.
149. The next speaker is the Minister
Affairs of Zambia.

for Forei,gn

150. Mr. MWALE: (Zambia): I have asked to speak
once again merely in order to repeat the sincere thanks
and appreciation that I expressed in my statement at
the opening of this series of meetings of the Council.
My delegation is overwhelmed by the solidarity thnt
has been expressed in the Council by all the representatives of countries with which Zambia has relations,
1.51. The vote that has been taken has meant a lot to
Zambia. We know that we cannot bring back the
persons whose lives have been lost. We know that
we cannot bring back the property that has been
destroyed. But we hope that the vote which the
Council has taken will serve as a deterrent so that very
soon there will be independence in Namibia and
Zimbabwe and, indeed, so that soon this diabolical
system of clpur’theid in South Africa will be eradicated.
152. My delegation has taken note of all the kind
words and all the deliberations here. We are going
back home to report to our Government that we have
friends in this important body of .the internatiof1al
community. We will go back home to Zambia to assure
our people, our peace-loving people, that the world is
with us in this just struggle, a struggle which is not&’
Zambian, a struggle which is not only African, but is
a struggle of the world, of all people who love peac!e,
all people who love social justice and fully support the

right to self-determination.
We are going back to
assure our people that human interdependence does
exist. The decision that has been taken here is an
expression of that fundamental
and, indeed, most
important aspect of our way of life on this planet.

be very sensitive to these condolences. On their
behalf I should like to thank the Council. The same
thanks go to all delegations that have individually
expressed their sympathy to us.
1.58. The PRESIDENT
(inte,p~etotion~o/?z
French):
I am sure I am speaking for the members of the
Council when I say that we appreciate the gesture of
the representative of Madagascar and reiterate our
sympathy on the cruel loss suffered by his Government
and his people.

153. I would not want to end this statement without
once again thanking my colleagues, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, who have come here, and in particular
Sir Harold Walter, who at very short notice flew all
the way from Mauritius to participate in these meetings
not only in his capacity as Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of the OAU but also because Zambia
and Mauritius enjoy very, very close relations.

159. Mr. CHOU

Nan (China) (hrfe~*prerrrrion ,#;Y)/,I

Chinese): In the name of the Chinese delegation, I wish

to extend deep condolences on the tragic death of
the Prime Minister of Madagascar.

154. Once again I want to assure the Council that
President Kaunda of Zambia, the Party, the Government and all the peace-loving people of Zambia
appreciate this expression of solidarity.

160. At the same time, I would like to express sincere
thanks to the Foreign Ministers of. Mozambique,
Mauritius and Zambia as well as the distinguished
representatives
of many other countries for the
sympathy they expressed at the morning and afternoon
meetings today over the earthquake which occurred
in Hopei province, China, and I shall convey their
cordial sentiments to the Chinese Government and
people.

15.5. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Madagascar wishes to say a few words in response to the
expressions of sympathy that have been conveyed to
his delegation. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
156.

Mr. RASOLONDRAlBE
(Madagascar) (inferfrown Fremh): This morning the Council was
informed
by Mr. Scranton of the grave helicopter
accident that took place today, 30 July, which led to
the death of the Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence of the Republic of Madagascar, Colonel Joel
Rakotomalala.
Other important persons were killed in
the same accident: Mr. Pierre Rajaonah, Minister of
Rural Development and Agrarian Reform; the Chief
of Staff of the People’s Army and the Director of the
Military
Cabinet of the Prime Minister. The pilot and
the engineer and a journalist of Malagasy radio and
television were killed also.

161. The PRESIDENT:
Most if not all participants
in this discussion have made very kind remarks
indeed concerning the task of the presidency during
this month of July. I warmly thank them and in turn
would like to convey to all the members of the Council and all the participants in this debate my deep
appreciation for their help and co-operation in the
fulfilment of my duties as President, which in a few
hours I shall be honoured and pleased to turn over Lo
our Japanese colleague, my old friend, Mr. Abe.

prefntion

162. The Security Council has now concluded the
current stage of its consideration of the item before it.

157. I have asked to speak in order to thank you,
Mr. President, and, through you, the other members
of the Security Council, for the decision the Council
took this morning to send a telegram of sympathy to
the Malagasy Government. I should like to assure you
that the people and Government of my country will

t

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bonkmrc

ST: l’l<OCURL’.H

NATIONS

may he obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

LES PUBLICATIONS

Lcr publications
clcs Nations
Unit\
mantle
cntier.
Inl’mncr-WLIS
:lupr&s
drs vcntcs. NW York 01, Gen?vc.

COMO

Litho

in

United

Nations,

CONStZUIR

New York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

sonl en vente dms les libmiries
et les agences
de votrc libraire
OH adressez-vows
ti : Nations

PLJBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

00400

throupbout
the
York or Geneva.

dfpositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNlDhS

83-60801-April

1985-2,20(1
