UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2164

th

NEW

CQUNCIL

MEETING:

29 AUGUST

19’79

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2164)
of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Letters dated 24 August 1979 and 28 August 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13516 and S/13520)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2164

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OflciaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2164th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,29 August 1979, at 11.30 a.m.
President.- Mr. Andrew YOUNG (United States of America)..

tine Liberation Organization to participate in the Security
Council’s consideration of the item ‘The situation in the
Middle East’, in accordance’ with the Council’s past
practice.”

Present The representatives of the following States: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.

3. This practice of the Council has been followed since
December 1975. It is understood that ,the proposal by the
representative of Kuwait is not made pursuant to rule 37 or
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if
approved by the Council, the invitation to participate in the
debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization the same rights of participation as those conferred on a
Member State when it was invited to participate under rule
37.

Provisional agenda(WAgendaL2164)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letters dated.24 August 1979 and 28 August 1979
from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13516 and S/13520)

4. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on this
proposal? Since no other member of the Council wishes to
speak, I shall speak in my capacity as representative of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.

5. The United States does not agree with the specialprocedure by which the Security Council hears the representatives of the Palestine Ltberation Organization. As we seeit,
the issue is not whether or not to hear the Palestine Liberation Organimtion but the manner in which the invitation is
formulated in terms of the rules of procedure. We request
that this matter be put to a vote.

Adoption of tbe agenda
l?ze agenda was adopted.
The situation-in tbe Middle East:
Letters dated 24 August 1979 and 2.8 August 1979
from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13516 and S/13520)

6. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the

7. lf no other members of the Council wish to speak, I
shall take it that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal
of Kuwait.

1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Israel and Lebanon in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

A vote was taken by show of had.
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against.- United States of America

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tut?ni(I.ebanon) took
a pIace at the Council table; Mr, BIum (Israel) took the pIace
reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.

Abstaining.- France, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
T%e proposal was adopted by 10 votes to 1. with 4
abstentions.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 29 August 1979 from the
representative of Kuwait [ZVZ3522], which reads as follows:

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Abdel Rahman
(Palestine Liberation Organizution) took a place at the side of
the Council chamber.

“I have the honour to request that the Security Council extend an invitation to the representative of the Pales1

8. The PRESIDENT: I should ‘like to draw attention to
the following documents, which contain letters received
from the representative of Lebanon and the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon: a letter
dated 6 August .I979 [s/134863; a letter dated 24 August
[s/lJsZ6j; a letter addressed to the Secretary-General &ted
28 August 1979 [S/235293; and a letter &ted 28 August
1979 [S/23520-j.
9. At the outset I should like to convey to members the
information I have received from the Secretariat on the
situation in Southern Lebanon. It will be recalled that at the
close of our last meeting, on 24 August, I made the following statement as President of the Security Council:
“‘Before adjourning the meeting I wish to draw the
attention of the Council to the many reports we have
received of intense military activity over recent days
in Southern Lebanon. I am informed that the Commander of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) has been instructed to make every effort to
arrange an immediate cease-fire in the area.
‘The members of the Council will recall the SecretaryGeneral’s own recent appeal for restraint on the part of
all the parties. In my capacity as President of the Council,
I appeal for restraint on the part of all concerned so that
these hostilities may be brought to an end.” [2163rd
meeting, paras. I88 and 189.1
10. Early on Saturday morning, the Commander of
UNIFIL requested the parties to agree to a cease-fire, to be
effective not later than 1200 hours (local time). The parties
refused to give their formal agreement to a cease-fire, but all
--of them undertook to desist from firing unless they were
fired upon. Thus a &facto cease-fire was established, and
by 0930 hours (local time) all firing ceased in Southern
Lebanon. However, the lull lasted for only seven hours, and
at approximately 1600 hours (local time) the firing broke
out again. It continued until the early hours of Sunday
morning.

wounded. On 22 August, following fire by armed elements
at a Fijian battalion position, which had been reinforced by
Dutch troops, three Dutch soldiers and one Fijian soldier
were wounded. In a later incident involving armed elements
and the Fijian position, a Fijian soldier fired in self-defence
and wounded a member of the armed elements believed to
be from the National Movement. It was reported that this
man later died at the hospital. On 24 August, two Fijian
patrol vehicles were ambushed by armed elements. Three
Fijian soldiers were killed and two wounded. UNIFIL is at
present carrying out an investigation to establish the identity of the armed elements involved. The PLO for its part
has disclaimed all responsibility for this incident and
informed UNIFIL that it has established a committee to
inquire into the incident.
13. That concludes our report from the Secretariat. If
there are no questions about the report, I shall call on the
first speaker inscribed on my list, the representative of
Lebanon.
14. Mr. T&N1 (Lebanon): Mr. President, there undoubtedly is an element of providence in your return to the
presidency of the Security Council after the meeting of
Friday, 24 August.
-15. In this chamber, where history has been made more
often than is commonly believed, sensed or admitted, rarely
if ever had a man brought the cold realities of international
politics so near to the heart, forcing his simple words deep
into the conscience of the nations of the world. Suddenly,
the attitude of one person in one short moment of human
anguish became-almost biblically, if I may so put it-so
much more dramatic and poignant than the issue of war
and peace which had been debated for endless hours.
16. But the epilogue had yet to come. For what else but
the fate of the innocent of this world could bring you back?
Strange indeed are the ways of Providence. Less than two
years ago you were pleading in this very chamber for peace
in my country. Resolution 425 (1978) will forever be remembered as the Andrew Young resolution, and great were our
hopes the day it was adopted. Now we turn to you againalmost in an anticlimax-in
what may well be a last desperate effort to salvage not only peace but also the
peacemakers.

11. The Commander of UNIFIL called for a new ceasefire, to be effective at 0400 hours (local time) on Sunday.
The Palestine Liberation Organization agreed to that
request; the Israel Defence Forces took the position that
they were not involved in the cease-fire, but they undertook
not to initiate firing unless they swerefired upon. The de
facto forces did not respond to the Force Commander’s
request, but by 2030 hours (local time) they had stopped
firing. Since that time the situation has been generally quiet
except for some minor outbreaks of firing.

17. People are still dying in my country every day of every
month since March 1978--civilians, young and old, men
and women, children and even babies, whose only crime is
that they .were born there with nowhere else to go and
nothing else to live with and for but their sacred mother
earth, their land, their homes, their love and their destiny.
With us are dying also soldiers of peace, the men of goodwill
who have come from far-away countries motivated, as
never before, not by hatred but by love and the belief you
yourself, Mr. President, have preached: faith in the intemational rule of law and order.

12. The remesentative of Zambia has inauired about the
casualties s;ffered by UNIFIL during the recent events. The
following information is based on reports received from
UNIFIL. On 14 August, a Nigerian patrol was ambushed
by armed elements, after a Nigerian unit had stopped and
turned back infiltrators. Five Nigerians were wounded. On
21 August, during a heavy exchange of fire between armed
elements in the Chgteau de Beaufort area and the defacto
forces in the Marjayoun area, a shell from the armed element side fell and exploded near a Nepalese battalion position, probably by accident. Three Nepalese soldiers were

18. Hence this your new rendezvous with history, this
strange encounter between you and your other self-the
diplomat and his creation, a romantic representative of a
super-Power and an army which he prompted us to create
as a projection of our common idealism. And what does this
army confront today7 A cynical, almost insane logic of
2

enjoy the prerogatives that are concurrent with its responsibility. We want, first, to see the safety and integrity of
UNIFIL, of its headquarters and of its freedom to operate
ensured. Secondly, we want to see UNIFIL provided with
the necessary instruments to enable it to perform its operation and to fulfil its mandate. Thirdly, we should like to see
UNIFIL supported with the necessaryinfrastructural means,
not excluding additional personnel. Fourthly, we should
like to see the area of operation of UNIFIL and its methods
of deployment and movement redefined in the light of
developments on the terrain since resolution 426 (1978) was
adopted, and the number of observers increased so that the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization could
report, with unimpeachable impartiality, when and where
violations took place with regard to the General Armistice
Agreement between Israel and Lebanon.’ We have asked
for this in a private letter to the Secretary-General of 15
June, and we should like this matter to bc taken up with the
utmost celerity. Finally, we should like to see the reactivation of the Israeli-Lebanese Mixed Armistice Commission,
in accordance with resolution 450 (1979), by invitation of
the Secretary-General or of his military representatives; this
Commission should be enabled to determine how it will
establish a mechanism for peace in Southern Lebanon.

crime and terror best exemplified by Prime Minister Begin,
who as recently as yesterday was expressing hii “deep grief’
and sorrow’* at the loss of innocent Lebanese lives but also
adding that this was the inevitable consequence of his preemptiie strategy against the Palestinians whEh “saveaihe
lives of many Israeli citizens”. In other, more simple words,
the Lebanese are doomed to be killed because Mr. Begin
wants to go on killing Palestinians before they in turn kill
every Israeli citizen.
19. And we are to be content with Mr. Begin’s expressions
of “deep grief and sorrow”. We are expected to die in
silence, almost in peace, to see our churches and convents
destroyed, our’ schools, cities and villages ravaged and the
whole fabric of our society totally disrupted simply because
we have been chosen by others as the arena of their wars and
their revolutions as well.
20. We now have a cease-fire. We have heard your report,
Mr. President, and we are content. For five days we have
been counting our victims, burying the dead and trying to
reverse the exodus of those driven away by fear from
nowhere to nowhere else.
21. So I am here today not to accuse and judge but to
defend. I am here to defend the right of a people to live, the
sanctity of a land and the validity of international peace
keeping. Ten UNIFIL soldiers have been killed in 10 days;
over 100 Lebanese civilians are dead in less than a week,
there are 270,009 homeless Lebanese-10 per cent of our
population-wandering
about in the desolate ruins of their
own homeland; a peace-keeping force that might become
no more than a thin demarcation line between the war and
the “anti-war”-all
this is more than we can take and more
than the world should tolerate. To allow this situation to
continue would mean that there is indeed a grand conspiracy designed to destroy the one country in the Middle Past
that has refused to share in the destruction of others.

26. It is difficult, of course, to predict what the situation in
Southern Lebanon may bear for the future. However, I
should like to say the following. We think, as the SecretaryGeneral has stated in more than one instance in his reports,
that the situation in Southern Lebanon is indeed directly
and organically linked to the situation in the rest of
Lebanon, and in this context we should like to repeat what
we have often said here,
27. First, we believe that, once a determined and militarily
more credible UNIFIL is established in Southern Lebanon,
more articulate and constructive efforts can be undertaken
by the Government of Lebanon, in conjunction with
UNIFIL,
to make the area of operation, and thereby
all of Southern Lebanon, a zone of peace, restoring international security and establishing a climate conducive to
national reconstruction.

22. I should like now to make some very simple practical
points. The first imperative before this Council and before
the whole world is a cessation of hostilities, that Southern
Lebanon should, as we have repeatedly asked, be a zone of
peace. To achieve this we must fully and unconditionally
implement, in the face of each and all, resolutions 425
(1978), 426 (1978), 427 (1978), 434 (1978), 444 (1979) and
450 (1979), not to mention all the statements on the subject
made by presidents of the Council.

28. The Lebanese authorities here solemnly pledge that
they are prepared fully to share military as well as civilian
responsibilities under the operational command of UNIPIL
or in conjunction with it in Southern Lebanon. Lebanon
hopes to be able then to resume its role as a factor for
stability and peace in the area instead of being a source of
anxiety to all and a danger to itself and to international
peace and security.

23. Not being keen on collecting resolutions, we are not at
this stage asking for another. If we were asking for one, the
only possible andiogical resolution would be one which, by
resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter, would force Israel
to cease its defiance of the world community represented in
the Council.

29. Secondly, we know that whatever happens in the area
of operation of UNIFIL will have a direct bearing on the
whole of Southern Lebanon. This in turn will complement
and confirm efforts engaged in elsewhere all over the country. It will give my Government added leverage and credibility in implementing, through strict Lebanese imperatives,
such security schemes as have been blocked by the continued deterioration of the situation in the south. The restoration of Lebanese social and national unity is and will be
the only road and best chance for reintegrating those who

24. At this stage we would be content with a serious and
profound reconsideration of the peacekeeping operation,
where so much is at stake.
25. In my memorandum
to the Secretary-General
[S/135193, I have raised a number of points that I should
like to take up briefly here before the Council. What are the
objectives that we are seeking? We should like UNIFIL to

’ WQial Records of the Security Council. Fourth Year, Specialsupp]ement No. 4.

3

have for too long been lured into seeking security outside
the fabric of Lebanon’s historic body politic.

the authority of the Security Council, which, in its resolutions 425 (1978), 434 (1978), 444 (1979) and 450 (1979). gave
a clearly defined mandate to UNIFIL.

30. Thirdly, such objectives, both the immediate and the
ultimate, obviously cannot be obtained without the confirmed total withdrawal of Israel as stipulated in resolution
425 (1978). Whereas such withdrawal had been declared by
Israel on 13 June 1978, successivereports of the SecretaryGeneral have on the contrary proved that Israeli military
personnel were still active inside Lebanon and that they
exercised a determining influence in the border area. The
Security Council has more than once described this fact as
constituting defiance of its resolutions and a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations.

36. Accordingly, my delegation attaches thegreatest interest to the suggestions presented, within the framework of
this mandate, by the representative of Lebanon, so as to
strengthen the effectiveness of the Force. We believe, in
particular, that it is necessary that the security of UNIFIL
and its headquarters be better assured. Likewise, we deem it
indispensable that the freedom of action and movement of
the United Nations troops be guaranteed. We are also in
favour of a study on means of improving their defensive
equipment and logistical capability.

3 1. I should like to conclude by expressing, through this
Council, an appeal to each and all. For too long now, my
country, Lebanon, has been a martyred tiountry, a casualty
both of war and of peace. This should now be brought to an
end, and only forceful action by the Council can achieve
this. The Speaker of the House said yesterday that the
United Nations in Lebanon was, in the beginning, a dream:
it has now become a mirage. I should like to say that we
never wanted the United Nations to be either in Lebanon.
We do not want it to be a dream and we do not think it
should be allowed to become a mirage. We want it to be a
living and forceful reality. Let us all work to make it so.

37. The delegation of France further considers that an
increase in the number of United Nations observer posts
along the southern border of Lebanon, as well as the reactivation of the Israeli-Lebanese Mixed Armistice Commission, would have significant advantages in the present
situation.
38. The time has come for us to return to reason. In this
spirit, my Government renews the appeal that appears in
resolution 450 (1979) for Israel to cease its incursions into
Lebanon and the assistance it continues to lend to irresponsible armed groups, and appeals to all parties concerned to
refrain from activities inconsistent with the objectives of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Calm must
return to Southern Lebanon, where the authority of the
Beirut Government must be restored.

32. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (inrerperurionfronr French):
The events of recent weeks in Southern Lebanon, in particular in the area of operation of UNIFIL, are such as to arouse
the deepest concern. Not only have members of the Force
been killed or wounded-and here I should like to pay a
particular tribute to the-three Fijian soldiers who died last
Friday and to express our sorrowful condolences to the
Government of Fiji-but,
what is more, civilian populations in increasing numbers are constantly threatened,
driven to forced exile in their own country, or have become
the victims of mindless bombings. The resumption of these
acts of violence leads us to wonder about the purposes
pursued by their authors, Is this a way to respond to the
many gestures of goodwill made by our Organization to
enable the inhabitants of Southern Lebanon to live in peace
and stability7

39. France, for its part, will support all efforts made
towards the restoration of peace. Given the gravity of the
situation created on the spot, we deem it justifiable that the
Security Council continue to be seized of this matter and to
follow it with special attention.
40. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.
41. Mr. BLUM (Israel): On behalf of the Government and
people of Israel, I should like to express at the outset our
deep sympathy to the families of the three Fijian soldiers
members of UNIFIL who lost their lives and the two others
who were wounded in the Tyre area on 24 August. Again,
the terrorist PLO was responsible for these casualties
among those acting in the service of international peace and
security. The Government of Israel finds it incomprehensible that in the statement made in the name of the SecretaryGeneral on 25 August with regard to this tragic incident, no
mention was made of the identity of those responsible for
thii crime. The sad fact is that, of the 30 fatalities of UNIFIL
to date, the great majority have been killed directly or
indirectly by PLO terrorists.

33. It cannot be admitted that these intemperate acts perpetrated by the armed elements as well as by the defier0
armed elements and the Israeli armed forces should continue indefinitely. Certainly, there has been a cease-fire, but
at what a cost, and we know how fragile it remains.
34. Given this situation, as the French Council of Ministers in Paris emphasized today, my country “fumly condemns all acts of violence committed against Lebanon, its
citizens and institutions, as well as against populations to
which this country has granted asylum”. It ‘VeafErms its
support for the negotiations and actions within the
framework of the United Nations, and, in particular, by
UNIFIL”,
whose conduct is exemplary. It “reafErms its
devotion to the unity, independence and territorial integrity
of Lebanon, which knows that it can count on its support,
co-operation and friendship”.

42. The Security Council has. been summoned today for
the tenth time since the establishment of UNIFIL in March
of last year, ostensibly to discuss the problems of Lebanon.
However, the true object of the exercise lies elsewhere. It is
to find a scapegoat for Lebanon’s fundamental problems
and a way to avoid facing up to them directly.

35. Our Organization can rio longer tolerate the questioning of the credibility of UNIFIL without seeing undermined
4

43. This, sadly, has been Lebanon’s auuroach for the last
decade and more. For example, as earl$&December 1968,
Mr. Fouad Boutros, Foreign Minister of Lebanon, claimed
in this Council that “Lebanon shelters no commando
organizations” [ 146Zsz meeting, para. 2621.‘Ihii was a barefaced tie, and when the President of Lebanon, Mr. HClou,
was pressed about it, he later admitted to Lebanese parliamentarians that the claim was made in this Council “in
order to secure Israel’s condemnation*‘. This was reported
in the Beirut newspaper AZ-Hayat of 1 July 1969.

I+500 of them are stationed in the Tyre pocket, which
reaches-as I have said before-to within eight miles of
Israel’s northern border. The rest, about 500 or so, are
entrenched in the area of operation of UNIFIL.
49. In this situation, one may well ask what has happened
to the unity, territorial integrity and national sovereignty of
Lebanon. I shall refrain from describing in detail how this
situation was reached, for members of the Council are well
aware of its background.
50. Let me only point out that the PLO area of control is
dependent on the Syrian area of occupation, as is clearly
obvious from this map, and in fact it is part of the wider
Syrian design; for, rather than permit PLO attacks on Israel
from Syrian territory, Syria prefers them to be launched
from Lebanon, and for Lebanon, crippledand battle-weary
as it already is, to bear the consequences of this aggression.

44. This mendacious approach, and the psychological
problems it reflects, continue to find expression in Lebanon’s recent calls for the reactivation of the Israeli-Lebanese
Mixed Armistice Commission, when it was Lebanon, at the
time of the Six Day War of 1967, which by its declarations
and actions made it clear that it considered that the General
Armistice Agreement ’ had come to an end. The essenceof
the Armistice Agreement was a commitment to put an end
to all hostilities and acts of aggression between Israel and
Lebanon. This is summed up in article III which, inter aZia,
prohibited terrorists from operating on or from the territories of both parties.

5 1. Resolution 425 (1978) took account of the fundamental problems facing Lebanon and provided UNIFIL with a
threefold mandate, calling for strict respect for the “territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence”-and
I stress “political independence**-“of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized boundaries”.

45. Had Lebanon been prepared to face its problems
honestly and had it fulfilled its international commitments,
Lebanon may not have come to the sorry pass it has reached
today. One could go further and suggest that the need for
UNIFIL could have been avoided and all the debates we
have had in recent months obviated.

52. UNIFIL was entrusted with an appropriate mandate.
It was established not only for the purpose of confirming
the withdrawal of the Israeli Defense Forces, which it did in
June of last year, but also for *‘restoring international peace
and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area”.

46. What then is the reality in Lebanon today7 Permit me
to demonstrate this reality with the map of Lebanon to
which I invite your attention. Lebanon is an occupied country. It is occupied by two foreign elements. The first is Syria,
marked in red on this map, which has deployed 30,000
troops throughout the bulk of that country, .as is clearly
evidenced on the map. The second is the terrorist PLO,
which has some 10,000 to 15,000 armed criminals in
Lebanon, and the zone of influence of the PLO is marked in
brown. The area in dark green is controlled by Lebanese
Christians.

53. However, the area of operation of UNIFIL was confined to the south of Lebanon, so that there was no possibility whatsoever of its being able effectively to fulfil its
mandate. Anybody glancing at the map in front of you will
readily appreciate how marginal and irrelevant UNIFIL
was and is to the real problems of occupied Lebanon.
54. In 1970, the terrorist PLO was ruthlessly hounded out
of Jordan, and many of its operatives came fleeing across
the Jordan River to Judaea and !&maria-under
Israeli
control-to save their lives. Syria has steadfastly refused to
let the PLO operate from its territory. Rebuffed by other
Arab countries, the PLO subverted Lebanon’s sovereignty,
and it now enjoys complete freedom in Lebanon. Its headquarters are located there. Its basesfor launching indiscrimnate acts of terror against innocent civilians in Israel are
located there. Whenever an atrocity is perpetrated in Israel,
responsibility is taken by the PLO in Lebanon.

47. As is clear from the map, Syria dominates Lebanon
and controls its Government, whose writ scarcely runs
beyond Beirut, if that. This stark truth is known to the
whole world and cannot be hidden any longer. In the name
of “peace”, Syria fuelled a civil war that led to the destruction of Beirut, to 60,000 Lebanese dead and almost 1 million
refugees. Now, by comparison, I draw your attention to the
fact of how small are the southern areas about which we are
talking. The area in light green is the area controlled by the
Christian Lebanese villagers in the south. The area marked
in blue is the area of operation of UNIFIL, and here again,
in brown, is another area controlled by the terrorist PLO in
the south, an area reaching south of the Litani river into the
Tyre pocket to a distance of a mere eight miles from the
border of Israel.

55. Israel is thus faced with a tragic dilemma: we can
either wait for our own civilians to be murdered, or move in
order to prevent terrorist outrages. Israel has in fact no
choice at all.
56. Members of the Council scarcely need to be reminded
that, under international law, if a State is unable or unwilling to prevent groups from using its territory to attack
another State, the latter is entitled .to take all necessary
measures in its own defence.

48. The PLO, for its part, has, since the end of the 196Os,
taken over a large area in the south of the country, the
brown area, which it maintains as the most concentrated
zone of terrorist operations in the world. About 2,000 of
those terrorists are located south of the Litani river. About

57. The PLO, in its cowardly way, deliberately locates its
bases in refugee camps, civilian towns and villages. I do not
5

wish to repeat here the reletit passage of the statement to
the General Assembly of 14 October 1976* by Ambassador
Ghorra, the former Permanent Representative of Lebanon,
in which he vividly described these criminal methods
employed by the PLO. As a result of that policy, civilians on
the Lebanese side inevitably are affected, and no country
more than Israel feels their pain when their lives are lost,
callously sacrificed by ‘tie terrorist PLO.
.58. It has always been the case that the PLO was an
instrument in the hands of certain Arab Governments.
However, since the signing of the Camp David accords in
September of last year, and, more particularly, since the
signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty on 26 March 1979, it
has become patently clear that the PLO is operating on
behalf of the rejection& Arab States-that is, the opponents of the peace process in the Arab world, and their
supporters beyond the Arab world. In particular, behind it
stand Syria and Iraq, which are using the PLO as an extension of the socalled eastern front in an effort to sabotage
the ongoing peace process in the Middle East. Illustrative of
this was the appointment earlier this month of a Syrian
former major-general as director of the so-called Military
Department of the terrorist PLO.

cause of ueace. Peace cannot be restored in Lebaion while a
Syrian o’ccupation army trains its gunsights on the civilian
population of Beirut and while armed PLO terrorists are
allowed free reign on Lebanese soil.
64. This is not the view of the Government of Israel alone.
It is also held by leading Lebanese figures. Only yesterday
the former President of Lebanon, Camille Chamoun, was
reported on a Lebanese radio station as stating that the
reason for what has been called the “Israeli attacks” is the
PLO presence in Lebanon, and that the escalation about
which there have been of&&l protests in recent days follows from the fact that the PLO have received heavy weaponry and set up new bases in Arkoub and other places. Let
me quote former President Chamoun:
“It does not matter if we go to the United Nations or
we request an Arab summit. The question is whether the
Government of Lebanon has sufficient courage to deal
with the question of security in the south in all its aspects.
The Syrian forces which should have deterred the PaIestinians are encouraging them and giving them cover to
extend the areas under their control.*’
Likewise, Pierre Jumayyel yesterday observed that, every
time there has been an increase in hostilities in the south, the
Lebanese authorities have rushed to have international
pressure brought to bear on Israel but have never exerted
pressure to prevent the attacks on Israel.

59. There have been repeated reports of increased supplies
of arms, Soviet and other, to the PLO in recent weeks. As of
today, the terrorists have approximately 100 cannons
deployed in Lebanon, mainly in the region between the
Zaharani and Litani rivers-the brown area-consisting of
Soviet-made 130-mm and 155-mm Howitzers, and now
also a sizable quantity of 105mm cannon of other manufacture. They also have extensive supplies of Soviet Katyusha rockets, which are mobile and are brought up to the
border for an attack. As a result, the terrorist PLO constitutes a threat not only to Israel, particularly its civilians in
the north, but also a considerable threat to Lebanese villagers in the south and to UNIFIL itself.

65. Until the nettle of the fundamental problem plaguing
Lebanon is grasped, nothing will be achieved. The PLO
must be evicted from Lebanon, and the Syrian occupation
of that country must be ended. Until these basic requirements arc met, the Security Council will achieve little. This
is a sad conclusion, but it is a realistic one which the Council
is in duty bound to address squarely.
66. The PRESIDENT:
Since no other members of the
Council have asked to speak at this time, I shall now speak
as representative of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

60. Speaking of these Lebanese villages in the south, let
me remind the Council that these are Christian, Shiite and
Druze farmers, who have been the victims of the disaster
-%flicted on them over the years by the terrorist PLO. They
have found themselves abandoned and have resolved to
take up arms to defend themselves.

67. I welcome the opportunity afforded by this meeting of
the Council to address a problem which has long been a
matter of grave concern to my Government.

61. At the same time, Israel’s policy of self-defence is
proving effective. Since the atrocity at Nahariya on 22 April
1979, when four Israeli civilians-including
two little sisters, aged 4 and 2-lost their lives as the result of a sea-borne
terrorist raid launched from Lebanon, there has been a
significant decrease in the terrorist activities in Israel.
Moreover, we have solid information that as many as four
murderous attacks were prevented in the last week by the
operations of the Israeli IXfense Forces.

68. In recent weeks and months, the sorry spectacle of the
slaughter of innocent people through random violence,
prin&ally .in Lebanon but also in Israel, has been an
tiront to the conscience of mankind. We are meeting now
at the request of the Government of Lebanon, in response
to the recent upsurge of violence in Southern Lebanon. In
recent days alone, thousands of Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians have been forced to flee from their homes, and
many have been killed and maimed by often indiscriminate
shelling. This situation is intolerable. The people of Southem Lebanon, Lebanese and Palestinian alike, and the people of Israel as well, de-serve relief from the almost daily
violence and fear of attack with which they have been forced
to live for far too long. They look to us to point the way to a
solution that will allow the people in Lebanon to return to
their homes and allow them and Israeli citizens to carry on
their lives in freedom from the fear of attack. We must not
fail them.

62. Israel’s position vis-&vis Lebanon is clear. Israel sup
ports the unity, national sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Lebanon within its internationally re~ognized boundaries.
63. Detaching the question of Southern Lebanon from
the situation in Lebanon as a whole will not enhance the
2 Ofida! Records of the GeneraI

naryMeetings,

32nd

meeting.

Assembly. l%irtpfirst

Session, Pie-

6

69.. The United States Government’s policy on Lebanon is
well known. We support that country% sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. We have special
ties of sympathy with the people of Lebanon, and we have
supported the Government of President Sarkis in its efforts
to restore its authority throughout the country, including
throughout Southern Lebanon. We will continue to do so.

75. Fourthly, all-parties to the fighting should carry .out
and btrictly enforce a complete, immediate and lasting halt
to all shelling, terrorism and other acts of violence.
76. Members of thii Council, less than a week ago, met to
consider another aspect of the Middle East situation, the
critical issue of the rights of the Palestinian people. If there is
a strengthened understanding in my country of the importance of ensuring that the legitimate rights of the Palestinians are included in a comprehensive settlement-and
I
believe that there is-then it is time for the Palestinian
leadership to recognixe that their objectives cannot be
achieved through violence and terrorism. Indeed, it is
timc-past time-for wiser counsels to prevail on both sides
of the border between Lebanon and Israel.

70. Let me make absolutely clear the position of the United States with regard to the events in Southern Lebanon. In
doing so, I speak with the full authority of the United States
Government. First, we condemn those. who boast of the
murder of an Israeli mother and her child, the attack on a
bus filled with Israeli civilians, and the explosion.of rockets
and bombs in Israeli towns and cities. No political objective
can ever justify such barbarism. Secondly, and just as
strongly, we condemn the policy of artillery shelling and
preemptive attacks on Lebanese towns, villages and refugee camps which Israel and armed Lebanese groups which
Israel supports have followed in recent months. Let there be
no doubt or ambiguity about this. We cannot and do not
agree with Israel’s military policies in Lebanon as manifested in the past few months. They are wrong and unaccep
table to my Government. They are painfully at variance
with the values which Israel has traditionally espoused.

77. Finally, I want to pay a tribute to General Erskine and
the brave men of UNIFIL he commands. Their task has
been thankless, frustrating and dangerous. Subjected to
attack in the performance of their duties, they have suffered
heavy casualties. Tragically, three members of the contingent from the small nation of Fiji were killed in a recent clash
with terrorists. In difficult terrain, and in a country where
arms are widely available among the population, the men of
UNIFIL have been subjected to a severetest of their steadfastness. They have risen to challenges with exemplary
determination and courage. We all owe them a debt of
thanks which words cannot repay. They can be proud of
their continued contribution to the cause of peace.

71. Let tie turn to what the United States Government
believes must be done to break the deadlock of terror and
counter-terror in which both sides seem to be caught.
72. First, both sides should cooperate fully with UNIFIL
in enabling it to carry out its mandate. It is disgraceful that
the men of the Force in Lebanon have been subjected to
attack and harrassment from both Palestinian elements and
groups supported by Israel because they seek to carry out a
mission entrusted to them by this Council. A lasting end to
the violence in the area can be brought about only through
scrupulous observance of resolution 425 (1978). UNIFIL
should thus be allowed to fulfil its mandate by functioning
in an unimpeded fashion throughout all .of Southern
Lebanon. The objective remains to restore the authority
and control of the Government of Lebanon throughout the
country.

78. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT. The next
speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organixation. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
79. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN (Palestine Liberation Organi&on): It was not my intention to speak here today, but I
must because of the barrage of lies and distortions to which
this august body has been subjected by the representative of
the Government of Israel, the Government of Menachem
Begin.
80. I think that we of the Palestine Liberation Organ&
tion are on record with regard .to our position vis-&is
Lebanon. We whole-heartedly support the territorial integrity, national independence and unity of Lebanon, and I
think that our Lebanese brothers know this. Our position
vi&&s UNIFIL is also clear. It has been stated in the
reports of the Secretary-General and reports from the field
by UNIFIL commanders that the PLO does everything
possible to co-operate with the forces of UNIFIL. We made
a pledge after the adoption of resolution 425 (1978), and we
are still abiding by that pledge.

73. Secondly, Israel should ena ns policy of preempuve
strikes on Lebanese soil. It should ceaseits artillery attacks
in support of Lebanese militia groups and effectively use its
influence over these groups so that random and indiscriminate violence can be stopped, especially against the men of
UNIFIL.
74. Thirdly, the Palestinian leadership should help heal
the wounds of Lebanon. It should stop attacks on the
Lebanese militia groups in Southern Lebanon and on
Israel. It should renounce the use of Lebanese territory for
this purpose. It should carry out its pledge of 5 June to
withdraw its fighters from Southern Lebanese villages and
towns and remove all its armed groups from the area of
‘operation of UNIFIL. This step should be taken without
precondition and without delay. There is no conceivable
justification for the continued presence of Palestinian
armed groups in Southern Lebanon if the Palestinian
leadership is prepared to co-operate with the Council and
UNIFIL in carrying out resolution 425 (1978).

81. I should like here today to clarify just a few points,
First, with regard to requesting the Palestine Liberation
Organization to carry out its commitment to the declaration made on 5 June, the PLO has implemented that declaration. However, a few hours after the withdrawal of the
Palestinian military from towns and villages in the south,
the area was subjected to barbaric shelling and bombardment of our refugee camps and of civilians of Lebanese
villages.
7

85. All we ask is to be allowed, like any other people in this
world, to exercise our minimum human and political
rights-the right to be in our homes and the right to selfdetermination and national independence.

82. Nobody in his right mind who wants to be objective
can ask the Palestinians or the Lebanese not to resist a
genocide that has been and is still being directed against
them. Just to give an example, on 27 August, Ramsey
Clark, former United States Attorney-General, David Dellinger, editor of Seven Days, Max Holland, researcher at the
Centre for International Studies, Fred Jameson, professor
at Yale and author, and Don Lute, Coordinator of the
Asian Centre, had just returned from the Middle East. They
issued a press release in which they testified that:

86. This morning I received this satchel. It belonged to
Ahmad Hayel, a nine-year-old boy in Al Rashidia refugee
camp. His school was shelled; he was killed; and here is the
piece of shrapnel that destroyed his books as well as his life.
This is what the Israelis and people like the representative of
Menachem Begin call self-defence: killing hundreds of
Palestinian and Lebanese children in their schools and refugee camps; continuing to occupy our land by force of arms;
committing daily atrocities against our people in their.villag& towns, shops, schools; and limiting the freedom of
those people. It goes further,.confiscating their lands and
establishing settlements in an attempt to create a Palestinian
ghetto similar to the bantustans that South Africa created
for our black brothers in South Africa.

“The group surveyed the daily military destruction of
Lebanese villages and Palestinian refugee camps in
Lebanon, especially in the southern part of the country.
In the south, the group observed artillery shellings and
passed a point on the coastal highway north of Tyre two
hours before a ship-based Israeli commando raid killed
eight people. They found massive, indiscriminate destruction throughout Southern Lebanon, including villages and cities extensively damaged and almost completely destroyed.

87. We wish to state here in this Council that it is clear that
we are not fighting for the sake of fighting. We are a normal
people like any other. We want our children to learn to play
with toys rather than with guns. We want our children to
learn how to cultivate the land rather than to train. But,
after what has been inflicted on us, what choice do we have?
And I ask everyone of the representatives here: should we
disappear as a nation? I can assure them that we will not; we
will continue to exist.

“According to members of the group, the civilian
population of Southern Lebanon has been the major
victim of the daily air raids and shellings. Casings and
shrapnel pieces of cluster bombs with United States
markings were shown to the visitors, with the angry
protest that the bombs had been dropped on defenceless
villages by Israeli-flown and United States-made airplanes.
“They also agreed that the increased Israeli military
activity has not been in response to Palestinian attacks
on Israel. This was confirmed by the Israeli Army Chief
of Staff, Lieutenant-General Raphael Eitan on 15 August
1979.”

88. We still believe in peace. We have struggled for peace
and we want peace, but a peace that would securefor us our
basic human rights, our political life, our right to selfdetermination, our right to live in dignity as a people, our
right to exist as a nation. This can be achieved only if Israel
withdraws from all the territories occupied since 1967 and
recognizes the right of the Palestinian people who were
expelled from their homes and properties in Palestine to
return or be compensated for their property as well as their
right to self-determination and national independence in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and resolutions of the Security Council and General Assembly.

Therefore, the Israeli shellings and attacks on Southern
Lebanon are not in response to Palestinian violence. It is a
war of genocide that is being carried out by the criminalminded Menachem Begin and his clique to destroy the political and physical existence of the Palestinian peopie.
83. We heard the Israeli representative speak of “no
choice”. I think that there is a choice. The choice is that
Israel should withdraw from the occupied territories and
allow the Palestinian people to exercise its right to selfdetermination and national independence. There is a choice;
everybody knows that we did not choose to be in Lebanon,
that we were forced to be in Lebanon, and that we as
Palestinians did not establish bases for resistance against
Israel and then establish around them refugee camps, that it
is just obvious that the Palestinian people, as a people
struggling for its right to return to its homes and properties
in Palestine, should resist and carry out its struggle by all
means-political
and diplomatic, and also, in accordance
with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, by armed struggle.

89. Those conditions have been approved by the United
Nations. If they are implemented, I can assure the Council
that peace will be established immediately. Therefore, the
choice is not whether to push the Palestinians into the
Mediterranean or to continue a war of genocide against
them. The choice is for those who are interested in peace to
implement the conditions for peace.
90. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Lebanon
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of his right of
reply, and I now call on him.
9 1. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): The representative of Israel
has once more engaged in his usual rhetoric of trying to
divert the debate from the point at issue to various other
points that he has often raised here I think he should renew
his stock of quotations. In fact, he is becoming repetitious. I
shall not deal with this.

84. We are in Lebanon because we are not in Palestine. If
we were in Palestine, we would not be in Lebanon. That is a
very logical formula. And we are in Lebanon because the
representative of Menachem Begin as well as 80 per cent of
the population of Israel are settler-colonials in our country.
I cannot be at my house because an Israeli who came from
either England or Brooklyn is living there.

92. I was very much’ interested by thii painting, which
shows the drama in my country. I am very candid. I have
8

extended by Prime Minister Begin on 7 May 1979 from the
rostrum of the Knesset to President Sarkis to meet and
negotiate peace between Israel and Lebanon. Prime Minister Begin stated on that occasion that Israel had no territorial ambitions whatsoever vis-a-vis Lebanon. We support
the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized boundaries. We still
await Lebanon’s reply to that invitation. As of now, no such
reply has been forthcoming.

said that I belong to a country that has become a martyred
country, a country tom by the wars of others. but a country that a-year ago asked this Council: let my.people live. I
repeat: let my people live.
93. I shall not discuss the various accusations. I have come
to this Council today, and before, repeatedly asking for the
implementation of peace and of the Armistice Agreement,
and we were confronted with debates on international law
that we never sought. Let me, however, read to this Council,
for the fust time, a letter from Mr. Moshe Dayan, Foreign
Minister of Israel, addressed to this body and dated 3
August 1978:

97. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I call on the representative

of

98. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): We are still free in our country to make at least one decision, which is how to govern our
country, and we think we are doing quite well given the five
years of war. No other nation in the world that had been
subjected to what we have been subjected to could have
survived as we have survived.

“Please be advised that the Government of Israel is
considering agreeing to reinstate the Lebanese/Israel
General Armistice Agreement of 1949 in order to enable
Israel to consider the matter positively. We request a
reaffirmation from the Government of Lebanon that it
will abide by all the provisions of the Agreement, including article III, . . .“.

99. As for the invitation of peace, we have replied by
saying that the Armistice Agreement is sufticient. It is, if
read properly-and
we have written numerous notes on this
to the Security Council-a
guarantee for security and for
the return of peace to Lebanon.

‘Ihis is an official letter given to the Secretary-General to
which we have replied saying that we were prepared to abide
by the terms of the Armistice Agreement. Not only have we
replied in the positive; there was an exchange, and this
Council has reaffirmed the Armistice Agreement over and
over again. What are we asking for? I have not come here to
ask for war. I have come here to propose that Lebanon
become a xone of peace&hat all hostilities stop in Southern
Lebanon, that the international conspiracy that has made
Lebanon a martyred country be brought to an end.

100. We want all hostilities in Lebanon to stop. We want
the PLO to stop its hostilities in Lebanon. We want it
because we want it, and not because Israel is inviting us to
do it. And if the Israelis are sincere in their claim for peace,
let us immediately have the Armistice Agreement implemented under the auspices of this Council.
101. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of the Netherlands in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representative of the
Netherlands to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

94. Peace in Lebanon cannot wait for a comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East problem. It is immoral that
my country should continue to suffer pending the achievement of a comprehensive peace settlement. It is immoral
that the representative of Israel should come here and
accord himself the right of tutelage over sovereignty in my
country.
We want Lebanon reunited and in peace; and we
are capable of n&taining
that peace. We have committed
ourselves to the maintenance of peace and the cessation of
hostilities, and we are prepared to stand by our word. Is the
representative of Israel prepared to commit his Government to abide by the United Nations resolutions?

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Feith (Netherland)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

95. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Israel who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
96. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I should just like to remind the
representative of Lebanon and the Council of the invitation

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

9

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dans
les librairies
d&ositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s
de votre
libraire
A : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

IfOIIYYHTh

CONSEGUIR

ZI3AAHIIt-l

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas.

litho

in United

Nation&

New York

OPI-AHH

3AQHH

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

tus.

OG’bEAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAqHH

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

et les agences
ou adresses-vous

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002~March

1982-2.250
