S/2012/368

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 May 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 27 May 2012 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Further to my letter dated 25 May 2012 (S/2012/363), in which I updated the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution 2043 (2012), I regret to inform
that violence against the civilian population and clashes between Government forces
and armed opposition groups in various parts of the Syrian Arab Republic have
escalated in the past two days. The most disturbing and violent event took place in
the El Houleh area in Homs province on 25 May 2012 and during the early hours of
26 May 2012.
Accounts of local residents suggest that attacks began on Friday, 25 May 2012,
after demonstrations that followed prayers, and lasted until after midnight. Members
of the Free Syrian Army and other local residents said that 116 people had been
killed and more than 300 had been wounded.
On 26 May 2012, observers and civil and human rights experts from the
United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) visited
the villages of Taldou and Kafr Laha in the El Houleh area, where they viewed the
bodies of the dead and confirmed from an examination of ordnance that artillery and
tank shells were fired at a residential neighbourhood. They heard first-hand accounts
of local residents of what had happened. The villages in question have been outside
of Government control, but have been surrounded by heavy military presence.
Government officials said that seven security officers had been killed in the El
Houleh area on 25 May 2012.
The patrols negotiated the cessation of fire with both sides to ensure their
safety. At the checkpoint before the village of Taldou, the team observed two
armoured personnel carriers and one tank. UNSMIS patrols were met by crowds of
local residents. Despite the circumstances, the observers were positively received by
the local population, the Free Syrian Army, the Revolutionary Council and the Local
Coordination Committee. However, local residents were anxious about the departure
of the observers, which they said would allow the Government forces to resume
shelling. For these reasons, in Taldou three patrol members were temporarily
prevented from leaving the town by residents. All local interlocutors called on
UNSMIS to establish presence in the El Houleh area.
UNSMIS patrols observed 85 corpses, including 34 children and 7 women,
located in a mosque in Taldou. The observers were not able to immediately
determine the cause of death, but observed shotgun wounds and wounds consistent
with artillery fire. Local residents said that the bodies of the dead were also located
12-35321 (E) 300512

*1235321*

S/2012/368

in another mosque, but the UNSMIS patrol could not visit it owing to security
reasons. The patrol also saw artillery and tank shells, as well as fresh tank tracks.
Many buildings had been destroyed by heavy weapons.
The observers visited the village of Taldou later the same day. They observed
local residents preparing a mass grave to bury the dead. The UNSMIS team visited
another mosque in the village where they were shown three bodies, including a
woman and an infant with gunshot wounds, and another four bodies, with severe
facial injuries in another mosque. UNSMIS observers secured the return of six to
eight other corpses, including one woman and children, from the checkpoint of the
Government forces to the Taldou village for burial. These bodies bore signs of
severe physical abuse.
In the village of Kafr Laha, the military observers met with representatives of
the Free Syrian Army, the Revolutionary Council and the Local Coordination
Committee. The observers spoke with local residents who alleged that the armed
men, who had entered the village, were members of a pro-government paramilitary
group, “Shabiha”, from the neighbouring village of Kabou. The observers were
shown injured adults and children, but they could not verify when the injuries had
been sustained.
UNSMIS contacted the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to request medical aid for
the injured in the two villages. Representatives of the Red Crescent, however,
responded that all ambulances were in the Homs neighbourhood of Sultaniyah,
which had also been shelled overnight. Local UNSMIS patrols met with the
Governor of Homs and shared photographic and video evidence. While the detailed
circumstances are unknown, we can confirm that there has been artillery and mortar
shelling. There have also been other forms of violence, including shootings at close
range and severe physical abuse.
In the wake of these events, the United Nations observers are facing increasing
criticism for not stopping the violence and, in some quarters, even being blamed for
an increase of violence. There is a misconception, which is difficult to correct, about
the role of unarmed military observers and what they can and cannot do. This puts
the United Nations presence on the ground in a perilous position both with regard to
the ability to conduct operations and to the observers’ personal security.
These appalling and brutal crimes, which involved indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force, are flagrant violations of international law and of the
commitments under the six-point plan to cease the use of heavy weapons in
population centres and violence in all its forms. Such crimes require a transparent,
independent and impartial international investigation. Those responsible for
perpetrating these crimes must be held to account.
I firmly demand that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic immediately
cease the use of heavy weapons in population centres and fulfil its responsibility to
protect civilians. Armed violence in all its forms in the Syrian Arab Republic must
cease at once. I urge the armed opposition to refrain from taking revenge and to
keep its commitment not to resort to armed violence. However, I stress that it is in
the first instance for the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to make the
cessation of violence announced on 12 April 2012 a reality. It is also clear that a
political process must be launched in order to find a solution to the current
dangerous political stalemate.

2

12-35321

S/2012/368

I welcome the continued unanimous support of the Security Council for the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States for Syria. I urge the Council to redouble its support to the Joint Special
Envoy and UNSMIS, find effective ways to ensure an immediate cessation of all
armed violence and take further steps, as necessary, to create the conditions for the
effective implementation of the Joint Special Envoy’s six-point plan and the
mandate of UNSMIS. In this regard, it is particularly critical that measures be in
place to ensure that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic abides by its
obligations to cease the use of heavy weapons in population centres. I call on the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to expeditiously and fully implement the
other aspects of the six-point plan in order to create an environment for a political
process to resolve the ongoing crisis through peaceful means and to meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. The longer the current violence
continues, the longer it will take the society to heal.
Joint Special Envoy Annan will travel to Damascus shortly. I sincerely hope
that the Syrian leadership will take this opportunity to fundamentally change course
and choose diplomacy over guns to ensure that the legitimate aspirations for
freedom, dignity and prosperity of the Syrian people are met.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter urgently to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-35321

3
