S/PV.9001

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9001

st meeting
Wednesday, 23 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shaheen/Mr. Abushahab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Shringla
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
League of Arab States
Letter dated 17 March 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/240)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29728 (E)
*2229728*

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

as we face the profound global ramifications of the
war in Ukraine. For example, numerous countries
import at least half of their wheat from Ukraine or
Russia, including Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, Somalia, the
Sudan and Yemen. Food, fuel and fertilizer prices are
skyrocketing. Supply chains are being disrupted. And
the costs and delays in the transportation of imported
goods, when available, are at record levels. All of that
is hitting the poorest the hardest and planting the seeds
for political instability and unrest around the globe.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
League of Arab States
Letter dated 17 March 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/240)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States; and Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil,
civil-society briefer.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome Secretary-General
António Guterres, to whom I now give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this opportunity
to address the Security Council on cooperation with the
League of Arab States.
Strengthening our cooperation with regional
organizations is a sine qua non for strengthening
multilateralism globally. We need partnership across
all levels, from the local to the regional to the global.
The League of Arab States is critical across the
spectrum of our work. When the coronavirus disease
upended societies and economies and threatened
new vectors of instability, Secretary-General Aboul
Gheit and I appealed to the Council to open space for
multilateral efforts, humanitarian action and diplomatic
solutions. Scanning the region today, it is clear that
those appeals are even more critical.
We remain united in our pursuit of multilateral
answers to the cascading challenges facing the Arab
world and beyond. Those efforts have an added urgency
2/24

23/03/2022

In addition, we see clear evidence of the war
draining resources and attention from other trouble
spots in desperate need. Just last week, I was deeply
disappointed that our appeal for Yemen received less
than a third of the funds so urgently needed. I cannot
overstate the severity of the suffering of the people
of Yemen. Twenty million Yemenis need life-saving
humanitarian assistance and protection, with women
and children in the greatest need of support. I appeal to
the generosity of members of the Arab League at this
critical time. I reiterate my plea to all countries to find
creative ways to finance the increased humanitarian
and development recovery needs worldwide, give
generously and immediately release pledged funds.
In Libya, I welcome the League’s constructive
engagement to help preserve the unity and hard-won
stability achieved since the signing of the Libyan
ceasefire agreement in October 2020. I count on the
League and its membership to continue prioritizing
the agreement on a comprehensive political
process and advance the full implementation of
resolution 2570 (2021).
In the Sudan, the League of Arab States and the
United Nations have been working closely together,
both bilaterally and in the context of the Friends of
Sudan Group, to encourage meaningful dialogue
towards an inclusive and peaceful transition.
In Syria, our two organizations are firmly united
in support of the Syrian people, who feel abandoned
by the world as they enter the eleventh year of a war
that has subjected them to human rights violations on
a massive and systematic scale and left the country in
ruins. The only way to break the deadlock and alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people is through a credible
political process that sees the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). We must keep working to chart a
political path to sustainable peace on which all Syrians
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

are heard, grievances are addressed, detainees are
released and needs are met. There must be no impunity.
In Lebanon, we are grateful to the Arab League
and its members for urging the Government to address
the country’s crisis through meaningful reforms,
timely elections, constructive engagement with the
International Monetary Fund and the full implementation
of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
In Iraq, we welcome the enhanced strategic
cooperation between the Government and members of
the League, which includes an observation mission to
monitor Iraq’s parliamentary elections last October.
Strengthening
regional
cooperation
and
collaboration are also critical in Yemen, where escalating
hostilities threaten to further heighten dramatic
humanitarian needs and further diminish hopes for
peace. I count on the League of Arab States to support
United Nations-led efforts to reach a lasting ceasefire,
defuse tensions, advance an inclusive political process
and provide humanitarian and economic assistance to
the Yemeni people. Faced with a catastrophic funding
crunch, I urge everyone to do everything possible to
prevent hunger and starvation from taking millions
of lives.
In Israel-Palestine, the League and the United
Nations remain committed to finding a path for the
peace process to advance and the occupation to end.
Our shared goal remains two States — Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State — living side by side in
peace within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the shared
capital of both States. Political, economic and security
conditions across the occupied Palestinian territory are
deteriorating as Palestinians experience dispossession,
violence and insecurity.
At the same time, the existential financial crisis
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) affects
the rights and well-being of Palestine refugees across
the region. I reiterate my call on Member States to
increase their financial support to the Palestinian
people and their contributions to UNRWA, a vital pillar
of regional stability.
Ever-closer cooperation with the Arab League
is vital to achieving all those goals. From regular
meetings with my Special Envoys and staff exchanges

S/PV.9001

to workshops on mediation and capacity-building
exercises on inclusive peacemaking, our relationship
is broadening and deepening. We look forward to
strengthening our ties further, including through the
United Nations Liaison Office to the League of Arab
States, which has opened new communication channels
between our organizations, at both headquarters and in
the field.
We are particularly focused on building stronger
partnerships with the League in the areas of women
and peace and security, disarmament, mediation and
peacebuilding. We are expanding our cooperation on
youth, peace and security issues through capacitybuilding and consultations on a regional strategy in
the Arab region. Looking ahead, we will hold our 15th
general cooperation meeting in July to advance our
biennial framework, and we will work together on a
sectoral meeting on climate change.
Today more than ever before, we need to come
together and stand together in support of multilateral
peaceful solutions. That is why our relationship with
the League of Arab States and the strong support from
its membership have never been more essential or
more appreciated.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Aboul Gheit.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. Minister, and
the United Arab Emirates on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
very much appreciate the important role of the United
Arab Emirates as the Arab member of the Council.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting and for the outstanding concept note prepared
by your delegation (S/2022/240, annex).
I also express my sincere appreciation to our dear
friend Secretary-General António Guterres for his
continued interest in promoting cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States to
increase prospects for international and regional peace
and security.
Today the Council addresses the issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, at a time when the international order is perhaps
at its most critical juncture since the end of the Cold War.
Conflict between global Powers is escalating, bringing

22-297283/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

with it several security, political and economic risks.
It is a very deplorable situation. We hope that global
Powers will be able to broker solutions and settlements
that are in the interests of all parties in order to stop
the bloodshed and meet the security requirements of
all, in line with the commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law
and good-neighbourliness. That would help the world
avert disastrous repercussions on the economies of
developing States that import food and oil.
We also hope that this significant conflict situation
will not have a negative impact on the attention paid
by the Security Council to other issues and crises
worldwide, and in the Arab region specifically. We
are deeply concerned about the crises in the Arab
world being overlooked or forgotten amid the tense
international situation. Crises will not be resolved
by themselves. The current international situation
might exacerbate them. The Arab region continues
to suffer from the significant shock of 2011. There
is ongoing conflict within States — such as Syria,
Libya and Yemen — which leads to high humanitarian
and economic costs. It also threatens security in the
Arab region.
Developments in the international arena have led
many in the Arab region to consider the suffering of
the Palestinian people differently. Their suffering has
continued for more than 70 years. They have been
suppressed and forced to live as refugees. Their rights
and freedoms have continued to be violated, without
any genuine prospect for a solution.
The Council endorsed the principle of land for
peace and the two-State solution as a basis for resolving
the historic conflict in Palestine and ending the Israeli
occupation. That also included the establishment of an
independent homeland for Palestinians, living side by
side in peace with the State of Israel along the 4 June
1967 borders.
However, the occupying Power continues to
manipulate and refuses to participate in direct
negotiations — based on United Nations and other
international benchmarks — with the Palestinian side,
despite many appeals by the President of Palestine
before the Council in 2018 (see S/PV.8183) and 2020
(see S/PV.8717) and before the General Assembly in
2021 (see A/76/PV.12). He asked the Secretary-General
to convene a summit under the auspices of the United
Nations in order to launch direct negotiations.
4/24

23/03/2022

The international order we aspire to cannot be
based on double standards or discrimination. We
therefore call on all international Powers to shoulder
their responsibilities, as set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations, to address all issues and crises alike in
full respect for international law and for the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
In Syria, the situation is at an impasse. The
political track sponsored by the United Nations has
been obstructed, the economic situation is sharply
deteriorating, and the living conditions of Syrians across
the country are worsening, including in areas under the
control of the regime or by other forces. The situation is
simply not viable. It is causing unspeakable suffering to
millions of Syrians. We have serious concerns that the
current international confrontation may have negative
repercussions on the situation in Syria.
In Libya, we fear that divisions in the country will
be exacerbated by the presence of militias, foreign
forces and mercenaries. We all agreed at the first and
second Berlin conferences, and with the support of the
Council, that they needed to leave Libya. In that vein,
we reaffirm that foreign intervention in the Libyan
crisis would only further complicate the situation,
making the parties more stubborn and prolonging the
conflict. We want the Libyan people to be able to select
their representatives freely through fair elections,
and we stand ready to participate in monitoring those
elections as soon as possible.
In Yemen, the Houthi militias continue to reject
a political settlement and negotiations, instead
threatening their neighbours in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates with drones and
ballistic missiles. In that regard, I commend the Security
Council for the adoption of resolution 2624 (2022),
thanks to the efforts of the United Arab Emirates. The
resolution led to the imposition of more sanctions on
the Houthis and listed them as a terrorist organization.
We reaffirm that a political solution is the only means
to address the war in Yemen, guarantee its territorial
integrity and ensure that Yemen is not used as an arena
by certain regional Powers to threaten its neighbours.
Iranian interventions in the internal affairs of Arab
States have been ongoing for over a decade. Arab States
have many concerns vis-à-vis the Iranian policy in our
region, particularly if Iran does not reach an agreement
with the 5+1 group on its nuclear programme, which
poses a threat to peace and security in the region and
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the world. We stress that all efforts need to be supported
at this year’s Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
as well as at the United Nations conference to reach
an agreement for the establishment of a zone free from
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East, through more commitment to that goal on
the part of the nuclear-weapon States, particularly those
States that sponsored the resolution on the Middle East
at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference.
Furthermore, the Iranian policy continues to be one
of intervention, which is not welcome in many Arab
States. Its missile programme is a source of legitimate
concern for many members of the League of Arab
States. The Arab States seek to have good-neighbourly
relations with Iran based on a mutual understanding
of the sovereignty of States and non-interference in
their internal affairs, within a framework that achieves
security for all in the region. However, that goal is still
not within reach.
At a time when the League of Arab States continues
to promote partnership mechanisms with the United
Nations through our meetings on cooperation, we look
forward to further mutual cooperation with the Security
Council in the various areas set forth in presidential
statements S/PRST/2019/5, adopted under the Kuwaiti
presidency of the Council, and S/PRST/2021/2, adopted
under the presidency of the Republic of Tunisia.
I would like to extend a special thanks to the Irish
presidency of the Council in September 2021 as it sought
to implement the contents of the latter presidential
statement, including by convening a successful
ministerial-level meeting on the margins of the General
Assembly high-level segment with the Arab Summit
Troika. The League of Arab States looks forward
to the continuation of that tradition with the French
presidency in September 2022. All of the provisions
of the aforementioned presidential statements must be
implemented, including continued Council field visits
to the League of Arab States members.
That also includes further work to increase the
participation of women and young people in our efforts
to achieve international peace and security in the context
of the welcome support provided by the United Nations
in building the League’s capacity in that important
area. We also look forward to the adoption of another
presidential statement that would enhance international
and regional cooperation to address international and

S/PV.9001

regional challenges, with a focus on the importance of
training young people at the League and throughout the
Arab world. We should provide young people with the
means to shoulder the serious responsibilities that they
will assume in the future.
We support the proposal of the Secretary-General
in his report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982)
to upgrade the status of his Special Envoy on Youth and
to enhance the competencies of that office. As proposed
by certain States, a specialized youth agency could also
be established, based on the model of UN-Women,
which would enhance the major role played by young
people in our Arab communities. Here, I would like
to commend Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil, the first Youth
Representative to the United Nations of her country,
and I look forward to listening to her intervention in
this meeting.
While participating in the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Heads
of States and Governments committed themselves
to fulfilling their promises to future generations and
to making 2021 a year for change. Their declaration
identified 12 areas of international multilateral work
for change, all of which form part of the cooperation
between the Security Council and the League of
Arab States.
The League of Arab States believes that the positive
momentum created by the Secretary-General’s report
Our Common Agenda constitutes the optimal path for
transitioning towards a broader horizon of joint work
within the international community, provided that
there is genuine political will and that we forget about
the past and instead focus on our common interests in
the future. In that connection, I would like to welcome
the establishment of the High-Level Advisory Board
on Effective Multilateralism. We look forward to its
recommendations to enhance and develop collective
work at the multilateral level.
In conclusion, we at the League of Arab States
look forward to the upcoming summit proposed by the
Secretary-General for next year. We stress our readiness
to play an active role in the preparation of the summit.
That would be in the interests of future generations,
who deserve a bright future. Young people would
contribute to such a future, guided by the experience
of previous generations, with a specific vision that
achieves the goals and maintains the particular cultural
characteristics of Arab communities, guaranteeing

22-297285/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

equality in rights and obligations. We will continue
to be committed to the strategic partnership between
the Security Council and the League of Arab States in
order to achieve our common goals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Aboul
Gheit for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Alaqil.
Ms. Alaqil (spoke in Arabic): I would like to greet
all participants by saying peace be upon you from the
youth of the Arab world, carrying a message of hope
from that generation. I am honoured to be here today
and to greet those present with a message of hope and
peace. I travelled here to convey a message on behalf
of more than 100 million young women and men from
the Middle East and North Africa. I am here today
representing one of the largest generations of young
people in history worldwide, as young people in the
Arab world represent 60 per cent of its entire population.
We appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
meeting. I thank the Security Council for giving us this
chance and for listening to the voice of Arab youth.
My generation’s message today is about engaging
young people in effective participation in maintaining
peace to build the future. I will cover the following
main points. First, United Nations and international
resolutions on the inclusion of youth; secondly, the
role of youth in bringing about peace and security
and achieving sustainable development in the region;
thirdly, youth from the Arab world and the Security
Council; and, lastly, some recommendations.
First, on United Nations and international
resolutions on the inclusion of youth, seven years ago in
this very Chamber, the Security Council unanimously
adopted the historic resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security, which seeks to empower young
people to participate in peacebuilding and conflict
resolution. Some important messages were emphasized.
“Recognizing that youth should actively be
engaged in shaping lasting peace and contributing
to justice and reconciliation,” (resolution 2250
(2015), ninth preambular paragraph);
“Urges Member States to consider ways to
increase inclusive representation of youth in
decision-making at all levels” (ibid., para. 1).
In the outcome statement of the Global Youth Summit
2020, presided over by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
6/24

23/03/2022

it was stressed that the Group of 20 should encourage
the role of young people in decision-making because
they are the catalysts for a more just and sustainable
future. In addition, on the item entitled “Empowering
youth”, it emphasized the need to include young people
in decision-making and ensure their representation,
participation and inclusion in decision-making bodies.
We emphasize the participation of young people
at all levels of United Nations work, from preventive
diplomacy to early warning, conflict prevention,
conflict management, peacekeeping, conflict resolution,
peace negotiations and post-conflict peacebuilding,
and in achieving sustainable peace and ensuring the
non-recurrence of conflicts.
Secondly, on the role of youth in bringing
about peace and security and achieving sustainable
development in the region, I say to participants and
my young Arab brothers and sisters who are listening
to me, let me speak from experience. The Security
Council has given my generation this opportunity to
dream of a promising future, filled not only with our
own hopes but also with the hopes of all those in the
Chamber. We believe that the inclusion of youth means
giving us a fair opportunity, based on our knowledge
and our rights, since we are truly qualified not only
to bring value added to important discussions but also
as active members in efforts regarding development
for peace and security in our region and the world.
We should be perceived based on our professional and
vocational capabilities, not just on our age. We should
be considered as competent to participate alongside.
Belief in us — we are of your making — and our
inclusion in actions to maintain peace and security will
enable us to lead the future.
It is therefore necessary to address the main Arab
challenges and dossiers before the Security Council,
which deplete the energy of the Arab world, so that
we can direct financial and human resources towards
development and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that regard,
the roles of the Security Council and the League of
Arab States and the cooperation between them are
pivotal. Including the young generation in such efforts
will enhance sustained efforts to resolve current and
future challenges. In that context, our message is that
we are competent because your generation raised us
this way. We ask that we be included.
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, on youth from the Arab world and
the Security Council, there are a number of Arab
young people who make local efforts that serve their
communities, which is reflected in the development of
the region. The following are just examples and models
among tens of millions. However, in their local work
we can reflect on what can be achieved with regard
to development at the regional level thanks to their
participation in peace and security dialogues based on
their experiences and competence, not their age.
Mr. Sameh Kamel, from the Arab Republic of
Egypt, has been a youth representative at the United
Nations since 2016 and led the establishment of the
Arab Youth Platform for Sustainable Development of
the League of Arab States.
Kazem Karabsheh, from the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, has been working within the initiatives of the
Jordanian Ministry of Youth for years in training young
people on the Sustainable Development Goals.
Omar Al-Mutawa, from the United Arab Emirates,
was the first youth delegate of that country to the United
Nations and dealt with a number of important dossiers.
Hala Al-Khamis, from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, established an association that seeks to spread
the culture of volunteerism and giving in society
and lead change, with thousands of volunteers in the
Kingdom, in order to achieve the 2030 Agenda.
In 2019, the League of Arab States agreed to establish
the Arab Youth Platform for Sustainable Development,
with the membership of all States. The establishment
of the platform is the beginning of efforts to include
young people in sustainable development work towards
achieving the 2030 Agenda for the development of
the region. However, the success and continuity of its
work will be ensured only with continued support for
youth leadership by promoting and enhancing youth
participation in drawing up national and regional
policies and plans through clear mechanisms for
Arab and international action and recognition of the
importance of young people in their implementation.
In that context, in the Security Council, we stress
the importance of youth participation in implementing
United Nations priorities in the three pillars of United
Nations work, namely, maintaining international
peace and security, economic, social and political
development and fundamental freedoms and good
governance, all of which are interlinked and intersect to

S/PV.9001

form the mainstay of multilateral international action
and achieve the desired international peace.
In conclusion, we, the Arab youth generation, are
sending a message to the generation of leaders here
in the Chamber and the world by emphasizing the
following key recommendations.
First, we must ensure the participation of youth
at all levels of the United Nations, from preventive
diplomacy to early warning, conflict prevention,
conflict management, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and peace negotiations and post-conflict peacebuilding,
and in achieving sustainable peace and ensuring the
non-recurrence of conflicts.
Secondly, we must work on resolving the main
Arab challenges before the Security Council, which
are depleting the energy of the Arab world, so
that we can direct financial and human resources
towards development and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda.
Thirdly, we must ensure youth participation in the
implementation of the priorities of the United Nations
in its three main areas of work — the maintenance
of international peace and security; international
economic, social and political development; basic
freedoms and good governance, all of which are
connected, in order to form the pillar of multilateral
international efforts and to bring about the desired
international security.
Fourthly, we must promote youth participation in
the formulation and implementation of national and
regional policies and plans through clear mechanisms
for Arab and international action.
Fifthly, youth participation can never be complete
without the participation of women in all efforts.
We are the youth of the world. Including us
confirms the Council’s belief in our capabilities, and
implementation will ensure opportunities for effective
participation in decision-making for the development of
our communities and will prepare us to lead the future.
I was entrusted to carry the voice of my brothers
and sisters — young Arabs — and I delivered their
message today to the Security Council. My name is
Razan Farhan Alaqil, a young Saudi Arabian woman
and one of more than 100 million young Arabs. I thank
the Council for giving us this opportunity, and we look
forward to future opportunities for participation.

22-297287/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Alaqil
for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the United Arab Emirates.
I thank both Mr. António Guterres, SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, and Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
(LAS), for their valuable briefings on the status of
cooperation between their respective organizations. We
also thank the civil society representative, Ms. Razan
Alaqil, for shedding light on the issues and aspirations
of Arab youth.
Today’s meeting is particularly important because
many of the issues on the Security Council’s agenda
are Arab issues, although some of them have been
on its agenda for decades because the international
community was merely managing these crises rather
than resolving them. The ongoing Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and other crises in Syria, Yemen, Libya, Iraq,
Lebanon, the Sudan and Somalia have imposed a
high political, economic and humanitarian cost on the
region, which further increases the risk of drastically
escalating the situation across the region and the world.
Furthermore, the current challenges and crises,
with their complex and inherently cross-border aspects,
require all stakeholders to make collective efforts at
both regional and international levels. This makes our
meeting important today, which we hope can help to
enhance cooperation between the Security Council and
the League of Arab States to address the outstanding
Arab issues.
The League of Arab States is a standing
organization that yesterday marked 77 years since
its founding in 1945. The LAS also possesses deep
knowledge of regional challenges and the concerns
of its member States. That enables it to play a leading
role in supporting the implementation of the Security
Council’s core mandate to maintain international peace
and security.
It is therefore important to increase coordination
and consultation between the Council and the LAS
and to institutionalize that relationship. Doing so will
require establishing mechanisms for the exchange of
information and viewpoints on how to address various
regional challenges from a realistic and practical
perspective. To that end, the United Nations Liaison
8/24

23/03/2022

Office to the League of Arab States must be strengthened
and empowered with the necessary resources and means
to achieve its objectives. That includes facilitating
cooperation between United Nations bodies and the
LAS and its various subsidiary organs, with a focus on
capacity-building and sharing experiences.
In that context, we support further cooperation
and complementarity in mediation activities between
the envoys of the United Nations and the LAS. We also
support strengthening trilateral cooperation among the
LAS, the United Nations and the African Union.
We also emphasize that any Security Council
approach to resolve regional issues needs to reflect
the concerns of Arab States and consider their views
on resolving them. These States can present a new
perspective to the Council on ways to break the current
stalemate in certain political processes. In that regard,
we stress the importance of working according to the
principle of seeking Arab solutions to Arab issues.
That requires, first and foremost, demanding an end to
foreign interference in Arab affairs. We also stress the
importance of States’ compliance with their obligations
under international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and good-neighbourliness.
As we seek to address the issues of the region,
we recommend that special attention be given to the
following issues.
First, more initiatives and programmes to
strengthen the role of Arab women in peace and security
issues are needed. We are pleased by the appointment
of Ms. Sima Bahous as the first Executive Director of
UN-Women from our region. At the national level, the
United Arab Emirates has launched the Sheikha Fatima
bint Mubarak’s Center for Women, Peace and Security
and a women’s empowerment programme in the fields
of security and peacekeeping, in which a group of Arab
women participate.
Secondly, it is necessary to focus on empowering
youth to play a leading role in addressing existing
challenges in the region and participating in
peacebuilding efforts, especially since approximately
60 per cent of the region’s population is under 25 years
of age. Listening to Ms. Alaqil today is an example of
offering a platform for young people to express their
opinions and concerns on the most important issues
and how to take their views into consideration when
developing solutions for such issues.
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, given the threats posed by extremism and
terrorism to the region, we stress the need for the two
organizations to strengthen joint efforts to combat
extremism and terrorism and to work on supporting
initiatives that encourage peaceful coexistence and
dialogue among religions and cultures in the region.
Fourthly, the Arab region needs enhanced
economic opportunities and the launching of projects
that can achieve development and prosperity for its
peoples and build resilience in the face of various
security and political challenges. We stress the need
for the collaboration between the two organizations to
invest in the future of youth by focusing on areas such
as artificial intelligence, outer space and renewable
energy, which can unlock promising opportunities for
the region away from conflict and war.
In conclusion, we stress the need for the two
organizations to enhance their cooperation in resolving
Arab issues based on clear criteria and on equal basis,
as well as by using all available diplomatic tools and
constructive engagement to end the crises in the region.
We also need to apply wisdom obtained from our
past experiences in order to better respond to current
challenges and move towards achieving stability and
security in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Shringla (India): At the outset, let me extend
my felicitations to His Excellency Mr. Khalifa Shaheen
Almarar, Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates,
for presiding over today’s meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of
Arab States.
I also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States and thank them for their valuable insights.
I would like to thank the representative of civil society,
Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil, for her briefing.
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates for its steadfast
stewardship of the Security Council this month, as
well as for successfully piloting the draft presidential
statement in the Council on United Nations-League of
Arab States cooperation.
For over a millennium, the Arab world has been a
cradle of human civilization, given its strategic location.
Developments in the Arab world have influenced our

S/PV.9001

shared history, and they continue to have a profound
impact globally. The challenges confronted by the
region today and how we address them will have a
critical bearing on international peace and security.
India and the Arab world share a civilizational
relationship, underpinned by strong people-to-people
relations and commercial and cultural ties. Trade
between India and the Arab region through the Indian
Ocean flourished for several centuries, even before the
advent of modern commerce. Not very long ago, the
Indian rupee was legal tender in parts of the Arab world.
Today countries from the Arab world are host to
more than 9 million Indians, and India’s wide-ranging
partnership with these countries encompasses every
aspect of human endeavour, from agriculture, trade,
commerce and education to clean energy, counterterrorism and new technologies.
India and the League of Arab States signed a
memorandum of understanding two decades ago for
institutionalizing a regular dialogue process to forge
a partnership for the future. It led to the creation of
the India-League of Arab States Forum, during which
progressive cooperation in several fields such as
energy, environmental protection, investment, food
security, science and technology, and human resource
development were agreed upon. Several other initiatives
to deepen our engagement with the League of Arab
States have also been conceptualized, including the
Energy Symposium, the Media Symposium and the
first edition of the Arab-India Energy Forum, which
was successfully convened a few months ago.
The League of Arab States has contributed positively
to security and stability in the region. Its States members
are significant troop- and police-contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping forces. The Arab States are
among the largest donors of humanitarian assistance
to countries facing armed conflict in the region. The
League has played an important role in the areas of
mediation and conflict prevention and resolution in
the region.
Today’s meeting provides us with a valuable
opportunity to take a closer look at the cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. We underline that the Arab States can further
contribute to our joint endeavour for peace, for the
sake of the people of the region, in general, and for
women and minorities, in particular. We take note of
the positive trajectory of the cooperation, including

22-297289/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

through the United Nations Liaison Office in Cairo
and the practice of annual briefings by the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council.
In this regard, I would like to submit four
proposals — specific suggestions for consideration
by the Council. First, there must be greater policy
synergy between the two organizations. Regular and
frequent consultations with the League of Arab States
and its members on peace initiatives in the region
would contribute to achieving common solutions and
meaningful outcomes.
Secondly, efforts must be made to achieve
comprehensive coordination at the field level,
especially through regular coordination between the
United Nations special representatives and envoys and
the League of Arab States.
Thirdly, engagement with the League and its
members in post-conflict peacebuilding through
reconstruction and economic development is
equally important.
Fourthly, ensuring the stability of countries
concerned and the region and the welfare of people,
especially women and minorities, should be at the
forefront of all such efforts.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States is of critical importance
when it comes to the Middle East peace process. Both
organizations must make concerted efforts to support
the reactivation of the Middle East peace process, in line
with the two-State solution based on the internationally
agreed framework and previous agreements between the
parties. India welcomes the agreement for normalization
of relations between countries in the region, which we
believe will contribute to greater peace and stability in
the region.
Let me conclude by expressing India’s steadfast
support for a closer, meaningful and sustained
cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for the benefit of the region.
India will continue to partner with the Arab countries
in their efforts to achieve regional peace, stability and
prosperity and will continue to work with the League
of Arab States in combating terrorism and in promoting
tolerance and pluralism.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General, the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States and Ms. Alaqil for their briefings.
10/24

23/03/2022

Regional cooperation has a vital role to play in
conflict prevention. We therefore welcome cooperation
between the United Nations and the Arab League and
thank today’s briefers and the United Arab Emirates
for convening today’s meeting. We also welcome the
imminent adoption of the draft presidential statement
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States.
Sadly, war and conflict continue to scar the
region. The Syrian conflict, for example, has left
14 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.
Al-Assad’s regime bears responsibility for this
tragedy, as it continues to obstruct peace efforts. We
therefore welcome the League’s continued suspension
of Syria’s membership and urge against normalization
with Al-Assad.
In Yemen, 7 million Yemenis are now on the
brink of famine. We therefore call for generous
humanitarian funding and welcome the United Nations
Special Envoy’s consultations. We also condemn the
ongoing Houthi terrorist cross-border attacks on Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, including the
reprehensible attacks on Saudi civilian infrastructure
last week.
We must also remain steadfast in our commitment
to a two-State solution based on the 1967 lines. To end
the conflict, we need both to address the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people and to safeguard
Israel’s security.
In Libya, there was a real risk of escalation that
could unravel the hard-won ceasefire and threaten
stability. We urge both sides of the current impasse
to accept the offer from Special Adviser Stephanie
Williams to facilitate a dialogue. For, as Libya lurches
between political crises, it is the Libyan people who
suffer most. It is therefore incumbent on all of us to
facilitate a path to the elections that the Libyan people
are waiting for.
I would also like to highlight our collective role in
tackling catastrophic climate change, which we know is
a driver of conflict, and, in particular, the role of Egypt
and the United Arab Emirates as they take on their
presidencies for the twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth
sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
respectively. During our own presidency year, we will
work closely with them to ensure that the commitments
made at the twenty-sixth session are delivered.
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has contributed to a
bleak humanitarian picture. As the Secretary-General
has said, for Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, the Sudan and
Yemen, their breadbasket is being bombed. Ukraine
alone provides more than half of the World Food
Programme’s wheat supply. We therefore hope that
Arab League leaders will continue to support all
efforts, including in the General Assembly, to bring an
end to this war.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of Minister
of State Khalifa Shaheen, President of the Security
Council, at today’s meeting.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, for their briefings. We also carefully listened
to the representative of the civil society, Ms. Razan
Farhan Alaqil.
The Middle East and North African region is
experiencing a complex and intense period, owing, inter
alia, to the multiple acute crisis situations that remain
unresolved, often provoked by external interference; the
colonial legacy and its terrible consequences that still
need to be overcome; and the numerous countries that
are still in the throes of political and economic crises
that only strengthen radical attitudes and provoke an
escalation of terrorism and extremism.
Furthermore, the coronavirus pandemic is
exacerbating the already complex socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation in a host of Arab States. The
conflicts in Syria, Libya and Yemen are still raging. We
are seeing tensions in Western Sahara. Urgent steps are
needed to overcome the stalemate on the central question
for the region: the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
In that connection, we think that the Quartet’s role as
international mediator is especially important, and we
call on our colleagues from the Quartet to support our
initiative to convene a ministerial meeting. We hope that
the recent normalization of relations between a number
of Arab States and Israel will not affect the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the achievement of
a just settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on
an internationally recognized basis.
The current situation in the region increases the
need for cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on countering new
challenges, peacekeeping and jointly preventing the

S/PV.9001

escalation of conflicts in the region. Such cooperation
could contribute to the peaceful settlement of existing
disputes without external interference while respecting
the interests of all parties concerned and in accordance
with the norms and provisions of international law.
The Russian Federation has consistently called for
stepping up cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States. In order to strengthen
that cooperation, a United Nations Liaison Office was
opened at the League headquarters in Cairo in 2019.
We are in favour of effectively using of that channel.
We believe it is important to intensify coordination
between the League and United Nations special envoys
in addressing crises in the Arab region with a view to
seeking joint measures to address them.
We reiterate our interest in seeing a strong and
effective League of Arab States and strengthening
the role of Arab States in preventing and resolving
conflicts. We support the participation of all
members of the Arab family in developing solutions
on an equal footing. We recall the relevance of
Syria’s return to the League of Arab States. We are
convinced that such a step would be in the interests
of both Damascus and the organization.
We believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should be based
on the recognition of the leading role that regional
organizations play in identifying ways of resolving
conflicts in that part of the world. Given the
potential of the League of Arab States in spreading
an interreligious and inter-ethnic culture of peace
and combating radical and extremist ideology,
it is important to conduct a dialogue between
the United Nations and the League on the situation of
Christians and other religious and ethnic minorities
affected by conflict.
It is in the interest of all States in the Arab region
and beyond to set aside mutual recrimination and
suspicions, and especially to avoid the use of unilateral
sanctions, pressure and provocations. Unfortunately,
tensions in the Persian Gulf continue unabated, which
has had a destabilizing effect on international relations
as a whole. In that connection, we welcome the declared
intention of leaders of the region to seek diplomatic
solutions to the current problems. We reaffirm our
readiness to assist in every possible way to normalize
the situation in the Persian Gulf, both in our national

22-2972811/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

capacity and in a collective format, including through
cooperation between the League and the United Nations.
In that context, we recall the renewed Russian
concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf
aimed at renouncing confrontational approaches
and promoting a constructive, unifying agenda. Our
initiative is an invitation to dialogue, in which the
League of Arab States can play an important role.
Russia will continue to strengthen its partnership
and cooperation with the League of Arab States on the
most urgent international and regional issues.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate, and we thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Secretary-General Aboul Gheit and Ms. Alaqil, the
living voice of civil society, for their briefings.
Today’s debate provides an opportunity to continue
to identify common ground and create synergies
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States with a view to resolving conflicts in their
member countries.
As Mexico has maintained over the years,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is natural and, at the same time,
essential — essential to promote social and human
development, mutual understanding and peace through
prevention and addressing the structural causes
underlying conflicts.
Challenges to international peace and security
also require that the actions taken at the global level,
including those agreed upon by the Security Council,
be supported by actions at the regional level. In that
regard, Mexico recognizes the efforts of the League of
Arab States in response to the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We consider it especially important to work in a
coordinated manner to settle conflicts that have been
unresolved for a long time, such as those in Yemen,
Syria and Palestine. It is equally important to ensure
that elections be held in Lebanon on 15 May. In that
connection, we commend the participation of an
electoral observation mission of the League. We also
believe that the League’s unequivocal support is an
important factor in the strengthening of institutions
in Iraq.
12/24

23/03/2022

Mexico also recognizes the role that the League
plays as co-Chair of the political working group of
the International Follow-up Committee to the Berlin
Conference on Libya. In that regard, the League’s
support for the good offices and mediation led by
the United Nations to resolve the political stalemate
through dialogue is critical, so as to move towards a
successful transition.
In the face of emerging conflicts and increasing
humanitarian demands, the timely intervention of
regional organizations will be increasingly important.
Mexico recognizes the efforts of the League’s
member countries in their financial contributions to
humanitarian response plans in the region. We are sure
that they will continue with their efforts.
We welcome the recent appointment of the Head
of the United Nations Liaison Office to the League of
Arab States in Cairo. We believe that is an important
step towards the institutional strengthening between
the two organizations.
Mexico reiterates the importance of following up on
resolution 2532 (2019), which reaffirms the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire. At the same time,
we call for a redoubling of efforts to jointly promote
initiatives in the areas of counter-terrorism; combating
illicit flows of arms and the effective implementation of
Security Council arms embargoes; the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda and the
youth, peace and security agenda; the impacts of climate
change as a factor in exacerbating conflict; and the use
of early-warning and conflict prevention mechanisms.
In conclusion, cooperation with regional
organizations that promotes mutual trust to avoid
security misperceptions favours preventive diplomacy
and mediation as viable alternatives for finding
sustainable peaceful solutions.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I thank Minister Shaheen
and express my sincere thanks also to the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States for their remarks. I also thank Ms. Alaqil
for bringing the perspective of young people and
women to bear on our deliberations. We have heard her
important messages to us here today. As she said, that
is where our future hopes lie, and I have to say that if
there are 100 million out there like her, I think that our
hopes will be well looked after.
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes the crucial role of regional organizations in
the maintenance of peace and security. Ireland’s own
history and national experience mean that we deeply
appreciate the vital contribution of such organizations
in building and sustaining peace. Our membership of
the European Union was central to our development
and growth. Moreover, the European Union played a
key role in the journey to peace and reconciliation on
the island of Ireland.
Ireland attaches the highest importance to the role
of the League of Arab States, and we look forward to
the adoption of the presidential statement this morning
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. Our commitment to the League
of Arab States was reflected in the programme of
our own Council presidency, last September, when
our Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence, Simon
Coveney, was pleased to chair an informal interactive
dialogue between members of this Council and the Arab
Summit Troika. The United Nations and the League of
Arab States have much to learn from each other as they
work on the vital task of the maintenance of peace and
security in the region.
Ireland welcomes the recent appointment of
Ms. Tamara Al-Zayyat as Head of the United Nations
Liaison Office to the League of Arab States. As we
heard, she is doing valuable work in helping to create
synergies between the two secretariats on a range of
important issues. One of those issues, both for the region
and indeed beyond, is the relationship between climate
change and insecurity. That is an area where we see
potential for increased cooperation, and we welcome
the Secretary-General’s remarks that this will be the
subject of the sectoral meeting between the League and
the United Nations.
Ireland firmly underlines the urgent need for
lasting political solutions to disputes and conflicts in
the region. We echo the call of the United Arab Emirates
for innovative approaches to strengthening conflict
prevention and mediation in the region in support of the
Council’s own efforts.
In Libya, the deterioration of the situation on
the ground since the postponement of elections last
December is of grave concern. All actors have a
responsibility to safeguard the progress that the Libyan
people, supported by the international community, have
worked so hard to achieve.

S/PV.9001

In Yemen, innocent civilians have suffered for far
too long; only a negotiated political solution will bring
peace. Negotiations towards peace can take place only
when there is a serious effort towards de-escalation
in violence. All parties to that conflict are bound by
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
I also wish to reiterate here Ireland’s condemnation in
the strongest terms of the cross-border attacks against
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
This month marks 11 years of devastating conflict
in Syria. It is critical that now more than ever the
parties adhere to a permanent nationwide ceasefire, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015). That remains the only
basis for a sustainable political solution.
As a leading troop contributor to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon since 1978, Ireland remains
resolutely committed to the stability of Lebanon as its
people grapple with complex political and economic
challenges. We urge the holding of elections as scheduled
on 15 May this year and the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Council.
In those countries and others in the region, we
are, sadly, seeing an increasingly grave humanitarian
and food security crisis. As the Secretary-General has
told us, Ukraine alone provides more than half of the
World Food Programme’s wheat supply. Russia’s illegal
invasion of Ukraine has driven up food and commodity
prices, which will compound the humanitarian misery
for millions of people.
Finally, a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains a key element for regional and global security.
In the absence of positive political progress, we must
guard against the potential for disillusionment and
despair to take hold, especially among young people.
International and regional actors must recommit to the
imperative of a two-State solution as the only way to
guarantee a stable, sustainable peace between Israelis
and Palestinians. That would be to the benefit of all
people in the region.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me thank you, Minister of
State Shaheen, for your statement and for personally
presiding over this important meeting here today. We
are also very appreciative of the briefings by SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit.
I also thank Ms. Razan Alaqil for her timely remarks.
Yesterday marked 77 years since the foundation
of the League of Arab States. Let me extend Norway’s

22-2972813/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

congratulations to the organization and its member
States. Norway strongly supports enhanced cooperation
and dialogue between the Security Council and the
Arab League as an essential part of peace and security
in the region. Organizations such as the Arab League
are vital for facilitating dialogue, building consensus
and bridging differences among States. We would
welcome a more prominent role played by the Arab
League in promoting stability, peace and reconciliation
in the region, in cooperation with other regional and
international partners.
We are pleased to see an emphasis placed today
on the role of youth. As Ms. Alaqil’s briefing to the
Council demonstrates, youth can be agents of positive
change in their communities and are key to building a
more inclusive, sustainable and effective peace.
You asked us, Mr. President, to identify the progress
made and avenues for enhanced partnership. Let me
offer four suggestions.
First, it is clear that implementing the youth,
peace and security agenda can be a collective effort
throughout the Middle East and North Africa region.
Indeed, there are already a few national youth, peace
and security coalitions, including in Iraq and Jordan.
But we believe that further partnership between the
United Nations and the Arab League on enhancing the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) throughout
the region would be a valuable way to share lessons
learned, build capacity and support the participation of
youth in regional peace and security efforts.
Secondly, enhanced collaboration on children and
armed conflict needs to be central to the partnership
between the League of Arab States and the United
Nations. Strengthening mediation efforts that are
sensitive to the issue of children and armed conflict,
as well as the prevention of grave violations against
children, are particularly promising joint endeavours,
including, of course, protecting education from attack.
Thirdly, another area for further cooperation could
be through coordination on issues related to climate
and security. We are pleased to note next week’s Middle
East and North Africa climate week, hosted by the
United Arab Emirates, in partnership with many global
and regional partners, including the United Nations and
the Arab League.
Multilateral forums that showcase innovative
climate action in the Arab region and deepen
14/24

23/03/2022

multi-stakeholder approaches — putting civil society
at the forefront — are key to addressing the adverse
impacts of climate change, which indeed knows
no borders.
Fourthly, let me highlight the important role
that women in Arab States must play in building
regional peace and security. Joint efforts between
the Arab League and UN-Women — such as the
Arab Women Mediators Network and the Emergency
Committee for Protection for Women during Armed
Conflicts — are strategic opportunities for furthering
the regional implementation of women and peace and
security resolutions.
Moreover, we support efforts to intensify contact
and coordination between all relevant United Nations
Special Envoys and the Arab League, in order to
advance a safe and enabling environment for women’s
meaningful participation and decision-making in peace
processes and underscoring the importance of a human
rights-based approach to peacebuilding.
In conclusion, we are hopeful that enhancing the
partnership between the United Nations and the Arab
League can play an important role in deepening peace
and security in the region.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to thank the
United Arab Emirates for convening today’s important
meeting. I also welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Harsh Vardhan Shringla, Foreign Secretary
of India.
I would like to express gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres; the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit; and Ms. Razan
Farhan Alaqil for their briefings.
I equally welcome the participation of the
representative of Yemen in today’s meeting.
Consistent with its foreign policy objectives and
in keeping with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, on regional arrangements,
Ghana strongly supports the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We believe that
regional arrangements or mechanisms, with their
unique and invaluable knowledge of the regions they
represent, make vital contributions to securing our
collective security. It is imperative, therefore, that we
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9001

encourage the sustenance of such strategic cooperation
and coordination.

solutions to the conflicts and crises facing the Middle
East and North Africa.

In that context, Ghana will continue to actively and
constructively support initiatives by the Security Council
to help further cement the veritable partnership between
the United Nations and all regional and subregional
organizations, including with the League of Arab States,
on the range of issues requiring urgent consideration,
such as early warning on potential conflict situations,
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
sustaining peace, addressing the root causes of conflict,
counter-terrorism, vaccine equity and justice, as well
as addressing the climate emergency. We also welcome
the commitments made today to the women and peace
and security agenda and the youth, peace and security
agenda in that context.

Thirdly, never has it been more necessary than
now to recall that, while the Charter confers on the
Council the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, it also permits
regional arrangements to deal with matters pertaining
to the maintenance of international peace and security
as lie within their competence. Therefore, by utilizing
avenues for regular consultations with the League
of Arab States and other regional arrangements, the
Council can be more effective in discharging its
mandate, especially in situations where arguments for
subsidiarity are stronger and clearer.

In that regard, we are pleased to note the principles
of the 22-member League of Arab States, in particular
on conflicts, including those in the Arab League region,
which are required to be settled by peaceful means, with
full respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned and
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In contributing to this agenda item, we would like
to make the following additional points.
First, Ghana believes that, in these times of
heightened global tensions, the continued engagement
and leadership of the League of Arab States will be
critical to containing any new conflict situations and
flare-ups in the Arab region, as well as addressing the
prevailing security challenges. We therefore encourage
greater diplomatic engagement by the League in
the conflicts in the region, in collaboration with the
Security Council, through its conflict resolution tools
and strategies.
Secondly, we commend the framework of trilateral
cooperation under the auspices of the United Nations,
the African Union and the League of Arab States,
and welcome efforts to enhance consultations in
addressing some of the intractable conflicts with which
we continue to grapple. We believe that a deepened
partnership with the League of Arab States will help
create the desired conditions for tackling some of the
cross-regional peace and security issues effectively, as
it is evident that sustainable peace will continue to be
elusive without effective coordination and collaborative

In conclusion, we are mindful of the complexities
that cooperation with regional arrangements entail
and, as a result, Ghana will continue its efforts to
identify gaps and propose guidelines to enhance
complementarity between the United Nations and
regional organizations. Those efforts are a continuing
endeavour and will benefit greatly from the partnership
and solidarity of all Council members, the wider United
Nations membership and relevant international actors,
including the League of Arab States.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I should like to begin by
thanking Secretary-General Guterres and the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, for their briefings.
I would also like to welcome youth briefer
Razan Farhan Alaqil to the Security Council and to
acknowledge the value of civil society in enriching
discussions in the Chamber.
We are very pleased to hear from our speakers about
the value of strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and the Arab League and the progress
that has been made in that regard, based on the two
previous presidential statements (S/PRST/2019/5 and
S/PRST/2021/2).
The United Nations is on the front lines in
addressing many challenges, but it cannot solve them
alone. Regional organizations serve as the building
blocks of global peace and security. We value the
cooperation between the United Nations and the Arab
League. As mentioned by the Secretary-General and
other members of the Council, there is no end to the
list of pressing challenges facing the Middle East. We
value the role of the United Arab Emirates in enhancing

22-2972815/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

cooperation between the United Nations and the Arab
League to meet those challenges.
We appreciate the fact that improving partnerships
and cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations has become an increasingly prominent
theme for the Security Council. We should aim to discuss
concrete ways to strengthen cooperation between the
Council and the Arab League in the areas of conflict
prevention, preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and counter-terrorism, as well as to
promote the role of women and youth in maintaining
regional and international peace and security. We
believe that the opening of the United Nations Liaison
Office to the Arab League will help in that regard.
We support the youth briefer in proposing ways for
the United Nations and the Arab League to advance
the implementation of the youth, peace and security
agenda and jointly address challenges facing youth in
the Middle East and North Africa. The Arab League
can further promote inclusivity and a greater role for
civil society. We commend its focus on youth and on
promoting diverse societies within its member States.
We also strongly encourage the Arab League
to further promote women’s empowerment and
participation in decision-making processes at all levels,
as well as to engage with civil society and human rights
organizations in a constructive and transformative
manner. We would also welcome enhanced trilateral
coordination among the United Nations, the African
Union and the League of Arab States on cross-regional
peace and security issues.
All new conflicts in the region, from the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to the conflicts in Yemen, Syria,
Libya and the volatile situation in Lebanon, require a
Herculean effort to resolve them. In our view, the Arab
League is well positioned to bring together Arab States
to address those challenges.
The Middle East is not immune to broader tensions
and conflicts elsewhere. The Russian invasion of
Ukraine is already having an impact on the many
challenges that the States of the Arab League face. As
mentioned by Secretary-General Guterres, it directly
threatens food security in the region, the daily bread of
millions of people. The Russian invasion exacerbates
the suffering and misery for millions of Arabs. We
must be united in our resolve to confront aggression
and violent conflict everywhere for our world to move
towards a peaceful, just and sustainable future.
16/24

23/03/2022

In this period, Albania stands ready to work together
with the League of Arab States to enhance cooperation
with the United Nations, and with the Security Council
in particular. We look forward to the new presidential
statement in that regard.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by thanking
Secretary-General António Guterres and SecretaryGeneral Ahmed Aboul Gheit for their insightful
briefings. We also thank Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil for
her valuable contribution to our conversation.
Brazil and Arab countries share deep social,
cultural and economic ties, as well as similar views on
many topics on the international agenda. The League
of Arab States is a traditional partner of our country.
Its first permanent delegation in Brazil was opened
in 1956 and, since then, the relationship with the
organization and with each of its member countries has
gained increasing importance. With the inauguration
of our Embassy in Manama in November, Brazil now
has Embassies in the capitals of 17 of the League’s
22 member States — a fact that underlines our evergrowing ties with Arab countries.
The Arab League plays an extremely important
role in voicing the interests and aspirations of Arab
countries in various forums, especially at the United
Nations. For that reason, we support the Security
Council’s initiative to recognize its positive influence
in the prevention and mediation of regional conflicts
and to support the strengthening of cooperation and
strategic coordination between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States in various fields, such as
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We also welcome the reference to the efforts of
the League of Arab States to implement the women
and peace and security agenda, including through
the development of a regional action plan for women
and peace and security and the youth, peace and
security agenda.
Many of the conflicts in the Arab world were
created or exacerbated by forces outside the region,
while the interests and well-being of Arab peoples
are — most of the time — side-lined. The Arab League
has raised its voice in favour of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its member States through
moderation and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
It is essential that the Council draw on the League’s
experience and wisdom to find balanced solutions to
the region’s problems. Brazil recognizes and values the
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

experience of the League of Arab States in mediating
conflicts in the region and supports its engagement
with the Council in that regard.
Finally, I would like to congratulate the United
Arab Emirates delegation on the presidential statement
to be adopted by the Council today. We believe that it
reflects the organization’s relevance in the preservation
of peace and security in its area of activity and the broad
scope for cooperation with other United Nations bodies.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I want to thank Secretary-General Guterres;
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit; and Ms. Alaqil for their
informative presentations. I particularly appreciate
Ms. Alaqil’s message from youth in the Arab world. I
also welcome the presence of Minister Shaheen.
The Security Council has a critical responsibility
to respond to the scourge of war and to threats to
international peace and security. To that end, the United
States fully supports the ongoing efforts to enhance
coordination between the Council and the League of
Arab States. Together, we can work to further a stable,
prosperous and secure Middle East.
In that vein, we welcome the League’s ongoing
engagement in a range of protracted conflicts that
continue to upend regional stability and create multiple
complex humanitarian crises, including in Libya, Syria
and Yemen. We also deeply appreciate the important
role played by League member States in pushing back
on Iran’s destabilizing behaviour in the region. The
United States applauds those members that recently
normalized relations with Israel, including the Abraham
Accords countries.
I especially want to thank the League of Arab
States for its contributions as a member of the Global
Coalition against Da’esh. The Coalition has brought
together 83 countries and international organizations
to ensure the enduring defeat of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham.
As we continue to respond to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) around the world, we are also grateful to the
League of Arab States for its participation in President
Biden’s first global COVID-19 summit on ending the
pandemic. We look forward to our engagement with
Arab health ministers later this month.
The United States has led the world in supporting
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)

S/PV.9001

Facility and donating vaccines to countries in need.
We have sent nearly 38.5 million doses to League of
Arab States members, in partnership with COVAX.
COVID-19 remains an immediate global priority, and
we value opportunities to further engage with the
League and its member States on its critical work.
But, as we deal with the pandemic, we must also
stay laser-focused on another great threat, namely,
the climate crisis. As part of that work, we welcome
the opportunity to strengthen our collective climate
ambitions and accelerate progress towards achieving
the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
We encourage all League of Arab States members to
join over 111 other countries in endorsing the Global
Methane Pledge, with the global collective goal of
reducing methane by 30 per cent by 2030.
The United States is also encouraged by joint efforts
undertaken by UN-Women and the League of Arab
States to support League member States in developing
and implementing national action plans on women and
peace and security. We also welcome the League’s
efforts to aid the region’s youth. We heard Ms. Alaqil’s
voice very loudly and, once again, we appreciate her
bringing the recommendations of youth to this forum.
When young people lack access to opportunities,
when they are marginalized or discriminated against
and when they face security threats, they become
more susceptible to recruitment by criminal and
terrorist groups.
Finally, it is deeply regrettable that we meet at a
time when the Security Council’s ability to carry out its
mandate has been undermined by one of its permanent
members. The United States condemns, in the strongest
terms possible, Russia’s premeditated, unprovoked and
increasingly devastating invasion of Ukraine. We must
stand united in the face of President Putin’s illegal
war. In that spirit, the United States appreciates that
a majority of members of the League of Arab States
supported the General Assembly resolution on Ukraine,
adopted on 2 March (resolution ES‑11/1).
But make no mistake: Russia’s war has global
implications. Russia’s devastation of Ukraine’s
agricultural fields and its blockade of ports have already
hurt global food security. That is having an impact on
the Arab world, including in Yemen, a country that has
already endured immense humanitarian suffering. We
hope to work with the League of Arab States and other

22-2972817/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

23/03/2022

members to ensure that the consequences of Russia’s
aggression are addressed.

Arab States and the African Union Commission on the
following issues.

The humanitarian situation in Syria today remains
dire, with nearly 15 million people in the country in
need of assistance. We thank Syria’s neighbours for
their incredible generosity in hosting Syrian refugees.

First is support for a Libya-led peace and political
transition in a manner that is in accord with the national
context and the specific security needs of the Libyan
people, neighbouring States and the region.

It is clear that we face a host of challenges, but we
cannot focus on one challenge and forget so many others
that we are dealing with. Secretary-General Aboul
Gheit reminded us of that in his remarks. However, by
acting together, I have no doubt that we will be better
poised to meet the moment, to meet all of the challenges
that we face and to find solutions moving forward.

Secondly, we must ensure continued support for the
implementation of the political agreement in the Sudan
that respects the important role that the Horn of Africa
countries have played.

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, and
Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil, for their briefings.
We are living in extraordinarily dangerous
times. Our multilateral order is struggling to live up
to its responsibilities. Kenya therefore believes that
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States must become more ambitious if it
is to be fit for purpose. It may well be that Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and its embrace of the
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
are what will ultimately rescue multilateralism.
Today I will focus on how cooperation can be more
responsive to transnational terrorism and political
stabilization and, in particular, on militant or terrorist
groups that utilize cross-border attacks to enhance their
prestige for ideological and recruitment purposes, even
as they are engaged in national mediation efforts.
African countries constitute nearly half of the
membership of the League of Arab States. It is therefore
logical that we add the African Union to achieve a
trilateral framework that builds on, and coordinates
with, the Security Council’s cooperation with both
regions. In that regard, Kenya welcomes this year’s draft
presidential statement recognizing the importance of
that approach, and we urge the further strengthening of
the trilateral consultations and coordination regarding
cross-regional peace and security issues.
We especially look forward to impactful outcomes
from the fifth Arab-African summit, to be held in
Riyadh, and the tenth General Cooperation Meeting
between the General Secretariat of the League of
18/24

Thirdly, we must encourage timely elections that
enable a strengthened Federal Government of Somalia.
Cooperation should also aim to limit the ability of
Al-Shabaab to penetrate the State and aid programmes
and giving it any political legitimacy. The common aim
should be to raise the costs of Al-Shabaab conducting
terrorist attacks in Somalia and abroad, its use of foreign
terrorist fighters and its ideological commitment to
undermining the territorial integrity of multiple States.
Fourthly, we must strengthen the ability of security
forces in the Horn of Africa, the Lake Chad basin and
the Sahel to carry out counter-insurgency operations
and counter-terrorism.
Fifthly, we must ensure collective and coordinated
measures to secure the maritime domain, especially
the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean,
to ensure that those waterways are free from piracy,
terrorism and any dangerous naval confrontations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s support for a
robust cooperative relationship between the League of
Arab States and the Security Council.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I welcome the presence of the United Arab
Emirates Minister this morning and thank him for his
briefing. I also welcome the presence of SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Secretary-General Aboul
Gheit and thank them for their briefings. I also thank
Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil for her hopeful testimony.
The United Nations needs to cooperate with
regional organizations. They work closest to the ground
and are best placed to find effective solutions to resolve
and prevent conflicts.
The region continues to face major threats. I am
thinking first and foremost of terrorism, with the
resurgence of Da’esh in particular. We must adapt
our action on the ground in the context of the Global
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9001

Coalition against Da’esh, in combating the financing of
terrorism, in fighting against the use of the Internet for
terrorist purposes and in respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law. We must also prevent
conflicts by responding to the legitimate aspirations of
populations in the social, economic and political fields
in particular.

resolutions, the agreed parameters and international
law. We will continue to work to re-establish a political
vision and preserve the humanitarian space. We call on
the Arab League and its members to fully play their
part in funding the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as the
organization has pledged to do.

Climate change exacerbates all those vulnerabilities.
In the Arab world, the advance of desertification, the
increase in droughts and the growth of water insecurity
are now a reality. Mitigating them and adapting to them
are an integral part of the struggle for international
peace and security.

In Yemen, we need to achieve a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution, which is the only way
to end the war and the humanitarian catastrophe that
the population is suffering with full force. All parties,
particularly the Houthis, must commit in good faith
to negotiations to ensure full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access.

Food insecurity is also dramatically back in the
spotlight. In the Middle East, Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine raises fears of major food shortages.
Russia’s war against Ukraine will continue to have
direct consequences for all the populations that depend
on it for their supplies.
Political and inclusive solutions are therefore now
more necessary than ever to put an end to the conflicts
and to work for the stability of the entire region.
France welcomes the initiatives of the League of
Arab States to strengthen the rule of law and to ensure
inclusive political processes, enabling the participation
of women and young people in particular. In terms of
electoral assistance and observation, we welcome the
cooperation between the United Nations and the Arab
League on the occasion of the Iraqi legislative elections
of 10 October 2021. The holding of free and transparent
elections in Lebanon on 15 May, according to the
established timetable, will also be crucial to ensuring
stability in the region.
In Syria, the war is far from over. Only a political
solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can bring
about lasting peace. Without a robust political process,
our position on reconstruction and on the lifting of
sanctions will remain unchanged. We are opposed to
any rehabilitation of the Syrian regime, which is why
we welcome the League’s maintenance of a principled
and demanding position on the reintegration of Syria
into the League. We will continue our commitment
to the fight against impunity for crimes committed
in Syria.
In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, France
consistently defends the two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as its capital, as defined by Council

In Libya, the political crisis can be resolved
only through continued political dialogue, with firm
condemnation of any use of force. A new road map for
the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections
as soon as possible must be developed. That is the only
solution for the long-term stabilization of the country.
In the Sudan, we also support the facilitation
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
promote dialogue between the Sudanese parties.
France will spare no efforts in giving regional
dialogue initiatives a chance. That was the case
last August with the Baghdad conference. Another
conference will take place this year. In order to ease
tensions, it is more urgent than ever to conclude the
agreement on a return to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. France will remain mobilized in support of
security, stabilization and the de-escalation of tensions
in the region, including in the Gulf, where we will
continue to strive to safeguard freedom of navigation.
To address these many challenges, the concerted,
unified support of the international community,
particularly the members of the Arab League, for
United Nations efforts remains absolutely essential,
both politically and in terms of funding.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the United Arab Emirates for its initiative to
convene today’s meeting. I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Shaheen, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of
the United Arab Emirates, to New York to preside over
this meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Secretary-General Aboul Gheit and Ms. Alaqil for
their briefings. I also welcome the participation of the

22-2972819/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Permanent Representative of Yemen in his capacity as
Chair of the Group of Arab States.
China looks forward to the Security Council’s
adoption of the draft presidential statement on
strengthening cooperation with the League of Arab
States (LAS). We believe that the statement will promote
cooperation between the two sides in areas such as
addressing the root causes of conflict, employing
good offices as mediation and countering terrorism.
We look forward to the brief report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General on cooperation between the
Security Council and the League, as per the presidential
statement, so as to develop ideas and create conditions
for deepening cooperation between the two sides.
Security and development have long been the two
principal goals pursued by Arab countries. Achieving
national and regional peace, stability and prosperity
is a common aspiration of the Arab people. The
international community should play a constructive
role in supporting Arab countries to independently
explore development paths that are in line with their
national conditions and independently determine the
destiny of their countries.
The League has in-depth knowledge of the
historical traditions, geographic environment and the
political and security situation of the countries of the
region, affording it a unique advantage in addressing
regional affairs. The United Nations should deepen its
cooperation with the League and put into practice the
essence of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The Security Council should give attention to the
views of the LAS and encourage a regional approach
to the settlement of regional disputes. In September,
the Security Council held its first informal dialogue
with the LAS troika, which achieved very good results.
Such dialogue should continue, with more flexible and
diverse formats. China encourages the relevant Special
Representatives and Special Envoys to strengthen
communication and maintain coordination with the
League so as to build synergies.
The question of Palestine has always been at
the heart of the Middle East issue. The international
situation is constantly evolving. However, under no
circumstances should the question of Palestine be
marginalized. We hope that Palestine and Israel will
take the recent high-level contact as an opportunity to
gradually build mutual trust, gather momentum and
20/24

23/03/2022

restart dialogue on an equal footing at an early date.
We hope that there will be greater intra-Palestinian
unity in order to achieve reconciliation and develop a
unified negotiating position. China commends the just
position of the League and its members on the question
of Palestine. The United Nations and the Security
Council should coordinate peace efforts with the LAS
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and international consensus
and must persevere in the efforts to advance the Middle
East peace process.
The conflict in Syria, now in its eleventh year, has
brought about irreparable harm to the Syrian people.
The presence of millions of Syrian refugees has put
enormous pressure on the neighbouring Arab countries,
such as Lebanon and Jordan. There are profound lessons
to be learned from the Syrian crisis. The seventh round
of the Constitutional Committee’s core group meeting
is being held in Geneva. We look forward to the meeting
making concrete progress and advancing the Syrian-led
and -owned political process. China is pleased to see
that more and more Arab countries are supportive of
the return of Syria to the League of Arab States. We
believe that its return would contribute to the early and
comprehensive settlement of the Syrian issue.
For some time now, Libya has seen the intensification
of internal divisions and problems. The momentum
for a political settlement that began last year has
since slowed, resulting in increasing uncertainty and
instability. We hope that all parties will stay committed
to the general direction of a political solution, maintain
peace and stability in Libya, reach consensus on
important issues concerning the future and destiny of
the country as soon as possible and hold elections at an
early date. The political process in Libya must follow
the Libyan-led and -owned principle. China supports
the League’s efforts to strengthen communication and
coordination with the United Nations and the African
Union through the Libya quartet and to play a more
active and constructive role in advancing the political
process in Libya.
In order to achieve security and stability in the
Gulf region, it is necessary to take into account the
legitimate concerns of all parties. China put forth an
initiative to establish a multilateral dialogue platform
in the Gulf region. Issues relating to the safeguarding
of oil facilities, civilian infrastructure and waterway
security could be the initial topics for discussion on the
basis of which a common comprehensive cooperative
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and sustainable security architecture can be gradually
built. We stand ready to maintain communication
with the LAS and the Gulf Cooperation Council in
that regard.
There is a long-standing friendship between China
and Arab countries. We fought side by side in the
struggle for national independence. We cooperate with
one another in the course of building our respective
countries. With a good partnership that delivers mutual
benefits, we are good brothers who help and support
one another. China has always kept the peace and
development of the Arab world close to its heart. China’s
State Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang
Yi has visited the Middle East and the North African
region several times in the past two years in order to
promote dialogue to resolve hotspot issues for regional
security and common security.
In the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
China has been working with Arab countries to promote
cooperation in vaccine production and in drug research
and development. China has also accelerated the
establishment of free trade zones with Gulf countries,
which will positively boost the post-virus recovery and
promote development in the Middle East. China will
continue to work hand in hand with Arab countries in
order to promote the building of a community with a
shared future for China and other States.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I welcome
your participation, Minister Shaheen Almarar, in
presiding over this debate, which allows us to recall
our firm conviction that regional and subregional
organizations are essential players in the response to
international crises and conflicts and that the regional
narrative must be central in the consideration of matters
submitted to the Security Council.
I thank Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, and Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, as well as Ms. Razan Farhan Alaqil, for their
informative briefings.
The choice of addressing this topic highlights
the positive role played by the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States is one of the issues regularly
discussed within the Council. As recently as last year,
in January to be precise, the Council held an important
debate (see S/2021/66) to hammer home the essential
partnership between the two entities, created the same
year with a series of objectives related to ensuring
international peace and security.
Since their creation in 1945, cooperation between
the United Nations and the Arab League has continued
to take shape over the years, encompassing different
aspects such as conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, disarmament, the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism, the
protection of human rights, the coordination of
humanitarian aid and the promotion of economic and
sociopolitical development.
More recently, the two organizations jointly
advocated against the effects of the current health crisis
and climate change. In addition, the United Nations
established a Liaison Office to the Arab League and,
recently, appointed its leadership. We welcome that step.
Beyond those achievements, the turmoil in the
region covered by the Arab League and the magnitude
of the issues involved call for even closer cooperation,
particularly in the search for solutions to the cyclical
crises in Syria, Yemen, Libya, the Sudan, Somalia
and the Sahel, as well as for the peace process in the
Middle East.
It is important to go beyond the periodic meetings
set forth in the presidential statements adopted by the
Council in June 2019 (S/PRST/2019/5) and January
2021 (S/PRST/2021/2) and to effectively strengthen
cooperation through trilateral interaction among the
United Nations, the Arab League and the African Union
on cross-cutting peace and security concerns.
Almost half of the Arab population lives in Africa.
That sociological reality seals the shared destiny
between the Arab League and the African Union.
That shared destiny also means a shared narrative
in applying endogenous solutions to regional crises,
naturally involving young people, as Secretary-General
Aboul Gheit and Ms. Razan Alaqil have pointed out.
Notwithstanding the diversity of approaches within
the Arab League and the dynamics of fragmentation
within the Council on the region’s security challenges,
cooperation between the United Nations and the

22-2972821/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Arab League in particular — and among regional
organizations in general — must remain at the heart of
the global agenda for the settlement of crises.
Such a cooperation dynamic is all the more necessary
because in a security context marked by multifaceted
crises — and exacerbated by an unprecedented
pandemic — the number of requests made of the United
Nations, together with the increasingly regional nature
of these crises, requires the Organization to be better
connected to the realities on the ground in order to
make its actions more effective. It goes without saying
that the involvement of regional actors alongside the
United Nations makes it possible to strengthen the
effectiveness of stabilization processes and to better
understand persistent threats.
While it is true that, through its actions in recent
years, the United Nations has made real efforts to
engage in regional and subregional partnerships, the
multiplicity of crises and their increasingly complex
nature require us to do more. I would like to address
three key directions for a more productive partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in general, and between the
Organization and the Arab League in particular.
First, the United Nations-Arab League partnership
must be based on complementarity and comparative
advantages. In addition to the advantage of in-depth
knowledge of their regions, regional and subregional
organizations are, through their regional mechanisms,
able to mobilize and deploy rapidly on the ground. That
requires stable and predictable financial, logistical and
technical support as well as capacity-building.
Secondly, cooperation must be based on better
coordination
and
communication.
Terrorism,
transnational crime, humanitarian crises and natural
disasters are all complex and interdependent challenges
that require the involvement of several actors, and
therefore regular and rapid exchange of information.
Thirdly, coherent crisis-management and crisisresolution mechanisms, with clearly defined tasks and
responsibilities among the various actors, need to be
established. That would allow for the development
of agreed policies between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a view to
dealing effectively with crisis situations.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome at the end of
our debate today the adoption of the draft presidential
22/24

23/03/2022

statement submitted by the United Arab Emirates and
call once again for strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, including interregional partnerships.
One of the main benefits of doing so would be to support
the United Nations in one of its central missions, namely,
the maintenance of peace and security in the world.
It is essential today to achieve synergy of action
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Such synergy would be a decisive step
towards the fulfilment of our international commitments
and our common will to considerably improve collective
security, particularly through conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to make this statement on behalf of the Group
of Arab States.
I would like to extend our sincere thanks to the
sisterly United Arab Emirates for holding this important
meeting and for all its efforts aimed at representing the
issues of the Arab Group in the Security Council. I
should also like to thank His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, and Ms. Razan
Farhan Alaqil for their valuable briefings.
We meet today as the world is facing mounting
complications and international crises that pose multiple
challenges. Those crises and challenges have effects on
Arab States that already suffer crises and challenges
at the political, security, economic and social levels.
The crises in Arab States represent a threat to regional
and international peace and security. Accordingly, they
became items on the Council’s agenda, taking up a
great deal of time and effort.
The Council seeks to find peaceful and lasting
solutions to those crises, with a view to putting an end
to the suffering of the peoples in crisis and restoring
security and stability in the region. The League of Arab
States has always played an effective role in resolving
those crises and addressing challenges in Arab States.
We believe in the important role played by regional
organizations working side by side with the United
Nations through common and concerted efforts aimed at
finding comprehensive and lasting solutions to regional
22-29728

23/03/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

crises, as they are better equipped to understand the
root causes and intricacies of those crises.
While cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States is outstanding, that
cooperation can, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, be enhanced to reach
the levels needed to effectively address the growing
challenges in our region. In that regard, the Arab Group
would like to stress the following points.
First, consultations and formal and informal
meetings between the Security Council and members
of the League of Arab States need to be intensified, for
the purpose of exchanging views regarding the Arab
issues on the Council’s agenda. In line with presidential
statements S/PRST/2019/5 and S/PRST/2021/2, the
Group values the holding of this annual high-level
Security Council meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, as it
serves to assist the Council in attaining a deeper and
better understanding of Arab crises.
The Group also stresses the need to establish a
mechanism that promotes bilateral cooperation and
coordination between the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Group of Arab States in New
York to discuss and address Arab priorities at the
United Nations, particularly in the Security Council,
including the holding of periodic formal meetings with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations. We also
stress the need to continue holding annual informal
ministerial meetings among the Security Council, the
Arab Summit Troika and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States on the margins of the highlevel segment of the General Assembly. We also look
forward to the upcoming visit by the Security Council
to the League of Arab States, as part of their exchanges
of visits.
Secondly, we stress the need for Arab solutions to
Arab problems. As the traditional Arabic saying goes,
the people of Mecca know their allies best. Arab States
must therefore contribute to finding suitable solutions
to the crises in Arab States. In that regard, the Group
calls for greater cooperation and coordination between
the two sides in the selection of United Nations special
envoys to the Arab region. We call for enhanced
cooperation between those special envoys and the
League of Arab States, which increases the chances of
reaching needed peaceful solutions to Arab issues.

S/PV.9001

Thirdly, it is important that the Council speak with
one voice with respect to Arab issues and limit the
use of the veto. Council positions, particularly those
of permanent members, should reflect the concerns
of Arab States with respect to their own crises, most
important of which are the establishment of a sovereign
independent Palestinian State within 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; maintaining
the legal and historic status quo of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
including the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif; and
ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. Such
concerns also include ending foreign intervention in the
domestic affairs of Arab States and the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. The Group also
stresses the need to implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Fourthly, we emphasize the importance of
enhancing the role of preventive diplomacy. The
economic, humanitarian and political costs of crisis
prevention are much lower than the exorbitant costs
of conflict resolution and achieving peace. The Group
therefore reaffirms the importance of promoting
cooperation between the Council and the League in
the areas of early warning, peacekeeping, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and post-conflict peacebuilding
towards sustaining peace. That can be achieved through
the continued development of mechanisms to exchange
information and promote capabilities through training
and capacity-building.
Fifthly, the United Nations Liaison Office to the
League of Arab States must be developed and enhanced.
It is important to conduct periodic assessments of
the strategic framework of the Office with a view to
maximizing cooperation. The Arab Group welcomes
the joint projects implemented by United Nations
departments and the League in various areas, especially
by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, which plays a pivotal role in promoting
institutional cooperation through continuous sectoral
meetings with the relevant organs of the League towards
the attainment of our common goals.
Finally, the Group believes that those efforts
cannot materialize without the major contribution of
young people, who represent half of our population.
Hence, we cannot address the challenges in Arab
States without the meaningful participation of young
people in achieving, building and sustaining peace as

22-2972823/24

S/PV.9001

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

well as preventing violence and achieving sustainable
development.
In that regard, the Arab Group welcomes the
proposals contained in the Secretary-General’s report
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) on enhancing the
role of the Special Envoy on Youth. Similarly, the
Arab Group believes that the inclusion of women and
girls in conflict prevention and settlement as well as
in the building and sustaining of peace is key to the
success of cooperation between the Council and the
League of Arab States. The Arab Group appreciates
the participation of the representative of both youth and
women in today’s debate as a testament in that respect.
In closing, the Arab Group believes that genuine
and concerted efforts among the main actors at the
international and regional levels are the optimal means

24/24

23/03/2022

of promoting peace and security in the Arab region.
The Group stresses that it will continue to support the
joint efforts of the Security Council and the League of
Arab States in that regard so that our States can enjoy
peace, security and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Council has
before it the text of a statement by the President on
behalf of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I
thank Council members for their valuable contributions
to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2022/1.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-29728
