General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

184

37/50.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, in which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/25 of 2 May 1980 and 1981/25 of 6 May 1981 concerning co-ordination and information in the field of youth,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
8 September 1982, 40
Convinced of the need to improve further the efforts of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies with regard
to the participation of youth in achieving the objectives of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Equally convinced of the valuable contribution that you!h
can make in promoting co-operation among States and m
implementing the new international economic or~er and. the
International Development Strategy for the Third Umted
Nations Development Decade, 41
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations for the proper information
of youth ana youth organizations and their effective participation in the United Nations and the specialized agencies
at the national, regional and international levels,
Taking note of the efforts in interagency co-operation to
promote and strengthen channels of communication between
the United Nations and youth and youth organizations within
the context of International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning
of channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth and youth organizations form a basic prerequisite
of the active involvement of young people and thus of the
successful preparation for, celebration of and follow-up to
International Youth Year,
1. Requests Member States, specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations to promote, in cooperation with youth organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council and other youth organizations concerned, further implementation of the guidelines adopted in General Assembly resolution 32/135 and
the additional guidelines adopted in its resolution 36/ 17;
2. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to continue to promote the implementation of the additional guidelines, together with the guidelines adopted in resolution 32/135, during the preparation
for and celebration of International Youth Year;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give full cooperation and support to interagency co-operation and coordination in promotional and information activities within
the context of International Youth Year;
4. Invites Member States, specialized agencies, regional commissions, intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental youth organizations to communicate and
further promote the guidelines and additional guidelines for
the improvement of channels of communication between
the United Nations and youth and youth organizations and
to offer additional suggestions for their further development;
40
41

A/37/401.
Resolution 35/56, annex.

5. Requests the Secretary-General to give special_ att~ntion to developing additional channels of commumcat1on
through such means as the mass media a~d educational
institutions in order to reach the largest possible number of
young people in different regions of the world;
6. Invites youth and youth organizations to act as disseminators of and contributors to the formulation of United
Nations policies and programmes directed to youth;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen a_nd i_mprove the functioning of existing channels of communication
between the United Nations and youth and youth organizations, such as the quarterly publication Youth Information
Bulletin produced by the Secretariat;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
reports of Member States, specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations, as well as non-governmental youth organizations, to report to the Gener~l Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of
the guidelines and additional guidelines for the improve~ent
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations, and to include
information on measures being taken to strengthen those
channels of communication.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/51.

Question of aging

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/52 of 14 December 1978. in
which it decided to convene a World Assembly on Aging
to call world-wide attention to the serious problems besetting
a growing portion of the population of the world and to
provide a forum to launch an international programme of
action aimed at guaranteeing economic and social security
to older persons, as well as opportunities for them to contribute to national development,
Recognizing that increasing longevity is an achievement
of biology and a sign of progress, and that the aged are an
asset and not a liability to society because of the invaluable
contribution they can make by virtue of their accumulated
wealth of knowledge and experience,
Bearing in mind that the States gathered in the World
Assembly on Aging, held at Vienna from 26 July to 6 August
1982, reaffirmed their belief that the fundamental and inalienable rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 38 apply fully and undiminishedly to the aging, and recognized that quality of life was no less important
than longevity, and that the aging should therefore, as far
as possible, be enabled to enjoy in their own families and
communities a life of fulfilment, health, security and contentment, appreciated as an integral part of sociely, 4 ~
Convinced that the International Plan of Action on Aging 1 '
adopted by the World Assembly on Aging must lead to
developing and applying, at the international, regional and
national levels, policies designed to enhance the lives of the
aging as individuals and to mitigate, by appropriate measures, any negative effects resulting from the impact of the
aging of populations on development,
Recognizing that the Plan of Action should be corn,idercJ
an integral component of the major international. regional
42 See Report of the World Assembl_v on A11ing. Vienna. 2f> J11/_1· 1,,
6 Au11ust /982 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1 It,), chap
VI, sect. A.
4
' Ibid.
