V.

131

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

crease food production through. inter alia, the provision, on a priority basis, of additional financial and
technical assistance to Africa by the International Fund
for Agricultural Development. the African Development Bank and the United Nations Development Programme and an increase in lending by the World Bank
to the agricultural sector in Africa:
4. Appeals to the international community to
provide urgently additional food aid to African countries to meet the current emergency needs in the region.
particularly as called for by the Economic and Social
Council in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1980 /58:
5. Calls upon current and prospective donor countries to achieve without delay the minimum target of the
Food Aid Convention of I 980, 1111 of 10 million tons of
cereal aid annually. as well as the minimum target of
500,000 tons of grains for the International Emergency
Food Reserve, as agreed upon in the relevant decisions
of the General Assembly:
6. Urges Governments and the international organizations concerned to provide the necessary technical,
financial and food assistance to food security projects in
the region, especially in the countries of the Sahe] and
the Sudano-Sahelian countries, in the framework of
their own activities, including strengthening the Food
Security Assistance Scheme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations through the
participation of current and prospective donors:
7. Urgently appeals to the international community
to offer its immediate assistance for the effective suppression of the present upsurge of the African migratory locust, which, if not immediately controlled, may
engulf a large part of the continent:
8. Urges the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to continue to play its leading role in
the co-ordination of the locust control efforts in the
region;
9. Recommends that the Programme for the Control
of African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Development, endorsed by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its
twentieth session in its resolution 8 /79 of 28 November
1979, should be implemented on an urgent basis under
the over-all co-ordination of that organization and with
the active financial and technical support of the international community:
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, to co-operate with the Organization of
African Unity in undertaking a study on the establishment of regional food trade and distribution organizations in Africa and to submit a report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session through the
Economic and Social Council:
11. Urges all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to intensify their
activities in Africa to assist Governments, inter alia, in
the areas of direct government participation in food production, agricultural processing. integrated research and
extension services;
12. Also urges the international community to assist
countries in the African region to achieve. between 1980
and 1985, the following goals:
(a) A significant improvement in their food situation and the laying of the foundations for the attain-

ment of self-sufficiency in cereals, livestock and fish
products:
(b) Significant progress towards attaining a 50 per
cent reduction in post-harvest losses, through, inter a/ia,
the construction of storage facilities;
(c) An improved physical infrastructure to facilitate
food distribution at the national, subregional and
regional levels:
(d) Greater and effective agronomic research, with
special emphasis on improved seeds and an adequate
supply of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals
suitable for African conditions:
13. Further urges all relevant organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to expand their
training programmes in the building up of national capabilities for the preparation, execution, monitoring and
evaluation of agricultural development projects;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to
submit a preliminary report on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

"" See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirty~fUth Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/Yi,1 \9). part one. para. 32. For the text o\'
the Convention, see TD,i\V HE•\ I .6 'I '·

''' See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Report nf the Conference of FA 0. Twentieth Session. Rome,
10-.'S Novemher /979 (C 79 REP and Corr.2), para. 43.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/70.

World Food Day

The General Assembly,
Considering that food is a requisite for human survival
and well-being and a fundamental human necessity,
I. Welcomes the observance of World Food Day, to
be held for the first time on 16 October 1981 and annually thereafter, as unanimously decided by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nat ions at its twentieth session:"'
2. Urges Governments and national, regional and
international organizations to contribute to the effective commemoration of World Food Day to the greatest
possible extent.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980

35/71.

Problem of remnants of war

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVJI), 2996 (XXVJI)
and 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, pertaining to
co-operation between States in the field of the environment, the international responsibility of States in protecting the environment and the establishment of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Recalling also its resolution 3435 (XXX) of 9 December 1975.
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 111 of 16 December
1976. in which it noted the interim report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the study of the problem of material
remnants of war, particularly mines, and their effect on
