S/PV.8081

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8081st meeting

Monday, 30 October 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/902)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-35064 (E)
*1735064*

S/PV.8081

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/902)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Lowcock is joining via video-teleconference
from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/902, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: This is my second briefing to the
Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. In Amman today I have discussed the position
with the Jordanian authorities and the United Nations
humanitarian leadership team based in the region.
One conclusion is obvious: the impact of the Syria
crisis continues to be profound. My briefing today
focuses on the humanitarian issues inside Syria. High
Commissioner Grandi will speak to the Council on the
refugee situation on Thursday.
More than 13 million people inside Syria still
need humanitarian assistance; 6.3 million of them
are exceptionally vulnerable and in acute need as a
result of displacement, hostilities and limited access
to basic goods and services. Conflict and violations
of international humanitarian law continue to be the
principal drivers of humanitarian need, with civilians in
many parts of the country enduring massive suffering.
Military operations and hostilities in some parts
of the country, particularly in the east, continue
2/6

30/10/2017

to drive displacement. The number of long-term
internally displaced persons (IDPs) has decreased from
6.3 million to 6.1 million over the past year, while IDP
returns, especially of those temporarily displaced,
have been increasing in some parts of the country. But
levels of new displacement remain high, with some
1.8 million people reported to have been displaced
between January and September.
I want to flag some specific current problems which
particularly concern me, and then I will summarize
where we are on the humanitarian response.
I am worried about the impact of fighting and
airstrikes on civilians and civilian infrastructure in
Raqqa governorate, with scores of civilians reportedly
killed in recent months. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) may be largely pushed out of Raqqa,
but after years of oppression and almost a year of
intense fighting, humanitarian needs will continue to
be large for some time to come. Since the beginning of
the anti-ISIL offensive in November last year, airstrikes
and clashes have resulted in more than 436,000 people
being displaced from Raqqa to 60 different locations,
including in neighbouring governorates.
I am also concerned for the safety and protection of
civilians at risk from unexploded ordnance throughout
Raqqa city, particularly those trying to return to their
homes. The United Nations anticipates that, despite the
directive issued by local authorities for civilians not to
return to the city until it is deemed safe, people will
go back to try to check on and protect their homes and
their personal assets. Further to the east, in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, heavy fighting and airstrikes continue to
result in civilian deaths and injuries.
Large-scale displacement also continues, with the
International Organization for Migration reporting
some 350,000 people displaced since August, including
more than 250,000 in October alone. In mid-October,
in Mayadin city and surrounding areas in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, around 15,000 people were reportedly
without access to health services following air strikes
on the city, rendering hospitals and medical points
inoperable. UNICEF and the World Health Organization
(WHO) report that the attacks on Mayadin destroyed
a vaccine cold room, with at least 140,000 doses of
United Nations-provided measles and polio vaccines
lost. Until a new cold room is built and the required
cold-chain equipment — including solar fridges, cold
boxes and vaccine carriers — are delivered, routine
17-35064

30/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

immunization for vulnerable children in the area will
be delayed. This is a particular setback for efforts to
check one of the world’s largest polio outbreaks in
recent memory, an outbreak which continues to plague
Deir ez-Zor in particular, with new cases continuing to
be reported.
In Homs governorate, over a period of 20 days this
month, ISIL reportedly executed at least 128 people in
reprisal killings, accusing them of collaboration with the
Syrian Government. And an estimated 50,000 Syrians
remain stranded in the desert in Rukban, in an area
known as the berm, along the Syrian-Jordanian border.
In the past year, there have been only two distributions
of United Nations humanitarian food assistance to
these people, and it has been four months since the last
partial distribution. As limited commercial supplies are
reaching Rukban, access to food is precarious and the
overall situation remains dire. As the winter months
approach, the situation will become even more acute.
Ongoing assessments and data collected through the
United Nations health clinic underscore the fragility of
the situation. A long-term durable solution to the plight
of these people has to be found.
Meanwhile, immediate access to enable life-saving
assistance for the civilian population is critical. Clearly
the best approach is to find a solution from within Syria.
We are straining every sinew to do that. Whatever
happens, it is our collective duty to avoid yet another
humanitarian catastrophe in Syria.
Nearly 3 million people in Syria continue to live in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. In eastern Ghouta,
daily shelling continues to be reported in recent weeks.
Humanitarian access to eastern Ghouta — one of the
four de-escalated areas where nearly 95 per cent of
Syria’s besieged population lives — has been severely
curtailed for months. Since the start of the year,
110,000 people have received food assistance, out of
an estimated population of nearly 400,000. Today the
United Nations and partners delivered food, nutrition
and health assistance to 40,000 people. An alarming
number of child malnutrition cases have been recorded
there, and more than 400 people with health problems
require medical evacuation. I join the call of the World
Food Programme (WFP) and others for unimpeded
humanitarian access.
Against that background, the United Nations and
our partners continue to implement in Syria one of
the largest humanitarian operations in the world. We

S/PV. 8081

are reaching millions of people on a monthly basis.
For example, in September the WFP provided food
assistance to more than 3.3 million people, UNICEF
reached over 1.5 million people, and the WHO reached
over 800,000 people. We have just completed a major
piece of work to analyse implementation of activities
so far this year, and I have separately made available
new data on that.
I would like to update members on the position
on humanitarian assistance to areas controlled by
the Government of Syria, cross-line activities and
cross-border activities. Between January and August,
United Nations and non-governmental organization
programmes, in close cooperation with various line
ministries of the Syrian Government, have reached
an average of well over 4 million people a month in
Government-controlled areas of the country. Those
programmes continue to represent the vast majority of
our work inside Syria.
Next, on cross-line activities, we continue to face
considerable challenges in meeting the humanitarian
needs of people in hard-to-reach and besieged
locations. As the Secretary-General points out in his
monthly report (S/2017/902), there is an expectation
that progress in de-escalation will result in increased
humanitarian access. While we continue alongside
others to work hard on the issue, this has yet to
materialize. Since the beginning of the year, on average
fewer than a quarter of the United Nations inter-agency
cross-line convoys requested under the monthly and
bimonthly plans have been able to proceed. Thus far
in October, inter-agency convoys have collectively
reached fewer than 200,000 people. On average, only
10 per cent of people in besieged locations have been
reached with United Nations assistance each month
this year, and that is also the total thus far for October,
including today’s deliveries.
The removal of life-saving medicines and medical
supplies continues. We have briefed the Council on that
before. I hope that, in the coming days, real and tangible
progress can be made on cross-line activities, through
the trilateral coordination mechanism in Damascus.
As I said last month (see S/PV.8058), it remains
our view that cross-border assistance, as provided
for in resolution 2165 (2014), has been a lifeline. That
assistance has allowed the United Nations to reach
millions of people in need in northern and southern
parts of Syria. Since United Nations cross-border

17-350643/6

S/PV.8081

The situation in the Middle East

operations began in July 2014, we have deployed
more than 16,400 trucks, carrying assistance through
authorized crossings into Syria. On average, aid was
delivered to 2.76 million people a month through crossborder operations between January and August this
year. A considerable proportion of the many millions
in need in both northern and southern Syria have
been regularly reached — not just once or twice, but
consistently and systematically throughout the last
three years. Our experience with cross-line operations
from within Syria, which I have just referred to, leads
us to believe that it would be impossible to reach those
people in a sustained manner from within Syria. I
therefore regard a renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) as
essential. Millions of people depend on the activities
it mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing.
First of all, allow me to recognize, as we do each
month, the permanent, dedicated and brave work of the
thousands of humanitarian workers of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and its
local partners seeking to improve the living conditions
of millions of civilians, who are always the primary
victims in this and other conflicts.
We cannot stress it strongly enough that
humanitarian principles, human rights and international
humanitarian law must be respected. Whenever they
are violated through grave crimes, those responsible
must be held accountable. We must urgently have
immediate, secure and unhindered access to deliver
humanitarian relief to all those in Syria who need it.
Nevertheless, many hotbeds of intense fighting persist
and remain a source of concern. Regrettably, every
month OCHA and the Secretary-General inform us
that humanitarian access in the country continues to
encounter serious problems, despite constant efforts
to coordinate with Syrian authorities to change the
dynamic on the ground.
We call on countries with influence to do what they
can to ensure that humanitarian aid can be delivered
in a fluid, secure and unhampered manner. For that
4/6

30/10/2017

to occur, Damascus must allow OCHA’s bimonthly
plans to be fully implemented by issuing all necessary
permits to that effect. The Government of Syria bears
the primary responsibility for allowing its own people
to access food, water, medicine and supplies to ensure
their survival as long as the conflict has not reached a
definite end. The provisions of resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of the injured, the sick and medical
facilities and personnel, must be fully complied with.
We will continue working to strengthen that resolution.
Attacks on hospitals and health-care personnel violate
the most basic international humanitarian laws and
may constitute war crimes.
The Astana process and other regional initiatives
launched in recent months to achieve the cessation of
local hostilities have enabled a significant reduction in
the fighting in the country this year by implementing
of various violence de-activation zones. Despite this,
there are still several hot spots with intense fighting
and this situation directly impacts the distribution
of supplies.
I want to dwell today on the emergency
humanitarian situation — or I would say, food
catastrophe — in eastern Ghouta, where there are at least
350,000 civilians under siege and which was described
last Friday as “an outrage” by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Zeid
Al Hussein. UNICEF reported on 23 October that
there are over 1,100 cases of child malnutrition, 232 of
which are severe acute malnutrition. Today, Monday,
30 October, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
mentioned, it is reported that supplies for 40,000 people
were authorized for the cities of Kafr Batna and Saqba.
Unfortunately, according to the reports and statistics
regularly provided by OCHA, the percentages of the
civilian population that effectively receive assistance
are very low in comparison with the target population.
Although significant progress has been made in
reducing violence, we must now ensure unimpeded
access for the United Nations and humanitarian
assistance to those areas, as well as the freedom
of movement to voluntarily enter and leave those
territories. This would ensure that the basic principles
of international humanitarian law are being upheld.
The Security Council must be vigilant when it comes
to this humanitarian crisis. Just as in 2014 it adopted
resolution 2165 (2014), which has been successively
renewed, most recently with resolution 2332 (2016),
it must ensure that the most suitable humanitarian
17-35064

30/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

corridors are protected so that supplies reach their
intended destinations. Time is running out and winter
is coming.
We hope that, at the Astana meeting, as the three
guarantors did in a statement last month, emphasis will
be placed on the need to make use of the deactivation
of violence zones created in May for quick, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as the need for
parties to the conflict to develop confidence-building
measures, including the release of detainees and people
who have been kidnapped, the delivery of the remains of
the dead and the identification of disappeared persons,
in order to create better conditions for the success of
the political process and a lasting ceasefire. We also
hope that by 28 November, at the start of the eighth
round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva convened by
Special Envoy De Mistura, the humanitarian situation
will be showing signs of improvement.
The priorities in Syria are clearly defined. We
need a political solution that will end the war and
ensure a peaceful political transition, consolidate the
local cessation of hostility agreements and ensure
humanitarian access to the millions of people who
need it in areas that are under siege or hard to reach,
regardless of who are conducting the sieges and who
are subjected to them.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State
of Bolivia is grateful for the briefing provided by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock. We
express our support to him in carrying out his mandate.
We deplore the fact that the crisis in Syria
has generated so much suffering, destruction and
loss of human life. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
there have been more than 500,000 deaths since the
conflict began and around 7,000 just from January to
September this year. It is unacceptable that there are
now 13.5 million people who require humanitarian
assistance, 6.3 million internally displaced persons and
3.5 million people who continue to live in areas that are
besieged or difficult to access. Many of them are girls,
boys and elderly people.
We believe that humanitarian assistance must
arrive in an expedited manner and urge the parties to
guarantee and facilitate humanitarian access. In that
sense, we reiterate once again our heartfelt thanks for

S/PV. 8081

and acknowledgement of the work being undertaken
by the staff of the various agencies and humanitarian
assistance organizations, and we demand that
international humanitarian law be upheld while they
carry out their risky work on the ground.
Bolivia wishes to highlight the agreements reached
at the latest meeting in Astana, held in September.
We believe this process is an effective complement to
the Geneva negotiations. Since the beginning, it has
allowed thousands of lives to be saved thanks to the
effective implementation of the de-escalation zones,
which has significantly reduced the escalation and level
of violence in Syria. We welcome the establishment of
new de-escalation zones in eastern Ghouta, in some
areas of the north of Homs, Idlib and the neighbouring
provinces of Ladhiqiyah, Hama and Aleppo, as well as
in areas in southern Syria.
Nevertheless, we reaffirm that the establishment
of de-escalation and security zones should be a
temporary measure based on a consensus among the
guarantors, and under no circumstances should it
undermine the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
also highlight the efforts carried out by Russia, Iran
and Turkey, the guarantors of the ceasefire on Syrian
territory whose joint work created the four violence
de-escalation zones, facilitating the establishment of
a joint coordination centre that will make it possible
to better manage a violence-reduction process in more
de-escalation zones.
We underscore the important work that the Russian
Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic has been carrying out, both as a
guarantor of security in the deployment of humanitarian
assistance and in the evacuation of people from the
areas in which armed confrontations have taken place.
According to OCHA, September was the deadliest
month of the year for civilians subjected to daily
attacks in residential areas. These recent events in
Syria indicate again the urgent need to both revitalize
the political process in Geneva and reinforce the
tangible results of Astana, in consultation, of course,
with all the parties involved, including the Cairo and
Moscow platforms, in order to enable the development
of confidence-building measures and thereby improve
the political and humanitarian situation.
Finally, we express our solidarity with the work being
done in Astana, and we commend the commitment of

17-350645/6

S/PV.8081

The situation in the Middle East

the host of the dialogue, the Government of Kazakhstan.
We call for compliance with the agreements reached in
Astana, as well as with resolution 2336 (2016), so that
they may be fully implemented.

6/6

30/10/2017

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

17-35064
