19

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Urges Governments that have been carrying out
nuclear weapon tests to take an active and constructive
part in presenting and developing in the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament, or in any other
appropriate body, specific proposals for a comprehensive test ban;
5. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to give first priority to its deliberations
on a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon
tests, taking full account of views of experts and of
technical developments bearing on the verification of
such a treaty, and further requests the Conference to
submit a special report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the results of its deliberations on this matter;
6. Urges Governments to take all appropriate
measures further to develop existing capabilities for
detection and identification of underground nuclear
tests through seismological and other technical means,
and to increase international co-operation in the
elaboration of relevant techniques and evaluation of
seismographic data, in order to facilitate an underground nuclear weapon test ban;
7. Calls upon Governments to seek as a matter of
urgency a halt to all nuclear weapon testing, and to
endeavour to achieve at the earliest possible date a
comprehensive test ban and to obtain universal
adherence to such a ban.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
C

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its deep apprehension concerning the
harmful consequences of nuclear weapon tests for the
acceleration of the arms race and for the health of
present and future generations of mankind,
Deploring that the General Assembly has not yet
succeeded in its aim of achieving a comprehensive
test ban, despite twenty-one successive resolutions on
the subject,
Deploring further that the determination expressed
by the original parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and
under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963,30
to pursue negotiations to achieve the discontinuance
of all ,test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time
has not so far produced the desired results,
Recalling its resolutions 1762 A (XVII) of 6
November 1962 and 2828 A (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, whereby all nuclear weapon tests, without
exception, were condemned,
1. Reiterates once again with the utmost vigour its
condemnation of all nuclear weapon tests;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that, whatever may be
the differences on the question of verification, there
is no valid reason for delaying the conclusion of a
comprehensive test ban of the nature contemplated in
the preamble to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water;
3. Urges once more the Governments of nuclearweapon States to bring to a halt al! nuclear weapon
tests at the earliest possible date, and in any case
not later than 5 August 1973, either through a
ao United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.

permanent agreement or through unilateral or agreed
moratoria;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and
to inform the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session of any measures they have taken to implement it.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

2935 (XXVII). Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2830 (XXVI) concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for t)ie Prohibition
of Nuclear W capons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIll) of 27
November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970 and 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971,
Recalling in particular that in four of those resolutions it addressed appeals to the nuclear-weapon
States to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco) as soon as
possible,
Having taken note of the fact that the Government
of the People's Republic of China, on 14 November
1972, made the following solemn declaration:
"The Chinese Government has repeatedly declared
that at no time and in no circumstances will China
be the first to use nuclear weapons. As a specific
undertaking regarding the nuclear-weapon-free zone
in Latin America, I now declare solemnly on behalf
of the Chinese Government: China will never use
or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear Latin American countries and the Latin
American nuclear-weapon-free zone, nor will China
test, manufacture, produce, stockpile, install or
deploy nuclear weapons in these countries or in this
zone, or send her means of transportation and
delivery carrying nuclear weapons to traverse the
territory, territorial sea and territorial air space of
Latin American countries.", n
1. Reaffirms its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or
protocol;
2. Recalls with particular satisfaction that the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America became
parties to Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for
the Prnhihition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treatv of Tiatelolco) in 1969 and 1971, respectively;
3. Welcomes also with satisfaction, as a preliminary
measure, the solemn decl:irntion made by the Government of the People's Republic of China on 14
:, 1 Statern~nt hy the Minister for Forci~n Affairs of '.he
People's Republic of China. See A/C.1/1028.

20

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

November 1972, by which it entered into obligations
similar to those implicit in Additional Protocol II of
the Treaty for States parties thereto, and invites the
Government of China to try to find procedures that
will enable it to accede to the Protocol as soon as
possible;
4. Deplores that the other two nuclear-weapon
States have not yet heeded the urgent appeals which
the General Assembly has made in four different
resolutions and urges them once again to sign and
ratify without further delay Additional Protocol II of
the Treaty;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2935 (XXVII)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)";
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and
to inform the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session of any measure adopted by them in order to
implement it.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2992 (XXVII). Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a zone of peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971 entitled "Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace",
Noting the report of the Secretary-General3 2 submitted in accordance with paragraph 4 of that resolution, in which he was requested to report to the
General Assembly at it~ twenty-seventh session on the
progress made with regard to implementation of the
Declaration,
Noting further that the consultations envisaged in
paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution have not taken
place,
Convinced that action in furtherance of the objectives
of the Declaration would be a substantial contribution
to the strengthening of international peace and
security,
Noting that, in the Georgetown Declaration of 12
August 1972, the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries took note with satisfaction of
the adoption by the General Assembly at its twentysixth session of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a zone of peace and agreed that further steps should
be taken at the Assembly's twenty-seventh session
towards implementation of the Declaration,
l. Calls upon the littoral and hinterland States of
the Indian Ocean, the permanent members of the
Security Council and other major maritime users of
the Indian Ocean to support the concept that the
Indian Ocean should be a zone of peace;
2. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee on
the Indian Ocean, consisting of no more than fifteen
members, to study the implications of the proposal,
with special reference to the practical measures that

may be taken in furtherance of the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), having
due regard to the security interests of the littoral and
hinterland States of the Indian Ocean and the interests
of any other State consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session;
3. Decides further that the Ad Hoe Committee
shall consist of the following States: Australia, China,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mauritius, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, United
Republic of Tanzania, Yemen and Zambia;33
4. Urges all the States concerned to extend their
co-operation to the: Ad Hoe Committee in the discharge
of its functions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee;
6. Decides to inc.Jude in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace".
2111 th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
2993 (XXVII). Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security",
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, contained in General
Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV) of 16 December
1970, and also reca11ing Assembly resolution 2880
(XXVI) of 21 December 1971 on the implementation
of that Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction that the development of
encouraging trends and the improvement of relations
among States in the bilateral, regional and multilateral
spheres contribute to the strengthening of international
security,
Expressing at the same time deep concern at the
persistence of armed conflicts and other situations in
different areas of the world which require the urgent
attention of the international community in order to
strengthen international security,
Recognizing that a co-ordinated approach, in
accordance with the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security, to the closely connected
problems of the strengthening of international security,
disarmament and development, including the evolving
concept of collective economic security, would be
conducive to a more precise identification of areas
where progress might be achieved,
Reaffirming that respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms is an essential element in the
strengthening of international security,
Taking note of the report of the Sccrctary-General,34
1. Solemnly reaffirms all the principles and provisions contained in the Declaration on the Strengthening
33 See A/8976.

32 A/8809.

34 A/877 5 and Add.1-4.
