S/PRST/2004/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 June 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4997th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 June 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council notes the report of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Secretary-General of the United Nations of
18 February 2004 (S/2004/126) which refers to the increasing number of
challenges to the police certification process conducted by the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) International Police Task
Force (IPTF).
“The Security Council recalls its relevant resolutions and its support for
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement, S/1995/999, annex).
The parties to the Peace Agreement had the responsibility to cooperate fully
with, and to instruct their respective responsible officials and authorities to
provide their full support to, the IPTF during its mandate on all relevant
matters. The Council affirms that such responsibility included giving full and
immediate effect to the decisions issued by the IPTF, including decisions to
deny certification. The Council also affirms that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
the obligation to respect fully and to promote the fulfilment of its
responsibilities under the Peace Agreement.
“The Security Council reaffirms the legal basis in the Charter of the
United Nations on which the IPTF was given its mandate. The Council recalls
that during its mandate the IPTF was entrusted with the tasks set out in Annex
11 of the Peace Agreement, including the tasks referred to in the Conclusions
of the London, Bonn, Luxembourg, Madrid and Brussels Conferences and
agreed by the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
“The Security Council affirms that the certification process was carried
out pursuant to the mandate of the IPTF and fully endorses this process. The
comprehensive and rigorous vetting procedure was designed to create a police
force comprised entirely of personnel meeting internationally recognized
standards of personal integrity and professional performance.

04-40422 (E) 250604

*0440422*

S/PRST/2004/22

“The Security Council expresses concern at the failure of the competent
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to take due steps to implement decisions
to deny certification. The Council notes that this failure has already led to
several challenges before the courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina brought by
persons whose employment in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s law enforcement
agencies was terminated pursuant to a denial of certification by the IPTF.
“The Security Council further notes that in some cases such persons have
been re-instated following decisions of some local courts. The Security
Council calls upon the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to ensure, including
through the adoption or amendment of domestic legislation, that all IPTF
certification decisions are fully and effectively implemented and that the
employment of persons who were denied certification by the IPTF be
terminated, and that such persons will be precluded from employment, either
now or in the future, in any position within any law enforcement agency in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.”

2
