A /67/PV.94

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

94th plenary meeting

Thursday, 15 August 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Momen
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Draft resolution (A/67/L.57/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly considered, in a joint debate,
agenda item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda
item 13 at its 25th, 26th and 28th plenary meetings, on
17 and 22 October 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Fiji to
introduce draft resolution A/67/L.57/Rev.1.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
the draft resolution entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support” (A/67/L.57/Rev.1).
The Group of 77 and China would like to express
its appreciation to all delegations for their constructive
deliberations on and contributions to the draft resolution.
Let me also thank all delegations, and particularly the

President of the Assembly, for providing members
space for clarification and discussion on certain aspects
of the draft that had required further consultations by
members.
The draft resolution submitted today reaffirms
the support of the international community for the
implementation of the African Union’s New Partnership
for Africa’s Development and recognizes the progress
made in its implementation.
Furthermore, the draft resolution recognizes
that the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) has provided an ideal framework for the
development of various policy frameworks, including
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and the Programme for Infrastructure
Development in Africa.
With regard to the topic of governance, the draft
resolution welcomes the commendable progress that
has been achieved in implementing the African Peer
Review Mechanism, in particular the completion of
the peer review process in 15 countries, and welcomes
the progress made in implementing the national
programmes of action resulting from those reviews.
The draft resolution also welcomes and expresses
appreciation for the sustained efforts of African
countries in mainstreaming a gender perspective and
the empowerment of women in the implementation of
the New Partnership.
The progress made thus far by Africa must continue
to be supported by developed countries. With less than
1,000 days left, Africa remains the only continent not

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-42821 (E)

*1342821*

A/67/PV.94

on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
by 2015.
In that regard, the draft resolution underlines the
fact that the fulfilment of all official development
assistance commitments is crucial, including the
commitments by many developed countries to achieve
the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for
official development assistance to developing countries
by 2015, and urges the developed countries that have
not yet done so to fulfil their commitments for official
development assistance to developing countries.
Africa’s efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger,
create jobs and ensure sustainable development
must be complemented by sustained support from
development partners. In that vein, the draft resolution
urges the international community to give due attention
to Africa’s priorities, in particular NEPAD, in the
formulation of the post-2015 development agenda.
Finally, the resolution submitted today reaffirms
the pivotal role played by the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to take measures to strengthen the Office in
order for it to effectively fulfil its mandate, including
monitoring and reporting on the progress related to
meeting the special needs of Africa.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/67/L.57/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Austria, Croatia, Estonia, Finland,
France, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Portugal, Romania,
Slovenia, Sweden and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.57/
Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/67/L.57/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 67/294).

2

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the pleasure to deliver this statement on
behalf of the African Group in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted (resolution 67/294).
The resolution represents an important step
towards the full implementation of the commitments
made by the United Nations to Africa with respect to
the Millennium Development Goals: the 2005 World
Summit Outcome; the outcome document of the 2008
Doha Follow-up International Conference on Financing
for Development to Review the Implementation of
the 2002 Monterrey Consensus; the 2008 Political
Declaration on Africa’s development needs; the
outcome of the Istanbul Ministerial Conference of
Least Developed Countries; the implementation of the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development; and, last but not least,
the due attention that must be paid to Africa’s special
development needs in the post-2015 development
agenda. It is therefore crucial to ensure a coherent
and integrated approach to United Nations support to
Africa, including following up on the implementation
of all global summit and conference outcomes related
to the continent.
In that vein, the African Group welcomes the
request made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to
continue to take measures to strengthen the Office of
the Special Adviser on Africa in order to enable it to
effectively fulfil its mandate, including monitoring and
reporting on progress related to meeting the special
needs of Africa and coordinating the Interdepartmental
Task Force on Africa.
For those reasons, African States voted in favour
of resolution 67/294. On behalf of the African Group, I
would like to thank all the delegations that participated
in the drafting of the resolution and that supported its
adoption by consensus. It is now my wish, and that of
the African Group, to see that spirit of consensus and
compromise prevail when it comes to considering the
programme budget implications in the Fifth Committee
at the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
On behalf of the African Group, we therefore appeal
to all delegations to continue to support the resolution

13-42821

A/67/PV.94

through that process, in line with resolution 67/248,
on the proposed programme budget outline for the
biennium 2014-2015, which includes the development
of Africa among the eight priorities for that biennium.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is extremely pleased to join the consensus on
resolution 67/294, on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, especially because of our long-standing
tradition of financial and political support for African
development. We are aware of the importance of the
issue for all citizens of Africa and, by extension, for
all of us.
(spoke in English)
We also welcome the confirmation from the
Secretariat that the resolution does not incur programme
budgetary implications. In the light of the discussions
that took place during the negotiation process, Canada
would like to strongly emphasize the requirement that
the General Assembly maintain full compliance with
rule 153, and note in that respect the letter of 19 July
from the Chair of the Fifth Committee to the President
of the General Assembly. Those procedures are essential
for ensuring that the appropriate administrative and
budgetary bodies, namely, the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the
Fifth Committee, are properly consulted on all relevant
issues. In that context, it is also critical that Member
States’ deliberations proceed on the basis of a timely and
comprehensive justification of any potential budgetary
implications. As always, Canada remains prepared to
consider any request submitted in accordance with the
usual rules and procedures.
Let me conclude by again stressing Canada’s support
for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. As a
trading partner and investor and an international donor,
we strongly value our extensive ties across the continent
and recognize the importance of development to all
African States. We remain committed to furthering
Africa’s economic growth and development.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I speak to stress the
importance of resolution 67/294, which the General
Assembly has just adopted by consensus.
Since its inception during the fifty-seventh session
of the General Assembly, in 2002, the resolution on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development has been
instrumental in following up progress and providing
support for Africa’s development needs. We commend

the efforts of all delegations in reaching a timely
consensus on that important resolution. We hope that
the resolution will pave the way for the much-needed
strengthening of the Office of the Special Adviser
on Africa to fulfil its important mandates, including
monitoring progress on meeting Africa’s special
needs and coordinating the Interdepartmental Task
Force on Africa. Those mandates are fundamental in
helping to realize the commitments of the international
community towards African development.
We urge all delegations to continue their support
for the current resolution through the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly by demonstrating the
same spirit of compromise that they showed during
their consideration of the current resolution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States.
We are pleased to join the consensus on the
adoption of resolution 67/294. The resolution contains
many important elements, which we warmly embrace,
including the strong alignment of development
partners with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the Programme for
Infrastructure Development in Africa. Today, we want
to reiterate, loudly and clearly, our strong appreciation
and commitment to supporting NEPAD.
We are pleased that the Secretariat has confirmed
our understanding throughout the informal negotiations
that the resolution has no programme budget
implications. In that context, in particular given the
prolonged discussions leading up to today’s adoption,
we would like to underline the importance that the
EU attaches to full compliance with rule 153, and
therefore the need for the appropriate budgetary bodies
to be consulted in a timely manner prior to adoption,
as requested by the Chair of the Fifth Committee in
his letter to the President of the General Assembly of
19 July. In that regard, we would like to re-emphasize
the need to receive, in a timely manner, full and
comprehensive information on the possible budgetary
implications of any proposed resolution that is under
discussion.

13-428213

A/67/PV.94

Let me conclude by emphasizing the importance
that the EU and its member States attach to the AfricaEU partnership and to the development of African
countries. Our continents are interconnected and
bound by strong ties. We are proud of having built
that strategic partnership, which has at its heart the
principles of African unity, European unity and mutual
interdependence.

4

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

13-42821
