Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

3426 (XXX). Question of the Gilbert Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in the Territory,35
Recalling the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission dispatched to the Territory in 197436 and
noting with satisfaction the steps taken in the implementation of the relevant recommendations of the
Visiting Mission,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Gilbert Islands ;37
,
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gilbert Islands to self-determination and mdependence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Requests the administering Power to continue to
take measures to expedite the process of decolonization
in the Territory in accordance with the relevant recommendations of the Special Committee, including in
particular the observations of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in 1974;
4. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Gilbert Islands,
including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission in consultation with the administering Power,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3427 (XXX). Question of Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Turks
and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Turks and Caicos
Islands,
34 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXI.

as Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
36 Ibid., Twenty-ninth

Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.I), chap. XXI, annex I.
37 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev .1 ) , chap. XXI.

111

Having examined the relevant c~apte_rs of !he report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,38
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dec7mber
1960, containing the Declaration_ on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countnes and Peo~les, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the Umted Nations relating to the Territories listed above, in particula1 General Assembly resolution 3289 (XXIX) of
13 December 1974,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above, 39
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
political, economic and social conditions in those Territories and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the
peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories
concerned and stressing the necessity of diversifying
their economies as a matter of priority in order to reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Turks and Caicos Islands;40
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, in consultation with the freely
elected representatives of the people, to continue to take
all the necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy
38 Ibid., chaps. IV, XXV and XXVII.
39 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting,
40 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al 10023/

Rev .1 ) , chaps. XXV and XXVII.

ll2

General AMembly-Thirtieth Session

attainment of the goals set forth in the Declaration with
respect to the Territories;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economies of the Territories listed above and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for
those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Governments of the Territories concerned, to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to the enjoyment of their natural
resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
7. Welcomes the positive attit11de of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under its administration and requests the Chairman of the Special
Committee to continue his consultations with a view to
the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of
those Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Turks and Caicos
Islands, including the possible dispatch of visiting missions in consultation with the administering Power, and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3428 (XXX). Question of the Tokelau Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,41
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its decisions of 14 December 1973 42 and
13 December 197443 on the question of the Tokelau
Islands,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,44
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to help the people of the Tokelau Islands to realize
their aspirations in accordance with the objectives set
forth in the Declaration,

41 Ibid., chaps. IV and XIX.

42 Ibid., Twenty-eiglzth Session, Supplement No. 30 (Al
9030), p. 111, item 23.
43 Ibi4,, Twenty-nintlz Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631),
p. 116, item 23.
44 lbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2168th meeting.

A ware of the special problems facing the Territory
by virtue of its isolation, small size and meagre resources,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Tokelau Islands and endorses the consensus contained therein;45
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Tokelau Islands to self-determination in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Welcomes the invitation extended by the Government of New Zealand to the Special Committee to dispatch a visiting mission to the Tokelau Islands in 1976,
in order to obtain first-hand information on conditions
in the Territory and on the wishes and aspirations of
its people;
·
4. Requests the administering Power and the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance and
facilities to the visiting mission in the discharge of its
task;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report further thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3429 (XXX). Question of American Samoa,
Guam and United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Guam and United States Virgin Islands,
Having e~amined t~e relevant c~apte~ of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 46
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories listed above, in particular
General Assembly resolutions 3289 (XXIX) and 3290
(XXIX) of 13 December 1974,
Taking into account the statements of the administering Power relating to developments in those Territories,47
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories listed above,
Deploring the policy of the administering Power in
continuing to maintain military installations on Guam
in contravention of the relevant resolutions of the Gen~
eral Assembly,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such ~issions i~ ess.ential for securing adequate
and first-hand mformation m regard to the conditions
prevailing in those Territories and to the views, wishes
45 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev. I), chap. XIX.
46 Ibid., chaps. IV, XXIII and XXVI.
47 See Al AC.109/SC.3/SR.229, 234, 235 and 240.
