S/2015/702*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 September 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 35 of Security Council
resolution 2232 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report on the
implementation of the resolution, including the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) by 12 September. The report covers the
major developments that occurred during the period from 1 May to 31 August 2015.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The Federal Government of Somalia accelerated efforts to advance the process
of building a federal state. However, on 28 July, the Federal Parliament passed a
resolution indicating that a country-wide “one-person-one-vote” election would not
be possible in 2016 owing to delays in the political process and remaining technical
and security challenges, confirming the consensus that had emerged among key
stakeholders. On 15 August, the Federal Government circulated an action plan
setting out arrangements for national consultations to agree on options for a yet to
be defined “electoral process” to replace the current members of the Somali Federal
Government and Parliament when their terms expire in 2016.
3.
Political tensions re-emerged when, on 12 August, Members of the Federal
Parliament submitted a motion to the Office of the Speaker for the impeachment of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The motion, signed by 95 Members of
Parliament out of a total of 275, accused the President of extensive corruption,
infringement of the Constitution and poor leadership. A swift resolution appeared to
be unlikely. International partners called on the Somali federal institutions to
maintain their unity and cohesion and to focus on the priorities set by Somalis for
the wider peace process.
4.
There was overall progress on the formation of federal states throughout the
country. On 7 May, the Juba Regional Assembly was inaugurated in Kismaayo, Juba
Hoose, amid criticism from some parties over inclusiveness. On 6 June, the Federal
Parliament passed a motion to “terminate” the Juba Regional Assembly, a decision
* Reissued for technical reasons on 24 September 2015.

15-14905* (E)

240915

*1514905*

S/2015/702

that was rejected by the Interim Juba Administration. While the Federal Government
has established a ministerial committee to resolve the issue, it has yet to begin work.
The Juba Regional Assembly subsequently elected Sheikh Ahmed Islam “Madobe”,
leader of the Interim Juba Administration, as President of the Interim Juba
Administration on 15 August. He called on the Assembly to work with him to
resolve the issues over its composition. On 9 August, in the Interim South-West
Administration, President Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, formally launched the
process to form a South-West Regional Assembly.
5.
In mid-June, a state formation conference took place in Cadaado, Galguduud
region, for the purpose of creating the new Galmudug Interim Administration in the
central regions. The conference formed a regional assembly which, on 4 July,
elected Abdikarim Hussein Guled as President. The Ahlu Sunna wal Jama’a group,
which occupies parts of the Galguduud region, including Dhuusamarreeb, boycotted
the process. On 27 August, however, factions from the group entered into an
agreement with the Galmudug Interim Administration to join the state in exchange
for political and constitutional concessions. Puntland’s administration initially
denounced the Galmudug Interim Administration as unconstitutional, owing partly
to its claim over northern Mudug region, which was long considered to be part of
Puntland. Following discussions between the Federal Pri me Minister and the
President of Puntland, the Galmudug Interim Administration revised its constitution
on 29 July to remove any claim to northern Mudug.
6.
On 8 August, the Federal Government launched a process to form an interim
administration for the Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe regions by 1 December 2015. The
process will be managed by a technical committee and overseen by a steering group
comprising 12 Federal Cabinet Ministers from the area and local governors.
7.
In “Somaliland”, the upper legislative chamber, the House of Elders ( Guurti)
announced on 11 May a 22-month term extension of the term of office of President
Ahmed Mohamed Mohamud “Silanyo”, thereby delaying the elections that had been
scheduled to be held in June 2016 until March 2017. Following protests and
consultations, the authorities and the opposition parties agreed on 27 May to
reschedule the elections for mid-December 2016. However, tensions remained high,
as the Guurti failed to revise its decision in line with the agreement. On 18 August, in
response to a request from the “Somaliland” authorities for a legal decision, the
Supreme Court ruled in favour of the Guurti’s decision, and set the election timeline
for March 2017.

B.

Security developments
8.
The holy month of Ramadan and the preceding weeks saw an increase in
attacks by Al-Shabaab in central and south-central Somalia. On 18 June, the first
day of Ramadan, security forces in Cadaado thwarted a complex attack by three
gunmen who attempted to enter the venue of the central regions state formation
conference after detonating a vehicle laden with explosives; the four attackers were
the only casualties.
9.
On 11 June, a convoy of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
was ambushed by a large number of Al-Shabaab fighters at Jama’a village, Bay
region. A reinforcement of AMISOM troops to Jama’a was ambushed twice by
Al-Shabaab on 12 June. On 26 June, over 100 Al-Shabaab fighters stormed an

2/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

AMISOM base in Leego, Bay Region, after detonating a vehicle -borne bomb,
resulting in a significant number of AMISOM casualties, and several soldiers of the
mission were reported as missing in action. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility,
citing its Abu Zubeyr Battalion, a new military unit named after the late Al -Shabaab
leader.
10. In Kismaayo, a training camp of the Somali national army located at the old
Kismaayo airport was targeted with a car bomb on 22 August, resulting in at least
18 fatalities among Somali national army personnel and injuries to at least
44 others, including three AMISOM soldiers.
11. In Mogadishu, during Ramadan, there was a surge in targeted assassinations
and complex attacks, for which Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility. On 10 July,
11 civilians were reported killed and at least 20 injured in two consecutive complex
attacks at two hotels. On 25 July, a Member of Parliament was killed in a drive -by
shooting together with his bodyguard and driver. On 26 July, a truck la den with
explosives detonated outside the Jazeera Palace Hotel, killing 15 people, including
one member of the Chinese diplomatic mission residing at the hotel. The blast
caused significant damage to the hotel and nearby buildings, including United
Nations compounds on Airport Road. Al-Shabaab stated that the attack had targeted
foreign diplomatic entities housed inside the hotel. Another car bomb attack was
carried out by Al-Shabaab on 22 August, targeting a restaurant frequented by Somali
security personnel, resulting in the death of 6 people, including 2 civilians, and
injuries to 18 others.
12. On 19 July, AMISOM and Somali security forces, together with the Ethiopian
and Kenyan Defence Forces, launched a new joint military operation, codenamed
“Operation Juba Corridor”, aimed at expelling Al-Shabaab from its last remaining
strongholds in south-central Somalia. The troops seized Baardheere, Gedo region,
and Diinsoor, Bay region, on 23 and 24 July, respectively. Diinsoor had been
presumed to be the headquarters of Al-Shabaab since the fall of Baraawe in October
2014. AMISOM also targeted suspected Al-Shabaab positions in the Hiraan and
Galguduud regions.
13. In Puntland, sporadic Al-Shabaab activities continued. On 8 May, Al-Shabaab
claimed responsibility for the assassination of a Member of Puntland’s Parliament
and his bodyguard in north Gaalkacyo. Following the ongoing operation in southcentral Somalia, there have been reports of a northward movement of Al -Shabaab
towards the Galgala Mountains. This could expose Puntland to an increased threat
of attacks by Al-Shabaab. Meanwhile, on 1 August, Puntland President Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali “Gaas” renewed an amnesty offer for Al -Shabaab insurgents for
another month, calling on the insurgents to take advantage of t he offer or face a
renewed military offensive.
14. Separately, in the Sool and Sanaag regions, tensions were reported on 4 May
and 15 June following a Puntland military build-up around Tukaraq, Sool Region,
and armed clashes between the “Somaliland” army and a militia that supports the
separatist “Khatumo” movement.

15-14905

3/20

S/2015/702

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

International coordination and political support
15. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative, Nicholas Kay,
worked closely with federal, regional and international stakeholders to support the
ongoing political process. He visited Kismaayo on 18 June to encourage the Federal
Government and the Interim Juba Administration to resolve their differences over
the Juba Regional Assembly. He also offered strategic advice and good offices to the
Federal Government on the state formation process for the central regions,
encouraging all stakeholders to ensure inclusiveness and outreach towards
remaining stakeholders and to resolve the dispute with Puntland. He attended the
inauguration of the President of the Galmudug Interim Administration in Cadaado
on 23 July and the signing on 8 August of the state formation process agreement for
the Shabelle Dhexe and Hiraan regions. He also continued to facilitate coordinated
approaches by the international community to the political process in Somalia,
including through joint public statements and briefings.
16. International support to Somalia’s peacebuilding and State -building process
continued to be coordinated through the “New Deal” Compact mechanisms. Work
progressed on the operationalization of the United Nations joint programmes,
developed and approved through the architecture of the Compact. By the end of the
reporting period, the United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund had received multiyear pledges totalling $113 million, of which $18.9 million had been disbursed.
17. On 29 and 30 July in Mogadishu, Federal President Mohamud and my Special
Representative co-chaired the second Ministerial meeting of the High-level
Partnership Forum, the main platform for high-level policy dialogue and strategic
coordination for implementation of the Compact. This was the largest international
conference held in Mogadishu for at least 25 years. Participants included
representatives of the Interim South-West Administration, the Galmudug Interim
Administration and Banadir; Members of the Federal Parliament; the chair of the
National Independent Electoral Commission; representatives of civil society; and
32 international delegations. The Interim Juba Administration and Puntland leaders,
who did not attend, subsequently endorsed the outcomes of the High -level
Partnership Forum.
18. The Forum reviewed progress on the New Deal to date, set expectations for
the remainder of 2015, and agreed to undertake a review of implementation by the
end of 2015. Participants recognized that a one-person-one-vote election would not
be possible in 2016, endorsed a set of guiding principles for an alternative “electoral
process”, and confirmed their expectation that the state formation process would be
concluded in 2015.
19. Participants also agreed on the need to accelerate the delivery of results at the
level of the citizenry, while strengthening government ownership and visibility.
Specific measures were proposed which are to be finalized by September 2015.
Government progress on the establishment of financial accountability and
transparency was welcomed, as was the International Monetary Fund article IV
consultation on Somalia that took place in Nairobi from 8 to 18 June.

4/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

B.

Inclusive politics
Development of a federal system
20. Work continued to build the legal basis for emerging federal entities described
above. The interim constitution of the Galmudug Interim Administration was
adopted on 17 June. On 1 August, the interim constitution for “Jubaland State” was
unanimously approved in Kismaayo by 300 delegates representing Juba Hoose, Juba
Dhexe and Gedo regions.
21. On 6 July, the Federal Parliament approved the Government’s nominations for
members of the Boundaries and Federation Commission, who will be responsible
for advising Parliament on the establishment of boundaries for Federal Member
States, regional administrations and districts of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
The commissioners elected their chairpersons on 27 July and began work on their
action plan, with the support of the United Nations and other partners.
22. UNSOM and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) are
finalizing consultations with the Peacebuilding Support Office for the release of
monies from the Peacebuilding Fund to support the Federal Gover nment and
emerging interim regional administrations to convene 10 local reconciliation
conferences and three minority rights conferences in south-central Somalia.
23. During July and August, UNSOM produced a radio talk show — aired on
Radio Mogadishu — on federalism and State-building, as part of a nationwide civic
education campaign. The programme reached over 4 million listeners and received a
record number of roughly 2,500 listener interactions. The programme is now being
distributed on social media, targeting the Somali diaspora. UNSOM also produced
two television talk shows on federalism and State-building, which are being
broadcast on Somalia’s largest television station and over social media.
24. In partnership with the Ministry of Information and So mali journalist
associations, UNSOM held two training workshops for more than 75 journalists in
Baidoa, Bay region, and Kismaayo to increase understanding of fede ralism and the
peace- and State-building processes.
Constitutional review process
25. There were further delays to the review of the Provisional Federal Constitution
as a result of the resignation of Asha Gelle Diriye as Chair of the Independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission, and continuing lack of
clarity of the respective roles and responsibilities of the key national implementing
institutions. However, on 27 July, the Federal Parliament approved drafting
instructions by its Oversight Committee to the Independent Constitutional Review
and Implementation Commission, and unanimously appointed Mohammed Dahir
Afrah as the Chair of the Commission. Subsequently, the Commission, with the
Oversight Committee and the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, continued to
prepare for the review process.
26. On 18 August, the UNDP Country Director and the Ministry of Constitutional
Affairs signed a letter of agreement for the implementation of the United Nations
Constitutional Support Project Initiation Plan, which includes providing
accommodations and offices for the members of the Commi ssion.

15-14905

5/20

S/2015/702

Preparations for elections
27. In a major milestone, on 6 July, the Federal Parliament endorsed the nine
nominees of the Federal Government for the National Independent Electoral
Commission. The Commission elected Halima Ismail Ibrahim as its Chair. UNSOM
and UNDP, through the United Nations Integrated Electoral Support Group,
established temporary offices for the Elections Commission and began work to
identify and support the commissioners’ needs.
28. The Department of Political Affairs conducted an election “pre-assessment”
mission to Somalia from 6 to 11 July and met with Government, civil society and
international stakeholders to assess prospects for conducting a constitutional
referendum and national elections by September 2016. The team noted broad
consensus among its interlocutors that one-person-one-vote elections in 2016 were not
feasible in the light of the delays encountered in the political process as well as the
remaining technical and security challenges. However, it also found that, in general,
there was a strong commitment to a more legitimate and inclusive process for a
change of administration at the end of the terms of the current members of Parliament.
The team further noted the expectation that the United Nations would support the
Federal Government in developing options for the alternative “electoral process” in
2016 and would deploy a needs assessment mission to assist the National Independent
Electoral Commission in preparing for general elections at a later date.

C.

Rule of law and security institutions
Security sector assistance and reform
29. International support for the Guulwade (Victory) Plan to develop the capacity
of the Somali national army has been limited to date. An implementation team for
the plan, comprising technical representatives from the Ministry of Defence, the
Somali national army, AMISOM, UNSOM, the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM (UNSOA), the European Union Training Mission, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was
established in May and is working on the execution of the plan.
30. The National Integration Commission, inaugurated on 12 May, reached
agreement with the Federal Government and the Interim Juba Administration on the
numbers of personnel to be integrated into the Somali national army in Jubaland
(340 from Gedo, 1,000 from Juba Dhexe and 1,540 from Juba Hoose). The
Commission developed a timeline for integration of personnel in 2015 and 2016 on
a regional basis. On 26 July, 1,350 personnel were officially integrated into the
Somali national army; military training is ongoing. UNSOM and UNSOA continue
to provide technical and logistical support to the Commission.
31. A total of 16,780 members of the Somali national army and 5,200 personnel of
the Somali police force were biometrically registered in the human resources system
by the end of August. The Security Sector Expenditure Task Force held its first
meeting on 17 August. The Task Force is formulating recommendations on the
payment of salaries and stipends, recognizing the need for sustainable arrangements
for swift disbursement and the importance of a harmonized payroll system for
security forces.

6/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

32. During the High-level Partnership Forum, it was agreed that greater focus was
required on a national security architecture, as current security sector governance
and oversight structures remain largely insufficient. Progress in this regard
continues to be hampered by political challenges, in particular with regard to the
State-building and constitutional review processes. UNSOM and UNDP continue to
offer support through strategic assistance on the security aspects of the
constitutional process.
Police
33. The Police Working Group endorsed the initial concept of the Heegan
(Readiness) Plan for the development of the Somali police force, including in the
recovered areas. Finalization of the plan is expected by October.
34. Following the signing in May of memorandums of understanding between the
Federal Government and the Interim Juba Administration and the Interim South West Administration, respectively, on the establishment of a regional police,
UNSOM assisted with the screening and vetting of 200 prospective police officers
in Baidoa. A three-month training course for those officers commenced in August.
Also in August, vetting and screening of 200 officers took place in Kismaayo.
UNSOM and AMISOM provided technical advice to the Federal Government and
the interim regional administrations on a model for a federal structure of policing in
Somalia and are facilitating a comprehensive dialogue with regional and federal
stakeholders to agree on adequate structures within a federal security sector
architecture.
35. UNSOM provided a two-week training course on close protection to prepare
the police forces in Beledweyne, Hiraan region, to protect judicial personnel. With
support from the Government of Japan, the United Nations completed the
installation of a digital radio communication network that enables full coverage for
police operations in Mogadishu. The United Nations Mine Ac tion Service
(UNMAS) provided operational and financial support and training to the police
explosive ordnance disposal units in Baidoa, Beledweyne and Mogadishu.
36. As at August, the Federal Ministry of Internal Security, with support from
United Nations and AMISOM police teams, had undertaken training for 151 officers
of the Somali police force to be deployed to newly recovered areas. The intent is to
deploy basic civilian law enforcement capacity comprising 10 officers of the Somali
police force (two commanders and eight field officers) and 35 locally recruited
community security officers in each of the 13 districts recovered from Al -Shabaab.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
37. The Federal Government continued to implement its national programme for
disengaging combatants. In June, the United Nations and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) signed a memorandum of understanding to
implement a project to provide immediate support to the Federal Government in
managing safe houses for disengaging female combatants of Al-Shabaab and their
dependants. Military operations against Al-Shabaab resulted in an increase in the
number of surrendering and captured combatants being placed in the national
programme, which raised questions concerning the voluntary nature of the process,
as well as the status of combatants captured during combat. Owing to a lack of

15-14905

7/20

S/2015/702

transitional centres and rehabilitation services, some former fighters are being
accommodated in private homes or temporary shelters.
38. UNSOM continued to monitor the compliance of rehabilitation facilities with
international human rights standards in line with the national programme. However,
a lack of funding has reduced the capacity for monitoring. Furthermore, access to
two centres was prevented by the previous management, which limited the
monitoring of conditions. The present management has confirmed access for United
Nations monitoring.
39. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) continued to provide
community-based child reintegration services to 625 children (502 boys and
123 girls) formerly associated with armed forces or groups, including Al -Shabaab,
Ahlu Sunna wal Jama’a and others. UNICEF also supports other children at risk in
Baidoa, Afgoye, Mogadishu and Beledweyne districts.
Maritime security
40. In July, a working group on capacity-building for Somalia’s Navy and Coast
Guard was launched with UNSOM support. UNSOM provided technical assistance
to the Federal Government in the drafting of the Coast Guard Law and worked with
the Division of Ocean Affairs and Law of the Sea of the Secretariat of the United
Nations to deliver a five-day capacity-building workshop on the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea for Somali Government officials.
Mine action
41. On 15 June, the Somalia Explosive Management Authority assumed
responsibility for coordination of all mine action activities, an important step
towards full national ownership in this area. In May, the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS) began a community-based pilot project to address
explosive hazards on the Somali-Ethiopian border, which will also provide
employment opportunities.
42. In July and August, UNMAS and UNSOM trained 25 members of the Somali
national army, the National Intelligence and Security Agency, the Custodial Corps
and the National Security Adviser’s Office in the destruction of small arms and light
weapons.
Justice and corrections
43. Following its approval by the Somalia Development and Reconstruction
Facility, the Somalia Joint Rule of Law Programme was endorsed by the Federal
Government and international donors on 27 May during the inaugural Programme
Steering Committee meeting. Donors contributed $60 million to the programme, in
addition to bilateral support. Additional support is urgently needed for the swift
implementation of the programme.
44. United Nations agencies are engaging with key justice institutions, including
the Federal Ministry of Justice and the Attorney General’s Office, as well as
regional states and civil society partners, to prepare the implementation of the
programme.

8/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

45. UNSOM assisted the Federal Ministry of Justice in assessing the priority
training needs of judges, prosecutors and registrars in the interim administrations
and to develop training on basic professional skills.
46. The Federal Government announced the Onkod (“Thunder”) Plan to build a
more effective Custodial Corps through legislative reform, organizational
restructuring and infrastructure development. UNSOM provided advice on the plan.
More than 620 members of prison staff have so far been registered in an ongoing
human resources system project that will enhance financial oversight and
accountability for the Custodial Corps.

D.

Economic foundations
47. In June, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) completed its first Article IV
consultation mission to Somalia in 25 years, a key milestone for Somalia’s debt
forgiveness process and access to concessional lending. The mission noted that
current growth in gross domestic product (GDP), driven by the agriculture,
construction and telecommunications sectors, would be insufficient to address
poverty and gender disparities.
48. The Federal Government initiated the process for building a national
development plan upon the work under Peace- and State-building Goals 4 and 5 of
the New Deal Compact, laying the foundation for sustainable economic recovery
and development. The plan will be in compliance with requirements of the interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, which will help Somalia in its application for
status as a heavily indebted poor country.
49. In May, the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility Steering
Committee approved the United Nations Joint Programme on Youth Employment,
which aims to catalyse growth in labour-intensive sectors and provide Somali youth
with skills tailored to emerging market needs and short -term employment
opportunities. Approval was also given for two World Bank initiatives aimed at
supporting development of the Somali power sector, as well as the private and
financial sectors, to catalyse private investment and job creation.
50. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
continued to support the livestock, agriculture and fisheries sectors at both
government and local community levels. Interventions were launched in August to
vaccinate 14 million livestock and treat 1.5 million more over three months. FAO is
also providing financial support to over 30,000 households for the rehabilitation of
productive infrastructure through a cash-for-work programme. The International
Labour Organization has created employment opportunities for over 11,000
households among Somali returnees from Kenya, internally displaced persons and
host communities.

E.

Revenue and services
51. The World Bank continued to support the Federal Government in
strengthening public financial management and financial governance. A five -year
package was agreed for support to recurrent costs linked to policy measures and
macro-fiscal management, as well as a package to support priority reforms of public

15-14905

9/20

S/2015/702

financial management. With financial management information systems, interim
instruments and fiscal rules in place, efforts are now required to ensure their
systematic implementation. Those instruments also form the basis of the United
Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund’s new National Window, designed to channel
funds directly to Government entities in support of key peacebuilding priorities.
52. Scaling up service delivery across Somalia remains a priorit y. An essential
package of health services has so far reached over 4.2 million people. A Somali
National Health Policy and other policies related to immunization and reproductive
health were adopted in June. Examinations for over 7,000 children were held i n
June, the first centralized examination for students completing secondary school in
Somalia since 1991. In the absence of a teacher payroll system, approximately
250,000 children are benefiting from teachers being paid incentives. Major funding
gaps remain for provision of non-formal education opportunities for overage
children.
53. The United Nations Joint Programme on Local Governance continued to have
considerable success in Puntland and “Somaliland” with the adoption of
decentralization policies and roadmaps, strengthened district-level administrative
and financial management systems, and improved revenue generation and local
government planning. Key ministries in Puntland and “Somaliland” commenced
decentralized service delivery pilots, advancing the decentralization of core
functions in sectors such as health, education and road development. The Joint
Programme on Local Governance expanded support to the Interim Juba
Administration and the Interim South-West Administration, applying lessons learned
from Puntland and “Somaliland”.

F.

Cross-cutting issues
Stabilization
54. Efforts continued to coordinate Government, AMISOM and international
efforts with respect to stabilization of districts recovered from Al -Shabaab,
including the deployment of police capacity. Of the districts recovered under
“Operation Eagle” and “Operation Indian Ocean”, Qoryooley and Leego were
briefly retaken by Al-Shabaab but an AMISOM presence was restored in both
places. Activity carried out by Al-Shabaab reduced freedom of movement around
Tayeeglow, with consequences for the humanitarian situation and reconciliation
activities. Interim district administrators were deployed to the newly recovered
Diinsoor district, while negotiations began on the interim district administration for
Baardheere.
55. Activities funded by the Peacebuilding Fund Immediate Response Facility in
support of the efforts of the Ministry of Interior and Federal Affairs to stabilize in
newly recovered areas were initiated by UNDP and UNSOM. Of the car etaker
administrations being established in 13 districts, monies disbursed from the
Peacebuilding Fund are providing budget support for the eight currently functioning
administrations. The Federal Government has deployed Community Liaison
Officers and Local Governance Assistants to those districts to strengthen the
caretaker governments and to lay the foundation for establishing interim district
administrations. District Peace and Stabilization Committees have been established

10/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

in seven districts to support reconciliation, dialogue and inclusion processes with
citizens.
Human rights
56. Civilian casualties were a major concern during the reporting period. Violent
clan conflicts and military operations by AMISOM, the Ethiopian National Defence
Forces and the Somali national army resulted in 113 reported civilian casualties.
These included 37 victims of violent clan fighting in the Jubaland and Hiraan
regions, the latter reportedly also involving the Somali national army. A total of
22 civilians were allegedly killed by AMISOM troops during operations in Marka in
Shabelle Hoose on 21 and 31 July. In early August in Hiraan, AMISOM reportedly
killed a further five civilians and injured six, all of whom were passengers in a
minibus. Twenty-eight civilians were reportedly killed during Ethiopian National
Defence Forces/Somali national army operations in the Bakool region and 15 were
killed during air strikes carried out by the Ethiopian National Defence Forces in
July. UNSOM conducted an independent verification mission to Marka and has
called for independent and thorough investigations into the incidents. AMISOM
conducted a mission to Marka jointly with the Federal Government to meet with the
affected communities and has indicted suspected perpetrators, instituted a Board of
Inquiry and expressed a commitment to hold perpetrators to account. Other civilian
casualties were attributed to Al-Shabaab insurgents, unidentified assailants or
fighting between Somali national army/AMISOM personnel and Al -Shabaab. About
30 abductions were reported to have been carried out by suspected elements of
Al-Shabaab.
57. Cases of arbitrary arrest and detention were reported. Following security
operations, 185 people were arrested throughout Somalia on security -related issues,
and most of them were released within 48 hours.
58. Application of the death penalty continued during the reporting period. Three
executions were carried out in Mogadishu and one in Baidoa, while two death
sentences were handed down in Mogadishu in June.
59. The Independent Expert on the Human Rights Situation in Somalia, Tom
Nyanduga, visited Somalia from 20 to 29 May and will present his report to the
Human Rights Council in September 2015.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
60. UNSOM actively lobbied and supported Somali women’s organizations and
the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development to advocate for the
participation of women in political processes at the federal and regional levels. In
June, UNSOM facilitated separate missions by the Somali Women’s Leadership
Initiative and the Minister for Women to Cadaado to enable women leaders to
advocate and negotiate with federal, regional and local authorities for the
participation of women in the central regions state formation process. Women
ultimately secured 8 of 64 seats in the newly formed Galmudug state assembly.
61. In July, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development, with
vigorous campaigning and support by UNSOM, played a vital role in the
endorsement of two women commissioners for the National Independent Electoral
Commission, one of whom was selected in July as the Commission’s Chair. Support

15-14905

11/20

S/2015/702

from UNSOM also enabled the Somali Women’s Leadership Initiative and Men
Solidarity Group for Women’s Rights to participate in the Interim Juba
Administration Constituent Assembly, where they advocated for constitutional
provisions to protect the rights of women and girls.
Child protection
62. At least 746 cases of grave violations against children were documented in the
reporting period. Reported incidents affected 689 children, comprising 567 boys and
122 girls, and mostly implicated elements of Al -Shabaab and the Somali national
army. In the current reporting period, only one case of defection from Al -Shabaab
by a child was recorded.
63. On 4 June, UNSOM held an orientation workshop to promote awareness in the
Somali national army of issues faced by children in armed conflict and on the
mainstreaming of child protection into the policies and activities of the Somali
national army. On 8 June, the United Nations supported the Child Protection Unit of
the Somali national army to inspect troops gathered for militia integration in
Kismaayo, resulting in 36 children being screened out. From 9 to 13 June, the
United Nations Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting supported
members of the Child Protection Unit to travel to Uganda to learn from the
successful implementation of its plan to stop recruitment and use of children in the
Uganda People’s Defence Force.
Prevention of sexual violence
64. During the reporting period, UNSOM provided support to the Somali police
force to ensure the integration of women’s protection and conflict-related sexual
violence concerns into the Heegan Plan. Efforts are also under way to incorporate
conflict-related and sexual violence protection measures into the militia integration
process of the Somali national army. UNSOM continued its efforts to sensitize
civilian and military judicial system stakeholders to due process in cases of sexual
violence. Through the support of the United Nations Team of Experts on Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, four prosecutors and judges received training
at the Regional Training Facility on Prevention and Suppression of Sexual and
Gender-Based Violence in the Great Lakes Region, held in Kampala from 10 to
13 August.
65. UNSOM also conducted training of trainers in sexual and gender -based
violence and basic investigation skills in cooperation with AMISOM. Those trainers
will be assigned to provide basic and ongoing training to new and experienced
investigators.
66. On 18 August, my Special Representative briefed senior officers of the Unite d
Nations Guard Unit on the zero tolerance policy of the United Nations towards
sexual exploitation and abuse and on my special measures for protection against
such exploitation and abuse.

IV. Humanitarian situation
67. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains fragile. Inter-agency
contingency planning is under way for up to 900,000 people in Somalia who could

12/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

be affected by possible major flooding in the Shabelle and Juba areas owing to the
El Niño phenomenon in 2015. The number of Somalis in need of food assistance is
predicted to increase through December, primarily in Shabelle Dhexe, owing to
flooding, and in the agropastoral areas of Awdal, Hiraan and Juba Dhexe owing to
erratic Gu rainfall from April to June.
68. Food security conditions are expected to improve in livestock-dependent
livelihood zones owing to an improvement in livestock herd size and favourable
prices. However, there continues to be a high residual level of acute malnutrition,
with 731,000 Somalis who are unable to meet their basic food needs and a further
2.3 million people who are at risk. An estimated 12 per cent of children under five
years of age (202,600) are acutely malnourished, including 38,200 who are severely
malnourished and face a high risk of mortality.
69. Over 1.1 million Somalis remain in protracted displacement, most of whom
are food insecure. The joint Somali national army -AMISOM operations in the Juba
Corridor have triggered additional displacements. Forced evictions continue to
cause protection concerns.
70. The situation in Yemen has added additional stress to the already stretched
humanitarian response system. As at 19 July, more than 28,000 people had arrived
in Somalia from Yemen, more than 90 per cent of whom are Somalis. Humanitarian
organizations established reception centres for returnees at the ports of Boosaaso in
Puntland and Berbera in Somaliland, jointly with the local authorities.
71. The volatile security situation continues to make the delivery of humanitarian
assistance extremely dangerous. In the first six months of 2015, over 70 incidents
involving humanitarian organizations were reported, accounting for nine deaths and
five abductions. Despite the challenges, humanitarian organizations continue to use
innovative ways to deliver humanitarian assistance, including the use of community
networks, local organizations, private transport companies and air cargo.
72. In the first six months of 2015, an estimated 658,000 Somalis were assisted
through various interventions, countrywide acute malnutrition levels were lowered
from 14.9 to 12 per cent, and the number of people unable to meet their minimum
food needs reduced to 731,000 from over 1 million. The one -year mark since the
last reported case of polio in Somalia was crossed on 11 August.
73. UNICEF provided cash assistance to 61,200 vulnerable people through the end
of the main pastoral lean season in June, and will continue to provide support to
39,000 individuals through September. Nutrition cluster partners reached 23,877
acutely malnourished children and 2,638 malnourished pregnant and lactating
women with lifesaving treatment services. Since May 2015, water, sanitation and
hygiene cluster partners have provided support to 185,000 people with access to
safe water, 25,000 people gained access to sanitation facilities, and 270,000 people
received hygiene kits and/or materials designed to promote hygiene.
74. Most government institutions continue to lack basic capacities to implement
their mandates, including human resources, guiding policies and infrastructure.
World Bank and UNDP projects to support capacity development in core
government functions have been approved.
75. Inter-agency humanitarian assessment missions were undertaken to identify
urgent needs in newly recovered Baardheere and Diinsoor. More than 14 humanitarian

15-14905

13/20

S/2015/702

organizations are currently active in the two towns and more are expected to begin
work as the situation improves.

V. Targeted sanctions
76. During the informal consultations of the Security Council Committee on
Somalia and Eritrea on 1 May, the Committee was briefed on the implementation of
the charcoal ban by the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group, the Combined
Maritime Forces and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
Committee Chair briefed the Security Council on 16 July. In August, the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group commenced the drafting of its final report, which the
Committee is scheduled to consider on 9 October.

VI. Implementation of resolutions 2124 (2013), 2182 (2014) and
2232 (2015)
Support to AMISOM and the Somali national army
77. By its resolution 2232 (2015), the Security Council endorsed the
recommendations of the Joint African Union-United Nations Review Mission that
were outlined in my letter of 2 July to the President of the Council. From 17 to
25 August, AMISOM convened a meeting in Nairobi to revise its concept of
operations in consultation with the United Nations and relevant partners. The draft
revised concept of operations will be reviewed by the African Union Commission
before being approved by the African Union Peace and Security Council.
78. Field visits for the UNSOA strategic review were conducted from 30 July to
8 August in Addis Ababa, Somalia and Nairobi and included consultations with the
Federal Government, AMISOM, the African Union, Member States, UNSOM and
other UNSOA clients. The review seeks to provide options for UNSOA to remain fit
for purpose in response to the strategic objectives of the United Nations in Somalia.
The final report of the strategic review will be submitted by 30 September, in
accordance with resolution 2232 (2015).
79. UNSOA continued to provide logistics support to AMISOM across all sectors
in south-central Somalia, with an increased burden on its air assets owing to
insecurity along and inaccessibility of main supply routes. The force enabling units
envisaged in resolution 2124 (2013) have not yet been deployed. The provision of
potable water to the sectors continued to be a challenge, and UNSOA is expediting a
borehole drilling programme and the distribution of water treatment plants.
Following the attack on 26 July at the Jazeera Palace Hotel, t here is an urgent need
for additional accommodation facilities at Mogadishu International Airport.
80. From 10 July to 6 August, UNSOA supported the rotation of Ethiopian,
Burundian and Ugandan troops, as well as a Ugandan formed police unit of 140
personnel. UNSOA also provided support to the rotation of the Ugandan United
Nations Guard Unit, consisting of 410 troops, and the deployment of an additional
120 troops from Uganda to the Guard Unit, bringing the force strength to 530, as
indicated in my letter of 6 April to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/234).

14/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

81. Discussions among the African Union, the United Nations and the Government
of Uganda on the letter of assist for the deployment of Ugandan mi litary helicopters
are at an advanced stage. UNSOA conducted predeployment and in -mission training
for 713 AMISOM personnel during the reporting period, including training for the
Uganda aviation unit, in preparation for the deployment of six Ugandan helic opters.
UNSOA also conducted medical evacuation, repatriation and redeployment of 248
AMISOM personnel, and issued 3,000 individual first aid kits to troops of the
Somali national army.
82. While the previously trained and registered 9,157 Somali national army troops
continued to benefit from UNSOA logistics support, an additional 1,350 troops
received mandatory human rights training in Kismaayo, bringing to 10,507 the total
number of troops of the Somali national army who are eligible for UNSOA support.
Additional Somali national army troops are expected to undergo human rights
training in Dhobley and Ceelwaaq in September 2015.
83. There were no further contributions to the Trust Fund in support of AMISOM
and the Somali national army during the reporting period. UNSOA has spent
$14.65 million from the Trust Fund in support of the Somali national army in joint
operations with AMISOM, pursuant to resolution 2124 (2013). As of 24 August, the
balance in the AMISOM Trust Fund stood at $2.8 million, while the S omali national
army Trust Fund is nearing depletion. The United States Government has signalled
its intention to make a contribution of $15 million to the Somali national army Trust
Fund.
84. As part of the UNSOA logistics support package, UNMAS continued to train,
mentor and equip 13 AMISOM teams in improvised explosive device
countermeasures and explosive ordnance disposal teams. During the reporting
period, AMISOM responded to 92 emergency incidents involving improvised
explosive devices and other explosive hazards. Mentors provided non-lethal combat
engineering technical advice to the Force Enabling Unit resulting in the safe
delivery of 2,452,165 kgs of cargo to the United Nations, the Federal Government
and AMISOM/Somali national army.
85. UNMAS began to embed staff into AMISOM Force Headquarters, Sector
Headquarters, and UNSOA, enabling it to provide better tactical advice and
mapping on mobility and the threat of improvised explosive devices. UNMAS
provided data, analysis and non-lethal technical advice to AMISOM to support
mobility and resupply on main supply routes.
Human rights due diligence policy
86. As part of the mitigating measures of the policy, UNSOM delivered training
on human rights and international humanitarian law to 318 officers o f the Somali
national army and a “training of trainers” workshop on human rights and
international humanitarian law for 25 selected AMISOM trainers. The trainers have
trained 1,600 newly integrated security forces in Jubaland. A three -day human rights
training for 20 officers of the Criminal Investigation Department of the Somali
police force was also delivered.
87. In June 2015, the Joint AMISOM/United Nations Working Group on the
human rights due diligence policy adopted a report which maps existing measures
and mechanisms to ensure compliance with the policy by AMISOM and the Somali

15-14905

15/20

S/2015/702

national army. The report identified gaps and further measures to improve
implementation of the policy, including a standing agenda item to review allegations
of human rights violations attributed to AMISOM. The Working Group met on
6 August following allegations against AMISOM in relation to its operations in July
in Marka. On 20 August, the United Nations internal task force on the human rights
due diligence policy met to identify further mitigation measures to prevent human
rights violations by AMISOM troops and recommend corrective action.

VII. United Nations presence in Somalia
A.

Expansion of the presence of the United Nations
88. During the reporting period, the number of international staff averaged 408
across Somalia, while the number of national staff averaged 1,024. The international
staff average for Mogadishu was 275. There was a slight scaling back in presence in
Puntland after the attack on the United Nations vehicle in Garoowe on 20 April.

B.

Integration
89. The Joint Planning Unit of UNISOM and the Resident Coordinator’s Office
jointly developed a tool to monitor progress in the implementation of the Integrated
Strategic Framework for Somalia. The first report was presented to the Senior
Management Group on 2 June. Subsequent reports will be submitted for discussion
every 120 days and will focus on identifying common challenges and providing
recommendations that require action by the Senior Management Group.
90. Discussions are ongoing between UNSOM and the United Nations country
team regarding joint deployments in the regions in order to maximize resources,
based on integrated analysis and planning. UNSOM and the co untry team have
developed regional strategic plans to guide programme delivery and assist regional
authorities in their own planning efforts. Meanwhile, the United Nations in Somalia
has designed a comprehensive risk management strategy with partners for a ll three
trust funds under the New Deal Compact.

C.

Staff safety and security
91. Following revised security risk assessments in Puntland and Somaliland,
United Nations agencies worked hard to ensure continued programme delivery and
access to local counterparts, while taking steps to address the increased security
requirements of the minimum operating security standards.
92. In June, UNSOM and the United Nations country team conducted an exercise
to revise the programme criticality framework for Somalia. The findings of the
exercise were incorporated into security risk assessments and will inform ongoing
deployment planning.
93. Amendments to the status-of-mission agreement covering the operation of the
United Nations Guard Unit, and a memorandum of understanding on coordinating
the operations of the Unit with those of the Somali security forces, were agreed
between the United Nations and the Federal Government on 23 May.

16/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

94. All Department of Safety and Security core international staff posts were filled
by mid-August 2015, while extra capacity was added to Mogadishu, Baidoa and
Doolow. Extrabudgetary funding has been secured to the end of 2015 for the
Medical Emergency Response Teams project.

VIII. Observations
95. Much progress has been achieved through the commitment of Somali leaders
and ordinary Somalis, supported by the international community in a show of unity
that is almost unparalleled. The administration of the first centralized examination
since 1991 — the beginning of the civil war in Somalia — to some 7,000 secondary
school students is a concrete example of a beginning of normalization, and hope,
which are much needed in Somalia. The beginnings of a resurgence in the economic
and social life of Mogadishu and other cities nationwide are a clear testimony of the
commitment of the Somalis to rebuilding their society. Yet, no one should be
complacent. Much more needs to be done to consolidate the gains and tackle the
remaining challenges.
96. Ongoing joint military operations by the Somali national army and AMISOM
have continued to create more territorial space for the Government to exercise its
authority. I pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali national army forces, who
continue to make sacrifices, showing perseverance despite many challenges. Recent
incidents, including the attack in Leego on 26 June and the Jazeera Palace Hotel
suicide bombing on 26 July, are constant reminders of the danger we continue to
face in Somalia.
97. I welcome the determination of both the Federal Government and the
international community not to be daunted by the cowardly terrorist attacks. The
people of Somalia continue to show tremendous resilience in the face of an enemy
that does not respect human life, even during the holy month of Ramadan. At the
same time, military operations alone will not address the threat of terrorism. I
encourage Member States to consider what more can be done to ensure a truly
comprehensive approach to Al-Shabaab, including supporting the emergence of a
state that offers Somalis political inclusion, security, respect for human rights and
economic opportunity.
98. Recent progress in the state formation process is commendable. I welcome the
successful completion of the formation of the Galmudug Interim Administration in
the central regions and highlight the leadership role played by the Federal
Government in guiding the process. I urge the Federal Government and the
Galmudug Interim Administration to continue reaching out to all groups in the
region to further deepen inclusivity. As the Interim Juba Administration and the
Interim South-West Administration continue to consolidate their administrations, I
call upon the Federal Government to play a similarly enabling role. The launching
of the process of forming an interim administration for Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe
regions is also encouraging. Achieving the establishment of functional federal
member states is a critical building block for the conclusion of other political
processes. I urge the Federal Government and the stakeholders to work closely in a
cohesive and inclusive process towards that end.
99. The High-level Partnership Forum marked a significant political moment.
Necessary actions were agreed upon to ensure that the “electoral process” in 2016 is

15-14905

17/20

S/2015/702

Somali-owned, more inclusive and representative than in 2012, and more orderly.
Following the High-level Partnership Forum, the Federal Government finalized its
action plan for the 2016 “electoral process” on 15 August after consulting the
Parliament and interim regional administrations. Discussions are under way on how
to move the plan forward, with the technical and financial support of the
international community. I am pleased to note this agreement and urge all
stakeholders to work expeditiously to implement the action plan.
100. In this context, the motion to impeach the President, introduced in the
Parliament on 12 August, raises concerns about the stability of the political process.
I add my voice to the joint statement issued by Somalia’s internation al partners on
18 August on this issue and appeal to all the Somali stakeholders to remain focused
on the urgent and pending priorities facing the country, including preparation for the
2016 “electoral process”, completion of the state formation process and the fight
against Al-Shabaab.
101. Continuing delays in the implementation of several other elements of the
Vision 2016 inclusive politics framework remain problematic. In particular, the
constitutional review process is a key area in which substantial progress needs to be
made, especially since the key national implementing institutions are now in place.
As part of this process, there is an urgent need to agree on a national security sector
architecture with clearly defined roles and responsibilities of all security institutions
in a federal Somalia. This should also provide a framework in which the
accelerating militia integration can take place. This must include effective oversight
and accountability mechanisms to prevent and address human rights viol ations.
102. I welcome the important commitments made by the Federal Government and
the international community regarding the security sector during the High -level
Partnership Forum. I urge all partners to commit to mobilizing resources for the
implementation of the Guulwade Plan and the Heegan Plan upon its completion, as
well as the work of the National Integration Commission. Current issues with the
non-payment of salaries to the national security forces could have serious
implications. I urge the Government and the international community to address the
situation without delay and look forward to the work of the Security Sector
Expenditure Task Force on addressing the issue of payments of salaries and stipends
so that harmonized, sustainable and transparent national payroll and stipend systems
can be developed.
103. The support of UNSOA to the Somali national army is playing an important
role in enhancing the operational capacity of the national forces, especially at the
present time when they, together with AMISOM, have launched an offensive to
liberate territory from Al-Shabaab. I, once again, urge Member States to contribute
generously to the Trust Fund to enable UNSOA to provide uninterrupted support to
the Somali national army as authorized by the Council.
104. I remain concerned about the continuing practice of the death penalty in
Somalia and call for an urgent moratorium to be implemented. I condemn the abuses
committed by Al-Shabaab, in particular its frequent executions of civilians. I am
deeply worried and concerned about reports of killings of civilians by the Somali
security forces and AMISOM forces. I welcome recent actions by AMISOM and call
upon the national authorities and AMISOM, where relevant, to continue
investigating allegations of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in the context of military operations and to hold the perpetrators

18/20

15-14905

S/2015/702

accountable. I similarly urge accountability for violations and abuses attributable to
foreign forces operating outside the AMISOM umbrella. The implementation of the
human rights due diligence policy in Somalia is paramount to United Nations efforts
in the country.
105. As outlined in my letter of 2 July to the Security Council and endorsed in
resolution 2232 (2015), substantial contributions to the development and
sustainment of the Somali police force are required. These must include short -term
initiatives to jump-start the establishment of a police force in the regions, along with
a recommended gradual reconfiguration of AMISOM to wards more police personnel
where appropriate. In collaboration with AMISOM, United Nations entities are
developing detailed options for the implementation and delivery of a non -lethal
support package for the Somali police force, which will be presented to the Council
in September, as requested in its resolution 2232 (2015).
106. I remain extremely concerned at the fragile humanitarian situation in Somalia,
which is being compounded by the crisis in Yemen, and at the increased rate of
forced evictions and displacement prompted by the military offensive. Over
3 million people remain in need of humanitarian assistance. The potential
humanitarian impact of El Niño is also of serious concern. I urge all parties to
facilitate timely, unhindered and safe access for humanitarian actors and to find
durable solutions for the 1.1 million Somalis who are internally displaced. I reiterate
my appeal to donors to increase support to the $863 million humanitarian appeal,
which is aimed at addressing the needs of over 2.8 million Somalis.
107. I am disappointed that in “Somaliland”, the Supreme Court has ruled in favour
of the Guurti to postpone presidential and parliamentary elections until March 2017.
The decision was made despite international appeals against the postpone ment and
risks jeopardizing the gains that the region has made in its democratization effort.
108. Numerous challenges notwithstanding, in recent months, Somalia has made
some progress in women’s political participation and leadership at the national and
local levels. While much remains to be achieved, the inclusion and engagement of
women in strategic positions, such as in the Interim Juba Administration and
Galmudug state assemblies, the National Independent Electoral Commission and
Federal and regional cabinets, are indications of slow but steady progress.
Traditional elders and political leaders have a responsibility to help to redress the
gender imbalance.
109. As I have stated in the past, the people of Somalia bear the ultimate
responsibility for ushering in lasting peace, stability and national development in
their country. Somalia has suffered long enough from painful past years of anarchy
and destruction. The Somali leadership and representatives must live up to their
responsibility of showing the political commitment and unity required to guide the
process to a satisfactory conclusion in 2016. The international community stands
ready to continue supporting Somalia.
110. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, his deputies and the
staff members of UNSOM, UNSOA and the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other international and regional organizations in Somalia for their
continued hard work under challenging conditions. I also thank the African Union,
AMISOM, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the European Union
and other development partners for their sustained support to the search for durable
peace in Somalia. We must continue to strengthen our partnership in the quest for
lasting peace and stability.

15-14905

19/20

S/2015/702

20/20

15-14905
