24

General Assemhly-Thirty-first Session

resolution 3067 (XXVIII) for the efficient and continuous servicing of the Conference in 1977 and of
subsequent activities as may be decidcd upon by the
Conference, as well as to take appropriate measures to
ensure stability and continuity for the secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference;
5. Recalls, in this connexion, that it noted in paragraph 4 of its resolution 3334 (XXIX) the decision of
the Conference to accept the invitation of the Govemment of Venezuela to meet at Caracas at an appropriate
date for the purpose of signing the Final Act and related instruments adopted by the Conference and authorized the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements to that end.
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1975

Bearing in mind that Bolívar envisaged a Latin
American region of free and brotherly countries united
by common ideals, a dream which makes him the precur~or of the integration of that region,
Recognizing that the Treaty of Perpetua! Union,
League and Confederation, signed in Panama on 15 July
1826, reflects a universalist spirit which is currently
embodied by the United Nations, in that it reaffirms
the sovereignty and independence of States and their
intention "to secure to themselves from this time forward the cnjoyment of unalterable peacc, and to promote in this behalf better harmony and good understanding as well between the countries, citizens and
rnbjects, respectively, as with the other Powers with
which they should maintain or enter into friendly relations" ,53

31/104.

Recalling that Simón Bolívar referred on several occasi ons to the need for a possible opening of a canal
in Panama, which "will shorten distances throughout
the world, strengthen commercial ties" 54 between the
continents and promote the exchange of projects "from
the four corners of the globe",M

Admission of thc lndependent State of
Western Samoa to membership in the
Unitecl Natiom,

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 1 December 1976 that the Independent State
of Western Samoa should be admitted to membership
in the United Nations,11º
Having considered the application for membership
of the Independent State of Western Samoa, 51
Decides to admit the Independent State of Western
Samoa to membership in the United Nations.
100th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/142. One hundred ami fifticth anniversary
of the Amphictyonic Conµ;ress of Panama

The General Assembly,
Having decided to hold a special commemorative
plenary meeting to pay a tribute to Simón Bolívar, the
Liberator, on the occasion of the one hundred and
fiftieth anniversary of the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama, which met on 22 June 1826,
Considering that the main objective of that Congress
was to constitute an assembly of confederated countries
which should establish the legal foundations for the
relations between the American Republics and all the
nations of the world, and should serve as "a council
during periods of great conflicts, to be appealed to in
the event of common danger, and to be a faithful interpreter of public treaties when difficulties arise, in brief,
to concíliate all our dífferences" ,52 concepts which form
the basis of the international law of the American countries and are thus the direct predecessors of the Covenant of the League of N ations and the Charter of
the United Nations,
50 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/369.
5 1 A/31 /364-S/ 12245. For the printed text, see Ofjicial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Y ear, Supp!ement
for October, November and December 1976.
52 Simón Bolívar, Lima, 7 December 1824. For the text,
see Selected Writings of Bolívar, vol. JI, Vicente Lecuna,
comp., Harold A. Bierck, Jr., ed. (New York, The Colonial
Press Inc., 1951), p. 457.

1. Pays a tribute to Simón Bolívar, the Liberator,
as a promoter of Latin American integration and as a
builder of constructive plans for international organization on a continental and wor!d-wide scalc and, in
this connexion, decides to place a commemorative
plaque in the United Nations Headquarters building
as a permanent tribute to his memory;
2. Recognizes that the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama represents the most outstanding and audacious
unionist experiment at the international leve! in the
nineteenth century, with oecumenical features which
anticípate and coincide with the ohjectives of the United
Nations system;
3. Expresses the hope that the ideal of Bolívar will
inspire the establishment of a more just intcrnational
order of respect for law, devoted to the maintenance of
pcace, the preservatíon of democratic principles, the
promotion of economic and social progress, and the
freedom of all peoples;
4. Formulates the wish for a successful outcome of
the negotiations for the conclusion of a new treaty on
the Panama Canal, which will eliminate the causes of
conflict between thc Republic of Panama and the United
States of America, in accordance with the Declaration
of Principies, signed by the parties concerned on 7 February 197 4, where it is stated that the Panamanian
territory of which the Panama Canal is a part shall be
returned promptly to the jurisdiction of the Republic
of Panama and that the Republic of Panama "will assume total responsibility for the operation of the Canal
upnn the termination of the treaty";" 5
5 :1 Article 2 of the Treaty of Perpetua! Union, League and
Confederation, Panama, 15 July 1826. For the text, see
lnternational Confcrences of American States, 1889-1928,
James Brown, ed. (New York, Oxford University Press, 1931),
p. XXV.
54 Simón Bolívar, "Reply of a South American to a gentleman of this Tsland [Jamaica]", Kingston, 6 September 1815.
Por the text, see Selected Writings of Bolivar, vol. I, Vicente
Lecuna, comp., Harold A. Bierck, Jr., ed. (New York, The
Colonial Press Tnc., 1951), p. 119.
5 :; Eight-point agreement signed in Panama City on 7 February 1974 by Mr. Juan Antonio Tack, Minister for Externa!
Relations of the Republic of Panama, and by Mr. Henry
Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States of America.
For the text, see United States Department of State Bulletin,
vol. LXV, No. 1809, 25 February 1974, pp. 184 and 185.

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the circulation to all Member States of a document
reproducing the instrument of convocation and the
agreements of the Amphictyonic Congress of 1826, the
original texts of which, currently kept in Río de Janeiro,
will be deposited in Panama by decision of the Government of Brazil, at an appropriate time, to be preserved
in the monument to be erected in that country as part
of the Bolívar commemoration.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1976
31/143.

Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 56
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 3481 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, as well as
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of millions of Africans, in Namibia by the Govemment of South Africa through its persistent, illegal
occupation of the intemational Territory, and in Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority régime,
Deeply conscious of the pressing need to take ali
the necessary measures to bring about the speedy and
complete elimination of the last vestiges of colonialism,
particularly with respect to Namibia and Zimbabwe,
where efforts to perpetuate iHegal racist minority rule
have brought untold suffering and bloodshed to the
peoples of those Territories,
Strongly deprecating the policies of those States
which, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, continue to collaborate with the Govemment of South Africa and with the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia, thus perpetuating their domination of the peoples in the Territories
concemed,
N oting that the success of the national Iiberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have
provided the international community with a unique
opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards
the elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism
in Africa,
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by
the Special Committee with a view to securing the effective and complete implementation of the Declaration
and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
in particular the important consultations undertaken
by the Ad Hoc Group established by the Special Com56 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1).

25

mittee at its 1029th meeting on 1 April 1976,r,7 as well
as the constructive results achieved as a consequence
of the visiting missions to the British Virgin Islands 58
and Tokelau, 59
Noting a/so with satisfaction the co-operation and
active participation of the administering Powers concerned in the relevant work of the Special Committee,
as well as the continued readiness of the Governments
of Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to receive United
Nations visiting missions in the Territories undcr their
administration, and deeply deploring the negative attitude of those administering Powers which, despite the
repeated appeals addressed to them by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee, persist in their
refusal to co-operate with the Special Committee in the
discharge of the mandate entrusted to it by the Assembly,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication
of racial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the
basic human rights of the peoples in colonial Territories will be achieved with the greatest spced by the
faithful and complete implementation of the Declaration,
l. Reaffi,rms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and ali other resolutions on decolonization,
and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance
with those resolutions, to take ali the necessary steps
to enable the dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise fully and without further delay their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Declares once again that the continuation of colonialism in ali its forms and manifestations-including
racism, apartheid, the exploitation by foreign and other
intercsts of economic and human resources, and the
waging of colonial wars to suppress the national liberation movements of the colonial Territories in Africais incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ami the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and poses a serious threat
to international peace and security;
3. Reaffirms its determination to take ali neccssary
steps with a view to the complete and speedy eradication of colonialism and to the faithful and strict observance by al! States of the relevant provisions of the
Charter, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples and the guiding principies of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
4. Affi,rms once again its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the peoples under colonial and
alíen domination to exercise their right to self-determination and independence by all the necessary means
at their disposal;
5. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 1976, 56 including the programme of work envisaged for 1977;60
6. Calls upan ali States, in particular the administering Powers, and the specialized agencies and other
ó7 !bid., chap. VII.
58 !bid., chap. XXVIII.
59 /bid., chap. XVII.
60 /bid., chap. I, paras. 149-161.
