168

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

(j) Interested intergovernmental organizations to be
represented by observers at the Conference:
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to be represented by observers at the Conference:
(h) Other interested non-governmental organizations that may have a specific contribution to make to
the work of the Conference to be represented by observers at the Conference:
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of representatives of the
organizations referred to in paragraph 18 (b) and (c)
above, including the requisite financial provisions for
their travel expenses and daily subsistence allowances;
20. Invites the co-ordinating committee, to which
reference is made in decision 8 (II) of I August 1980 of
the Preparatory Committee, 2 ' ' to play an active role in
ensuring the effective implementation of the preparatory work programme of the Conference:
21. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize
further the assistance of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and other relevant services
of the United Nations system in the implementation of
the programme of information for the Conference to ensure world-wide awareness of the Conference and its objectives, particularly in the developing countries;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain immediately the views of Member States concerning plans
which have been drawn up for the organization of
exhibitions-cum-demonstrations in the area of new
and renewable sources of energy at Nairobi during the
Conference and to keep in close touch with the Government of Kenya to ensure the best possible conditions for
the exhibitions-cum-demonstrations:
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the entire documentation for the Conference and its Preparatory Committee in all the working languages of the
Conference is made available well in advance for consideration by Member States:
24. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those of the General Assembly and its Main
Committees:
25. Decides to consider the results of the Conference
at its thirty-sixth session.
97th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

35/205.

tember 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,254 by which it endorsed, as one of its major
priorities, a Comprehensive New Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries in two phases: an Immediate Action Programme ( 1979-1981) and a Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s,
Recognizing that the primary responsibility for their
development rests with the least developed countries
themselves,
Recalling its resolution 34/2 JO of I 9 December I 979,
by which it endorsed the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling also its resolution 34 /203 of 19 December
1979, by which it decided to convene the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
in 1981,
Recalling further its resolution S-11 /4 of 15 September 1980 on measures to meet the critical situation in the
least developed countries,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries on its first and second sessions, 2 ' '
Reaffirming that there is an immediate need for a
greatly expanded increase in the transfer of resources to
meet the critical needs of the least developed countries
and to help promote their rapid and self-sustained
socio-economic development,
Emphasizing the particular importance of the contribution that economic co-operation among developing countries can make, inter a/ia, to the development of
the least developed among them,
Noting with appreciation that some developed countries have taken positive steps towards the implementation of resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Deeply concerned that, even more than one year after
the adoption of the Immediate Action Programme
( 1979-1981 ), contained in resolution 122 (V) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
very limited progress has been made towards its implementation,
Recognizing the need for extensive public awareness
throughout the world of the desperate plight of the least
developed countries and the importance and objectives
of the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries,

United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the deteriorating
economic and social situation of the least developed
countries and their dismal development during the past
two decades, as well as at their bleak development
prospects for the l 980s.
Also deeply concerned at the continued critical lack of
basic infrastructure in the least developed countries,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States. and 3362 (S-V II) of 16 Sep-

I. Urges all developed countries, developing countries in a position to do so, multilateral development
institutions and other sources to take urgent steps to implement without any further delay, and in any case before the end of 1981, the commitments undertaken in the
Immediate Action Programme ( 1979-1981 ), contained
in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development:
2. Urges donor countries which have not yet done so
to provide substantive information on the steps they
'" See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D. 14), part one, sect. A.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 45 (A/JS/45).

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

are taking to implement the Immediate Action Programme;
3. Urges the least developed countries, to the extent
of their possibilities, to submit information on the steps
they are taking to implement the Immediate Action Programme;
4. Also urges donor countries to make equitable and
all possible efforts with a view to doubling, at the
earliest possible time within the first half of the 1980s,
the flow of official development assistance to the least
developed countries, in accordance with the commitments undertaken in paragraph 13 of resolution 122 (V)
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and to give serious consideration to this end to
the proposal that such a doubling should be in real
terms, taking into account the relative performance of
donor countries;
5. Further urges donor countries, in the context of
the over-all increase of official development assistance,
to give serious consideration, not later than at the
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, to be held in 1981, to the proposals for further
measures to provide an adequate minimum flow of official development assistance, including those proposals
for tripling the net disbursement of concessional assistance by 1984 and quadrupling it by 1990, at 1977 prices,
on a predictable, continuous and assured basis;
6. Calls upon all developed countries to provide official development assistance to the least developed
countries, as a general rule in the form of grants, which,
as a general rule, should be untied;
7. Expresses satisfaction at the readiness of other developing countries to take concrete measures to assist in
meeting the development needs of the least developed
countries on a priority basis and to give particular attention to the least developed countries, as an example
of economic and technical co-operation among developing countries, and to make special efforts to ensure
that all least developed countries can actively participate in and benefit from economic and technical cooperation among developing countries;
8. Notes with appreciation the concern of developed
countries for the alleviation of the critical situation of
the least developed countries;
9. Urges donor countries and multilateral development institutions to allocate increased financial resources and technical assistance in support of activities
aimed at major structural transformations of the least
developed countries, taking into account the relative
over-all performance of the donor countries;
10. Requests multilateral development agencies, including international, interregional, regional and intergovernmental funds, to accord priority to the least developed countries in the programming and allocation of
their resources;
11. Urges all developed countries, developing countries in a position to do so, multilateral development
institutions and other sources to extend substantial assistance to the least developed countries for the development of their energy resources;
12. Invites all countries, as well as organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to accord due priority, in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, 256 to the provisions relating _to accelerated development of the least developed
countries;
"'See resolution 35/56 above. annex.

169

II
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
put forward by the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries at its second session, 257 taking into account
the views expressed by delegations at that session;
2. Decides that the United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries shall be held from I to
14 September 1981, to be preceded by a two-day consultation among senior officials on 27 and 28 August
1981:
3. Accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of France to act as host to the Conference, to be
held in Paris;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
(b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate, in the capacity of observers, in thesessions and the work of all international conferences
convened under its auspices to participate in the Conference in that capacity, in accordance with Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 31 / I 52
of 20 December 1976;
(c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity
in its region to participate in the Conference in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d) Namibia, represented by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to participate in the Conference in
accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of 4 November 1977;
(e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs of
the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(j) Intergovernmental bodies in consultative status
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to be represented by observers at the Conference;
(g) Non-governmental organizations in consultative
status (general category) with the United Nations Confc:rence on Trade and Development and the Economic
and Social Council to be represented by observers at the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure effective
participation of representatives of the le"ast developed
countries in the Conference by seeking extrabudgetary
funds to finance travel expenses of three representatives
from each least developed country;
6. Decides that the third session of the Preparatory
Committee for the Conference shall be held at Geneva
from 29 June to 10 July 1981;
7. Requests the Preparatory Committee to consider
and finalize the draft agenda and draft rules of procedure for the Conference during its third session and to
submit them to the Conference;
8. Requests the least developed countries to submit
their individual country presentations to the Conferem:e secretariat not later than I March 1981, since they
are of crucial importance to the success of the Conference;
•, . Ofjicial Records o( the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 45 (A; 35 /45), part two. annex I.

170

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

9. Calls upon the internati~rnal commu~ity and_ the
organs, organizations and bodies of the United ~at1ons
system to take all necessary measures to contribute to
the success of the Conference, the primary objective of
which will be to finalize, adopt and support the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s, as
called for in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements to ensure the availability of all
relevant documents, in all the official languages of the
Conference, well in advance for timely consideration by
Member States;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that the necessary arrangements for requisite financial
provisions to the maximum extent possible within
existing resources are made to ensure the success of
tht> Conference, including the arrangements for prP-Conference consultations, as envisaged in paragraph 2
of the present section;
12. Decides that the official languages of the Conference and its committees shall be those of the General
Assembly and its Main Committees;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in pursuance of
paragraph 8 of its resolution 34/203, to entrust the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation with the responsibility for
taking necessary steps, with the collaboration of the
Secretary-General of the Conference, to ensure the full
mobilization and co-ordination of all organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in the
preparations for the Conference;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General and the
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to provide, using, inter alia, existing resource~ to
the extent possible, appropriate assistance, including
technical assistance, to the least developed countries, at
their request and in accordance with established procedures, in their preparations for the Conference at the
national, subregional, regional and global levels;
15. Invites the Governments in a position to do so to
provide similar assistance:
16. Urges donor countries to provide assistance
bilaterally or through appropriate multilateral channels
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
the Special Measures Fund for the Least Developed
Countries of the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Capital Development
Fund, in response to requests from the least developed
countries for immediate additional financial support for
detailed preparations of the country programmes and
other preparations for the Substantial New Programme

of Action for the 1980s, including identification of
obstacles to planning and steps to correct them, a su~vey of resources, feasibility studies and investment p~oJects, as envisaged in paragraph 3 (c) of resolution
122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development:
Ill
I. Requests the Secretary-General of_ the Un_ited
Nations the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Confere~ce on the Least Developed Countries and the
organs, organizations and bodies of the Uni~ed_ Nations
system to undertake a programme of pubhc information activities designed to ensure awa:-eness througho_ut
the world of the importance of the Conference and its
objectives. to the maximum extent possible within existing resources;
2. Invites Member States actively to promote public
awareness of the Conference by disseminating relevant
information, inter alia, to their mass communication
media networks;
3. Suggests the exchange of hi~h-level natiof!al
delegations in order to generate pubhc awareness with
regard to the critical situation of t~e \east developed
countries and the importance and obJect1ves of the Conference:
4. Expresses the view that an international year of
the least developed countries could focus the attention
of the international community on the situation in those
countries, without prejudice to paragraph 10 of the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980 /6 7
of 25 July 1980 on guidelines for future international
years. as adopted by the General Assembly in its decision 35/424 of 5 December 1980:
5. Requests the United Nations Postal Administration to issue special stamps commemorating the Conference;
6. Invites Member States to consider issuing special
national stamps of a commemorative nature on the
Conference:

IV
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the outcome of the United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries and on the progress made in
the implementation of the Immediate Action Programme (1979-1981).
97th plenary meeting
I 6 December I 980
