5
-.
F;
c

0
CD
2
R
0
3

:
.
.
.

.
.3
.
.
.
.

c
5
c-z

.
.
.

_ s
. 3

r

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S11pplel17enrs
of the Offkirrl Records of tllp Secl/~it.~~ Cot~~lcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~so1r~tion.s rr/7d
Deci.vions of’tlw
Security C’olll7cil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1980th .MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 December 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Ion DATCU

(Romania).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1. Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l980)

receiving great contributions
from France as a
permanent member. Therefore we are happy to have
the representative of France among LIS here. We are
confident that Mr. Leprette, with his great distinction
as a French diplomat and rich experience in the
affairs of the United Nations, will play an important
and effective role-as effective, indeed, as his predecessor’s-and
will discharge wet1 his heavy responsibilities as representative of that great country. My
delegation would like to offer him the best possible
wishes for his success.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12253 and
Add.1)

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the’secretary-General
on the United Nations
operation #in Cyprus (S/12253 and Add.1)

I, The PRESIDENT
(i/ttc~/pr’etrrtiorI ,fh~ Fw~I):
In accordance with the decisions taken yesterday by
the Council at its 1979th meeting, 1 shall, with tshe
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Turkey and Greece to pal-.ticipate in the debate
without the right to vote.

2. The PRESlDENT
(i/rtLJI.I)/‘c~tl//i~)/l ,fb/~r Frc~/~c*/r):
The Council .will now hear the statements of t,he
remainder of the representativ’es who wished to
speak after the udopt’ion by the Council yesterday of
resolution 401 (1976).
3. Mr. ABE (Japan) (intc’l’/,,‘c’t~/tio,l ,fiw/~r Frc~uc*l?):
(It is a very pleasant duty for me to take this o,pportunity
to bid a very warm welcome on #behalf of my delegation to the new Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations. As everyone knows, the
Council has always had the privilege in its work of

4. My delegation voted in favour of resolution 401
(1976), which the Security Council adopted yesterday
afternoon [1979th ulec~ti/lg], renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
for a further period of six months. We
did so because we consider that the presence of
UNFICYP
is still necessary.
5. My delegation notes the view of the SecretaryGeneral as expressed in paragraph 77 of his report
to the Council which we have before us that
“The withdrawal of United Nations troops from
the island in the present circumstances would
certainly heighten tension between the two communities. endanger the cease-fire and further reduce the
prospects of achieving a just and lasting peace in
Cyprus.”
Although rhe Secretary-General did not have to report
any serious incidents in the past six months, he
expressed concern over attempts by one side or the
other to i.ncrease or sirengthen their positio’ns on the
cease-fire lines and in puragraph 70 he urged both to
increase their liaison and co-operation with the Force
in order to avoid “unwarranted
shooting and other
incidents and ;I heightening of tension in the area”
6. In view of such a situation. we attach particulut
importance to pnragrap’h 3 of the resolution which:
“UI*.~I>,S the pal-ties concerned to act with the
utmost restraint to refrain from any unilateral 01
other action likely to affect adversely the prospects
of negotiations for ii just and peacefd
solution illld t0
tiontinue and accelerate determined co-operative
efforts to achieve the objectives of the Security
Council.”

That paragraph is a salutary reminder that the extension
of the mandate of the Force for another six months is
not an end in itself. The extra time we have gained by
the extension must be used for meaningful negotiations
between the two communities and should not be
employed ‘by any of the parties to drag out the
negotiations.

11. We wish at the same time to extend a warm
welcome to the new Commander of the Force, MajorGeneral James Joseph Quinn of Ireland. Like his
distinguished predecessor, General Quinn is a veteran
of United Nations peace-keeping operations. We are
glad that he is returning with increased responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and order in Cyprus.

7. The good offices of the Secretary-General still
offer a valid framework for the negotiations. It is
regrettable, therefore, that, although the SecretaryGeneral has continued to exert his best efforts in
search. of a negotiated solution through the good
offices mission entrusted to him by the Council, it
has not been possible to reconvene the intercommunal
talks with reasonable assurance that the resumed
discussions would be meaningful and productive.

12. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, although the Council has met in closed session
under your presidency already this month, I have not
previously had the occasion to congratulate you
publicly on your assumption of the office of President.
Members of the Council have not had the opportunity
to work with you in that capacity before, but none
of us can have any qualms on that account. Having
worked with you as fellow members of the Council
during the past year and having seen the talents
,displayed by you and your delegation during that
period, we are fully confident that the Council’s
business this month will be conducted with efficiency
and skill. May I also take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Illueca, who held the presidency during
November. Under him the Council met to consider
questions concerning almost every corner of the world,
Yet he dealt with each of them with equal competence,
good humour and dispatch.

8. The General-Assembly stated in his report that the
positions of representatives of the two communities
have remained far apart. Undoubtedly, the consequences of the unsuccessful efforts to resume the
intercommunal
negotiations will only lead to more
suffering for all the people of Cyprus. Therefore, my
delegation fully subscribes to the Secretary-General’s
appeal to the parties concerned to make a determined
effort in order to make it possible to resume the
negotiating process at an early date. If, indeed, the
search for a just and lasting settlement is allowed to
bog down in a prolonged impasse, as it has already
done, the basic issues which are themselves of great
complexity will become more and more intractable
and the situation increasingly dangerous.

13. Turning now to today’s agenda, I should like to
thank the Secretary-General
for another comprehensive yet lucid report on the .United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the six-month period ending
today. I do not hesitate to repeat a view which my
delegation has expressed on similar occasions in the
past, namely, that in our judgement
the United
Nations presence in Cyprus has been an important
factor for maintaining calm and stability in difficult
circumstances during the period reviewed in the
report. The fact that there have been no serious
intercommunal incidents owes a great deal to the
activities of Mr. Perez de CuelIar, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative,
to LieutenantGeneral Prem Chand, the Commander of UNFICYP,
and to their civilian and military staff.

9. My delegation feels that the present state of
affairs is truly deplorable; it cannot be perpetuated.
We wish in particular to draw the attention of the
parties concerned to the fact that the usefulness of
those negotiations depends upon the willingness of the
parties concerned to show the necessary flexibility,
taking into account not only their own interests but
also the legitimate
aspirations and requirements
of the opposing side. My delegation wishes to urge all
the parties concerned once again to take conciliatory
positions and to make the Secretary-General’s efforts
successful.

14. When I spoke in the debate on Cyprus in the
General Assembly last month, I said that our regular
tribute to those men was not perfunctory nor a mere
courtesy. As I said then, we believe that whatever
progress has been possible on the political side has
been made in large measure because the SecretaryGeneral has been represented in Cyprus by men with
skill and tenacity of purpose such as Mr. Perez de
CuelIar. Whatever security has been achieved on the
ground exists because, on the military side, General
Prem Chand and the resolute men of the UNFICYP
contingents have time and again ensured that incidents
that might have led to outbreaks of fighting have
not been allowed to get out of hand.

IO. Before concluding, I should like to express the
thanks of my delegation to the Secretary-General, to
his Special, Representative, Mr. Perez de Cuellar,
and to his staff for their untiring efforts made so far
to the cause of peace. We wish to express our thanks
to the officers and men of the Force and to its civilian
staff for the exemplary way in which they have fulfilled tasks under trying circumstances, Our particular
thanks go to Lieutenant-General Prem Chand, Commander of the Force, who hands over his command
at the end of the current mandate, During his seven
years as Commander, General Prem Chand has met
the highest standards of international service. We
should like to extend to him our deep gratitude and
best wishes.

15. On this occasion, we have the melancholy duty
of bidding farewell to General Prem Chand, who is
2

retiring after seven years’ service as Commander of
UNFICYP.
More than six years ago, when the
UNFICYP
mandate was in the process of being
renewed in June 1970, the United Kingdom representative said that General Prem Chand, in the comparatively short time that he had been in Cyprus,
had won widespread admiration and esteem. Six years
later that judgement has been reinforced many times
over by his conduct in frequently difficult and dangerous situations. We share with the SecretaryGeneral the view that General Prem Chand has served
the United Nations with great distinction, dedication
and courage, and that for his outstanding contributions
to United Nations peace keeping, the Organization
owes him a great debt of gratitude.

to be concerned for the fate of Cyprus should
articulate
that concern by contributing
to the
maintenance
of peace and security there. It is a
reproach to the United Nations that we the Members
fail to give the Secretary-General
the financial means
to carry out the task which, by our votes, we have
required him to undertake.
20. This is not an occasion on which it is appropriate
to discuss the wider aspects of the Cyprus problem.
But the Secretary-General’s
report rightly contains a
section concerning
the mission of good offices
entrusted to him by resolution 367 (1975). In his
observations he points out that it has not been possible
to reconvene the intercommunal
talks with reasonable assurance that discussions would be meaningful,
because the positions of the representatives of the two
communities
have remained far apart. He goes on
to stress the importance and urgency of that situation,
because if the impasse is allowed to be prolonged,
the basic issues will become more and more intractable, and the situation increasingly dangerous.

16. In his report the Secretary-General states that he
is convinced that the continued presence of UNFICYP
is essential and that the withdrawal of United Nations
troops from the island would heighten tension between
the two communities,
endanger the cease-fire and’
further reduce the prospects of achieving a just
and lasting peace in Cyprus. It gives my delegation
no satisfaction to say that, regrettably, we share the
view of the Secretary-General.
For that reason the
United Kingdom voted for the resolution which we
adopted yesterday.

21. As they made clear in the recent General
A,ssembly debate, the nine members of the European
Communities
are much concerned about the Cyprus
problem. They believe that the way out of the impasse
to which the Secretary-General
referred is by means
of a resumption of the intercommunal
talks, to which
the representatives
of the parties to the dispute
expressed their continuing
commitment
in their
statements yesterday. My Government,
therefore,
welcomes the assurance given by the SecretaryGeneral when he addressed us yesterday [ibid.],
that he intends to resume contacts with the negotiators
with a view to re-opening intercommunal
talks in the
new year.

17. I am glad to be able to say that the United
Kingdom hopes to maintain the British contingent at
its present strength for the coming mandate period.
We shall continue to meet in full the cost of our contingent, which is the largest contingent in the Force.
We shall also continue to meet a large part of the cost
of the logistic support of the Force. In the financial
year 1975/1976, this amounted to El.7 million.
18. As one of the two Council members which are
also troop contributors to UNFICYP,
I am bound to
draw attention to the Secretary-General’s
remarks
about the financial situation of the Force, both in his
report and in his statement to us yesterday. The
Secretary-General
describes
that situation
as
increasingly critical. He points out that, because ofthe
deficit in the UNFICYP account, certain contributing
Governments now wish to lessen, their commitments,
and that some contingents have already been reduced
below the level recommended by the Force Commander. He again warns that, if no remedia1 measures
are taken, UNFICYP
may well find itself unable to
continue to function.

22. In my own delegation’s statement in the General
Assembly, we. said that the United Kingdom Government views with deep disappointment
the apparent
inability
of the two negotiators to surmount the
procedural difficulties which inevitably appear to outside observers as a cause for unnecessary delay in
adopting a new approach to their problems of
substance. I should like to take this opportunity
to
reiterate that view.
23. I have already drawn attention to the increasing
impatience of the troop contributors, which feel that
they have for too. long borne a disproportionate
share of the burden of maintaining peace in Cyprus.
They have been willing to bear that burden for 12 years
because they believe that, by the prevention of a
recurrence of violence, a respite from bloodshed
and an opportunity
for peace-making
has been
afforded.

19. In the recent General Assembly debate on the
Cyprus question, a .very considerable number of delegations expressed concern about the situation in
Cyprus. They were right to do so. But it is easy
enough to express concern and then give the SecretaryGeneral a mandate to sort things out. If we give
him that mandate, we have a common obligation to
give him also the means to carry it out. The responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace
and security rests on all of us. Those who profess

24. But, in the apparent absence of any willingness
to negotiate, and with the growing impasse to which
the Secretary-General
has referred, the question
arises in the minds of some-and
has indeed been
3

i

29. Mr. SHERER
(United States of America):
I would like, in the name of the United States delegation, to take this formal occasion to express and
reiterate our most warm greetings Of welcome to
Mr. Leprette. The United States takes deep pleasure
in welcoming to the Security Council and to the United
Nations this distinguished representative of our very
first ally, The United States has benefited from
Mr. Leprette’s service on behalf of the Government
of France in Washington, and we look forward with
pleasure to developing further our relations here in
New York City. The light cast by the appointment
of Mr. Leprette sheds its radiance not only on the
United Nations but on the host country as well. We
wish him every success as he undertakes his new
responsibilities.

expressed in the debate in the Assembly-whether
UNFICYP’s
presence has provided an excuse for
rigidity and inflexibility, rather than a framework for
negotiation. The view has been expressed that, if the
Force were withdrawn, the parties, having been left
face to face, would have no alternative but to deal with
each other and achieve a /ltotlrrs l*iwndi.
25. This is a view which my delegation totally rejects.
We believe, as I have already said, that as the
Secretary-General’s
report makes clear, UNFICYP
is instrumental in maintaining peace in Cyprus. If the
Force were withdrawn, we believe that the incidents
which the men of UNFICYP are able to control could
instead result in serious bloodshed. But the parties to
the dispute should ponder the fact that the possibility
of withdrawing the Force has been openly voiced in
the General Assembly. Before they test the patience
of the international community too far, the representatives of the two communities must embark upon a
process of reconciliation if Cyprus is not to risk being
once again a site of bloodshed.

30. The Council’s renewal yesterday of the mandate
of UNFICYP underscores what we believe is a commonly shared concern for maintaining the stability
indispensable to a negotiated settlement and lasting
peace in Cyprus. The Council’s vote represents as well
an expression of continued confidence in UNFIGYP’s
performance of its important task. I wish to reaffirm
the continuing strong moral and material support of
the United States for UNFICYP.
The nations which
have contributed troops to UNFiCYP
merit special
congratulations, having demonstrated
by concrete
action their commitment to avoiding a resumption of
armed conflict and human suffering on that strife-torn
island.

26. Time is not on their side. The Cyprus story is a
story of missed opportunity in which, at every stage,
the chance for a peaceful solution has been passed
up in favour of narrowly conceived short-term
advantages which do not ultimately serve the interests
of either community. But such opportunities will not
go on presenting themselves indefinitely. At every
wrong turn the way back towards reconciliation and
reconstruction becomes more difficult. The leaders of
the two communities must recognize this if Cyprus, an
island endowed with so many natural advantages, is
not to be permanently disabled by human wrongheadedness.

31. We wish to thank also the many nations that
have contributed the financial or other material
assistance which has enabled UNFICYP to continue its
vital mission. We would urge other nations which
have not yet done so-in
particular
permanent
members of the Council-to
demonstrate
their
concern for the preservation of peace in the Eastern
‘Mediterranean by lending their material support to
UNFICYP. We believe all nations materially able to
do so should willingly share in meeting their obligation
under the Charter to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace.

27. Before ending my statement, I should like to
express my delegation’s great pleasure at the
re-election of Mr. Kurt Waldheim as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. My Prime Minister
has already sent a message to Mr. Waldheim congratulating him personally, and I can do no better
than to repeat Mr. Callaghan’s expression of the
United Kingdom Government’s admiration for the very
considerable achievements of the Secretary-General’s
first five years of office and to promise him the
United Kingdom’s full support in the critical time
ahead. It seems to me particularly appropriate that
this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Waldheim
occurs in the course of a debate which has underlined
the importance of the Secretary-General in the activities of the United Nations.

32. The renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
is
practical testimony to responsible international action.
However, the continuing need for a peace-keeping
force in Cyprus all too obviously points up the tragic
reality that true peace and stability have proved
unattainable there for more than a decade. Therefore, while commending UNFICYP
and expressing
admiration for the exemplary conduct of its officers
and men, we also wish to voice our hope that the
parties to the Cyprus dispute Jvill make renewed
efforts to negotiate a lasting settlement that will remove
the necessity for the continued presence of United
Nations soldiers on the island.

28. I should also like to take this opportunity to
welcome Mr. Jacques Leprette, the new representative of France. Mr. Leprette’s reputation as a wise
and experienced diplomat has preceded him, I look
forward to working closely with him, not only in the
Security Council but in all aspects of the activities
of the United Nations.

33. I should not like to conclude my remarks without
paying a special tribute to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative, Mr. Perez de Cuellar,
4

the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Urquhart and
Mr. Guyer, and their excellent staffs for their untiring
efforts towards making peace-keeping a success in
Cyprus. UNFICYP
is confronted by unique and
delicate problems which have been ably acted on by
a talented leadership. This leadership has been
personified pm excellerrce by Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand who, to our collective regret, has recently
submitted,his resignation as Commander of UNFICYP.
His performance in diplomacy, military operations and
human relations reflects the highest ideals of international service. We wish him continuing success in the
years ahead.
34. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
frun~
Mr. President, speaking for the first, time in
the Security Council, I should first of all like to say
how very much I appreciate your kind words of welcome and what an honour it is for me to participate
in the Council’s work. The significance of this honour
and the obligations flowing therefrom are all the greater
because this mission has been entrusted to me by the
former representative of France to the Security
Council. I know what an impact Mr. de Guiringaud
made, both in his personal relations and in. his official
capacity, we know, too, the part he played, under
often difficult conditions, in the proper conduct of the
Council’s debates, and the contribution he made to
their successful conclusion both as representative of
France and, on four occasions, as Council President.
French):

35. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs, he has called
upon me to testify to France’s devotion to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to its determination to contribute fully to
the functioning of the organs created by the Charter.
I am aware of the special responsibilities of the Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and, consequently, of the duties of the delegations of
which it is composed. In my concern to justify the
confidence placed in me by the French authorities,
I can assure you that I shall spare no effort to assist
the Council in acquitting itself of the tasks assigned
to it under the Charter.
36. Before turning to the subject of our discussion
I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to congratulate
you, Mr. President, most warmly on your accession
to the presidency of the Council and on the particularly adroit manner in which you have already
guided its work. All our colleagues have been able
to appreciate your qualities as a diplomat
and
negotiator. You have had many opportunities during
these months in the Council and elsewhere, often
as the architect of texts before us, to manifest YOUI
‘great talent. I am sure your talent, which has already
been proved in the course of the present debate,
will be needed in the weeks to come. I should like
to add that, through you, it is a privilege for me to pay
tribute to the nation of Romania which you represent
here with so much distinction and with which my
country has long-standing bonds of friendship.

37. I wish also to thank the President for the month
of November, Mr. Illueca. We’are all aware that it
was by reason of his skill, good nature, perseverance
and sense of duty that the Council was able to prepare
its labours for the month of December so satisfactorily,
and successfully to conclude those for the month of
November.
38. Finally, I wish to greet every member of the
Council and to thank them all for their very courteous
and friendly words of welcome to me and of esteem
for my country, of which I am most appreciative. I
can assure my colleagues of my complete co-operation.
39. In the course of my statement I shall come back
to the role of the Secretary-General
in the matter
before us. However, I now wish to reiterate the
congratulations
which the Government of France
addressed to Mr. Waldheim on the occasion of his
re-election. His personal contribution
to efforts to
settle the Cyprus question is but one example among
many of the tireless devotion he brings to the cause
of peace and the realization of the loftiest principles
of the Organization.
40. I turn now to the subject of our meeting: the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP.
The decision
we have taken is within a category of measures
that are doubtless necessary but that show that we
are really marking time in seeking a lasting peaceful
solution. As on several previous occasions, my delegation cannot but agree with the opinion of the
Secretary-General that the Force’s presence continues
to be essential.
41. A few weeks after the debate in the General
Assembly on Cyprus, I do not think it necessary to
set out in detail my Government’s
position on the
general aspects of the problem. While there has been
no progress towards a solution. the principles that
should guide the quest for a settlement remain the
same. As was pointed out by Mr. de Guiringaud in
his statement on 29 September last before the General
Assembly’ and as the representative ofthe Netherlands
reiterated on I1 November on behalf of the members
of the European Community,? any agreement must be
acceptable to all Cypriots and preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus.
42. Until the resumption of negotions-the
only
means to bring back peace-the usefulness ofthe Force
can be challenged by no one, even though its presence
only tends to preserve the s/t/t//s cl//o. The facts speak
for themselves. In the course of the last six months.
the Force has recorded a daily average of approximately two shooting incidents. On three occasions.
shots have been fired in the direction of UNFICYP
troops by members of Turkish forces. There is no.
need to emphasize the risks of :I situation in which
opposing forces would come face to face. We also
observe that there have-Tbeen persistent violations

are not allowed to get bogged down in prior procedural
questions.

of the cease-fire resulting from the movement forward
of positions or from the construction of new defensive
positions.

47. We are certain that the Secretary-General will be
determined, with the patience and the good will
which he has unsparingly demonstrated so far, once
more to seek to overcome the obstacles barring a
resumption of the intercommunal
talks. He may be
assured, as in the past, of our complete support,
which also goes to all those assisting him in that noble
task.

43. What can we do but renew our appeals for
observance of the cease-fire and the cease-fire line
established on 16 August 1974? The maintenance of the
sttrtrts (/IIO seems to us to be paramount in the search
for a peaceful solution. In particular, neither party
should seek to call in question the arrangements
and practices at present in effect under the control of
the Force in the zone between the cease-fire lines.

48. In this connexion, I should like to pay tribute to
the activity in the field of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. PBrez de CuCllar. I also
commend the devotion and the sense of duty continually displayed, at times at the risk of their lives,
by the contingents of UNFICYP,
under the direction
of Lieutenant-General Prem Chand, whose departure
we must unfortunately deplore. Let them rest assured
that the decision of our Council to renew the mandate
of UNFICYP, while it is motivated by our concern
to preserve every chance for resumed negotiations,
must in their regard be interpreted as a tribute of
deep appreciation and recognition for the work of
peace which they are accomplishing on behalf of the
United Nations.

44. There is another series of difficulties which,
although less directly related to the cease-fire, are no
less alarming. These are the obstacles encoutitered
by the Force in discharging its humanitarian functions
in the zone under Turkish-Cypriot control. According
to the Secretary-General’s report, the living conditions
of the Greek Cypriots in the north have not improved
and their exodus to the south has accelerated. The
Secretary-General
notes that UNFICYP
access to
Greek-Cypriot
habitations
and its freedom of
movement in the area remain restricted: he further
specifies that the procedure jointly agreed to for the
review of requests of Greek Cypriots for transfer to
the south has not functioned effectively. The report
also
indicates that, contrary to the Vienna communiquC of 2 August 1975 [XCLJ S///789, lm/10.~],
the freedom of movement of the Greek Cypriots
living in the northern zone is not guaranteed.

49. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): I have the honour, on
behalf of .the delegation of Pakistan, to join other
colleagues in extending a very warm welcome to
Mr. Leprette of France as his great country’s representative to the United Nations. We look forward to
continuing to work in close co-operation with the
delegation of France under his leadership, which we
are certain, will be of the same high order as that of
his able and distinguished predecessor.
.

45. These indications cannot be ignored, nor can
their importance be underestimated. The only way to
shed light on the situation and to preserve what can
be saved is to allow UNFICYP
to fulfil its mission
‘without obstacles. This depends, in the first place, on
the will of the parties concerned; hence, we very
much hope that the text established in accordance
with the pro&s-verbal of 12 December 1975, concerning the stationing and functioning of the Force in
the north, will rapidly be put into final form and enter
into force.

50. The Prime Minister and the Minister of State for
Defence and Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, as well as
Mr. Iqbal Akhund, have already conveyed our heartfelt felicitations to Mr. Kurt Waldheim
on his
re-election as Secretary-General.
Maj, I once again
convey our congratulations to him. We are certain
that, under his patient, diligent and wise guidance, the
Organization will be able not only to contribute to
peace-keeping and peace-making efforts in various
parts of the world but also to move forward to the
early realization of a new and more just economic
world order, which has quite rightly become one of the
basic goals of the Organization.

46. The presence of the Force, as I have said, is not
an end in itself, it is intended to create or maintain a
situation that will permit a resumption of negotiations.
In this connexion, we can but regret the absence of
agreement manifested in the consultations held in
New York in September last regarding the resumption
of intercommunal talks, and that despite the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to pave the way once again. In the
resolution which we have just adopted, we have
appealed to the parties to act with restraint, to refrain
from any unilateral action likely to hinder the
prospects of the success of the negotiations and to
continue their efforts in a concerted manner so as to
achieve the objectives laid down by the Security
Council. We hope that they will have realized that
the only real progress towards a just and lasting peace
can come from negotiations without ulterior motives
on the substance of the problem, negotiations that

51. We are glad that the mandate of UNFICYP
has been extended by the Security Council, with the
adoption, without dissent, of a resolution prepared by
YOU, Mr. President, with the agreement and co-operation of the parties concerned, I join other colleagues,
who have already spoken, in a well-deserved tribute
to you for the patient efforts which you have undertaken and which resulted in this satisfactory outcome.
It bears testimony to the desire and determination
of the two communities of Cyprus to keep peace on
6

the island, thus paving the way for the achievement
of a just and lasting peace.

efforts to bring about a resumption of meaningful
negotiations and to assist the parties in making the
urgently required progress towards a settlement of the
Cyprus problem. We wish him success in his efforts
to do all he can, within his competence and authority,
to help achieve such a settlement and, as a first step,
to bring about as soon as possible the resumption of
inlercommunal
talks under his auspices.

52. My delegation would like to pay tribute .also to
the Commander, the officers and the men of the Force
for the diligence and sense of duty with which they
have been .performing the arduous tasks assigned to
them.
53. We note that an effective working relationship
and clear channels of communication
exist between
the Force and the two sides. It is a source of satisfaction that none of the shooting incidents, which are
not uf~usual in such conditions, has been of a serious
nature. However, it is our hope that such incidents
will cease altogether.

58. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): At the outset, I should
like to join my colleagues in welcoming Mr. Jacques
Leprette of France to the Security Council. We are
confident that he will, in the high and noble traditions of his delegation, make a constructive contribution to the work of the Council. We wish him a
successful term of office at the United Nations and
pledge to him our full co-operation.

54. The Force deserves special thanks for discharging
the humanitarian task assigned to it. It is providing
security to farmers, shepherds and other plain folk
of both communities to pursue their peaceful occupations in the buffer zone. While the situation is not
normal, as indeed it cannot be in the circumstances,
the Secretary-General’s
report is not without
encouraging elements. Thus, the fact that the Turkish
Cypriot authorities have decided to grant the Greek
Cypriots in the north increased freedom of movement
and travel as well as to provide improved facilities
for their education and health should not be overlooked or minimized. In this context, we should like
also to express our delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Perez
de CuCllar, for the devotion and patience with which
he has been discharging his difficult task.

59. The establishment of UNFICYP 12 yearsago was
occasioned by specific circumstances which ascribed
to the operation of that Force the function of containing a potentially dangerous situation in the relations
between the two communities
in Cyprus. That the
Council is in IY76 still concerned with the renewal of
the mandate of UNFICYP
is disturbing, in that it
reflects a tendency towards a transformation
of
UNFICYP
from an Ed hoc creation to an almost
permanent fixture aiding the maintenance of the
,stalu.r y1w .
60. The unfortunate,
indeed tragic, events which
took place in Cyprus in 1974 have occasioned much
travail to the people of Cyprus and have added a new
dimension to the functioning of UNFICYP.
61. It is against that background, sketchily described,
that the Secretary-General’s
report and the Council’s
current meetings should be seen.

55. The delegation of Pakistan continues to attach
importance to the search for an early solution of the
conflict in Cyprus. We believe also that a settlement,
in order to be lasting and just, should fully ensure to
the two communities in the island the exercise of their
fundamental rights and enable them to live peacefully
side by side with each other.

62. On the substantive
aspects of the Cyprus
question, Guyana’s position is clear. We have often
reiterated the view that the peaceful solution to the
Cyprus
problem lies in the prompt and effective
implementation
of the provisions of Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by the Council
in its resolution 365 (1974). Resolution 3212 (XXIX),
unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly two
years ago, remains the only valid framework for an
equitable and peaceful settlement of the Cyprus
problems. While that resolution remains the viable
basis for international
action, both the Assembly and
the Council have subsequently adopted a number of
resolutions, including one by the General Assembly on
12 November
this year [r.es&tion
3//12], which
prescribe in clear terms the demands of the international community
for effective action. It is our
failure to insist on the implementation
of our resolutions that keeps the question of Cyprus on the international agenda.

56. The Secretary-General, in his report of 30 October
[S/12222], notes that the difficulties in the way of
resuming meaningful negotiations have yet to be overcome and that the differences between the parties,
both as to substance and as to procedure, have in
practice shown little sign of narrowing. We share
the belief he has expressed in the report before us that
the best hope of achievmg a just and lasting settlement
of the Cyprus problem, as called for by the Security
Council, lies in negotiations between the representatives of the two Cypriot communities.
57. The encouraging developments which have taken
place in the region recently lead us to hope that the
parties concerned will respond positively to the appeal
of the Secretary-General
to show the necessary
flexibility in order to make it possible to resume the
negotiating process at an early date. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s
resolve to exert his best

63. Earlier ,I observed that the necessity for the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
is disturbing.
7

occasion I should like to congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on behalf of my delegation, since in our view
his re-election is a fine tribute by the Organization
to hi,s dedication and his sustained effort in the search
for peace and justice.

My delegation is reinforced in that view by its careful
reading of the Secretary-General’s report for the last
six-month period, ending on 6 December 1976. We
note, for example, that the freedom of movement of
UNFICYP
continues to be restricted, that attempts
have been made to change the military sttrt/rs yr/o
by movements forward of the cease-fire line, that the
situation of the Greek Cypriots in the north is a matter
of special concern, and that the developments in
regard to that situation have, as stated by’the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 72 of the report, “further
heightened tension”.

69. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (itifc;p,.rtnlio,r~fjv,i~
Frci&*l!):
Mr. President, my delegation is extremely satisfied at
the responsible and dignified way in which you have
conducted our proceedings. As an exa’mple I would
mention the skill with which you so successfully
conducted the proceedings connected with the
ie-election of the Secretary-Geneial.
Your country,
the Socialist Republic of Romania, and my own,
the People’s Republic of Benin, are linked by profound
friendship and fraternity in the spirit of genuine internationalism, the objectives of which are common to
us both. The recent visit of our great comrade-inarms, President KCrikou,
to his friend Comrade
CeauSescu contributed more positively to strengthening this co-operation, to which Benin attaches such
great importance.

64. We further observe that previous agreements
reached during the intercommunal talks, in particular
the Vienna agreement of 1975 [XJP S/11789, (II?IIC’.~.],
hive not been fully implemented. There is thus an
urgent need for forward movement on all fronts
if the much-desired peace is to be achieved in Cyprus.
65. To deal with one aspect only, the intercommunal
talks, my delegation hopes that in the weeks ahead
all parties concerned will, by their actions, positively
contribute to the creation of a new climate, a climate
which would be favourable for negotiations. What is
needed above all is the forsaking of bitterness rooted
in past experiences and its replacement by a mutual
respect, accompanied by a genuine and sincere spirit
of accommodation and compromise. In this respect,
my delegation hopes ‘that all the parties will fully
co-operate with UNFICYP, with a view not only to
reducing tension in the area but also to facilitating
its performance with maximum efficiency the. tasks
entrusted to it by the Council.

70. I should like to take this opportunity’ to bid a
warm welcome to the new representative of France
here in the Council, Mr. Leprette, a distinguished
diplomat very familiar with the problems of the
Organiiation.
My delegation is convinced that relations between his great and beautiful country, France,
and the great and valiant French people and the people
and Government of Benin will be ever further strengthened on a basis of equality and mutual advantage.
71. The position of my Government on the question
of Cyprus is well known and entirely unambiguous.
In various forums of the United Nations our delegation
has given its views on this important problem, which
threatens peace and.security in the region. In the final
analysis, the problem of Cyprus is but a reflection of
the attempts of the imperialist Powers of the North
Atlantjd Treaty Organization (NATO) to take control
of the strategic interests of the island and thus to
continue to perpetuate their aggression against the
countries of the region.

66. My delegation has given considerable thought lo
proposing that the Council should send a fact-finding
mission to Cyprus. We have refrained from doing so in
the hope that the six-month period of extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP will be used wisely and
productively and ttiat developments in the months’
ahead will render unnecessary such an exercise. Should
our optimism be found to be misplaced, however, I
would urge that the Council, when next considering
this question, should reactivate that idea.

72. As the Secretary-General states in his report of
9 December which we are considering, UNFICYP,
which has been in Cyprus since 1964, is very much
handicapped by restrictions imposed on its freedom of
movement in the northern part of the country occupied
by Turkish occupation forces. Thus, the Force does
not receive all the co-operation it needs in order
successfully to accomplish its task, although it has
carried out certain missions designed to promote
respect for the cease-fire.

67. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to extend
sincere thanks to’the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and Lieutenant-General Prem Chand,
who has recently relinquished his post of Force
Commander, for their dedication and service to the
cause of Cyprus. We also sincerely thank those Member States whose contributions of men and material
have made this operation possible. It is our sincere
hope that in renewing the mandate of UNFICYP,
the Council is truly preparing the way for a lasting peace
in Cyprus.

73. In my delegation’s view, the existence of the
Force should make it possible to bring about a certain
normalization of the situation in the area, but what
we have in fact seen is a dangerous deterioration
in
the situation resulting from the actions of imperialism,
which stops at nothing to force the non-aligned

68, Finally, the Foreign Minister of my country,
Comrade Fred Wills, has already conveyed the congratulations of the Government and people of Guyana
to the Secretary-General on his re-election. On this
8

Government
alignment.

of Cyprus

to renounce

its policy of non-

“Despite
the passage of time, the main problems
resulting from the events of 1974 have remained
unresolved
and, on the basic political issues, the
two Cypriot communities
are still deeply divided.”

74, From 1964 to the preselit, the expenditures
incurred for the maintenance of the Force have been
very high, while the results, in terms of settlement
of the crisis, have been very scanty. It has therefore
become clear to my delegation that the automatic
renewing. of the mandate of the Force without
a
substantive discussion
accompanied by appropriate
measures may be a chronic error to which the Organization is succumbing. For all those reasons, my delegation, as in June 1976, did not participate
in the
adoption of the resolution renewing the mandate of the
Force.

86. We do understand
from the report of the
Secretary-General
that the situation on the ground.
during the period under review, has somehow been
quieter than at previous times, as far as shooting
incidents are concerned. However, the report states
that tension has persisted and that violations of the
cease-fire
have occurred
mainly by movements
forward
in the buffer area between the two armies
or by construction
of new military positions. Further
on, we note that the report indicates that humanitarian
and normalization
functions by UNFICYP
in the area
under Turkish
control have been limited. mainl’y
because the freedom of movement of the Force in the
northern part of Cyprus continues to be restricted.’

75. My delegation feels that those who are truly
responsible
for the crisis in Cyprus,
namely the
imperialist Powers and the members of NATO., must
accept full responsibility
for all the expenditures
involved in the operation of a Force the effectiveness
of which, to say the very least, is doubtful.

81. We have learnt with distress that even the mine
problem continues
to pose real dangers: despite
requests made to both sides, comprehensive
minefield
records
have still not been made available to

76. We think that the Cypriot people are one and
indivisible
and should properly
understand
the
situation imposed upon them, and react accordingly.

UNFICYP.
82. Having read through t,he whole report. we cannot
fail to note with gratitude that the Secretary-General
has continued
personally,
or through his Special
Representative,
Mr. P&ez de CuCltar, his tireless
efforts
to carry out the mission of good offices
entrusted to him by the Council. However,
here again
he feels duty bound to inform us in parngraph 6L of
his report that “While both sides have indicated thnt
they favour a resumption of the negotiating process.
their conflicting positions.,.
remain unaltered”.

77. Mr. VINCI, (Italy) (irlterpwtath
.fhrr Fw~lch):
Mr. Presiden,t, first of all, I should like most cordially
to associate myself with the words
of welcome
addressed by yourself and, members of the Council to
our new colleague, the representative
of France,
Mr. Jacques Leprette. I am certain that he will bring
to the Council and to the other organs of the United
Nations the valuable contribution of his personal talent
and his lengthy experience of the work of this world
Organizatioh.
I rejoice in advance at being able to
co-operate with so eminent a colleague who has already
distinguished
himself in various
United
Nations
forums, in the interests of peace and in the interests
of the Community of Nine, to which we belong. and
of this great Organization.

83. In short. this commendable factual report shows
altogetheradistressingstuteofaffairs.
What.ofcourse.
is most distressing is to see SO,lTliltly
people. niimely idI.
those who still find fherriselves disdluced i\s a result
of the events of 1974, living in conditions of, misery
and disillusionment.
At the same time, we ,canliot
refrain from expressing
our serious concern on the
general political plane, since the crisis in Cyprus
remains il source of intern;\tionill tension in illl iIl’(fM
of greitt
itllportilnce
for lllillly
countries.
including.
an~ong ohters. my own country. Italy is indeed especially interested in the restoration of stability in the
are:\ both because of its geogrnphical position ;\nd
because of its friendly relations with :IH the countries
directly involved.

78. The report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus gives us a clear picture
of the present .situation in Cyprus, 21 picture of th;lt
beautiful island where we see under a calm sky,
apparently free from stormy clouds, a landscape
unfortunately
showing here and there, especially in
the north, some disqu.ieting features. We co,uld not feel
less reasstired, especially at a time when the Italian
delegation had much hoped that it would, have been
possible to re-examine in the Security Council the
renewal of the mandate of UNFKYP
in the light of
ta!gible progress alo,ng the lines set down by this very
body on so many occasions.

84. My delegi~tion hns stilted several times. in the
Security Council and in other bodies of the Organizntion, that Italy is tirrnly convinced that the responreconciliation
lies with the
sibility
fol seeking
purties directly concerned and. in pitrticuI;tr; with the
leaders of the wo communities.
In this connexion. I
wish to refer to the views which were m+ie i\bund;mIly
cle;lr in the statement I made WI 14 June last at the
1926th meeting. They ir1-e on record :md open to MY

79. Therefore, it is with regret that we take note of
t,he observat.ions made by the Secretary-Generut
in his
report. I hiive in mind, in the first instance, paragraph 69, where he states:
9

delegation for scrutiny. I do not need, therefore, to
repeat them. I simply wish to add at this stage that my
Government, together with its eight European partners, places its hopes on the quick resumption of
intercommunal
negotiations and continues to believe
that all parties should refrain from any action which
might prejudice the progress of such negotiations.
My Government continues to hope, as well, that the
parties will do their utmost to reach a compromise by
adopting flexible positions and that they will indeed
bear in mind the extent of their responsibilities towards
their own country and the international community
as a whole, We feel that the situation is very serious
and that it is high time to reverse its present trend, by
starting a new round of negotiations conducted in a
frank and sincere spirit, with the will-the good will,
as Mr. Celik stated yesterday [/979t/? n?eeti,l$!]-to
do business on matters of substance. Ultimately, the
statesmanship of the leaders of the two communities
will be ascertained according to their capacity to
reach out for the well-being of the Cypriots and for
peace in Cyprus and in the Mediterranean.
85. From what we heard yesterday in the statements
made by the Foreign Minister of Cyprus, by our
colleagues of Greece and Turkey and by Mr. Celik
speaking for the Turkish Cypriot community, any
outside observer might be led to believe that apparently
there are not enough grounds for such a prospect.
My delegation takes a different view. We certainly do
not underestimate lamented past and recent wrongdoings, conflicting assessments and points of view and
the reasons backing them. However, having followed
very closely the developments of the Cyprus crisis
during these 12 years, we feel somehow encouraged,
perhaps more by the tone than by the content of what
we have heard, to place a little more confidence than
before in the professed good intentions and commitments of the main parties concerned to undertake
. serious and meaningful negotiations under the auspices
of the Secretary-General. I hope we shall be proved
right.

voiced. My delegation, therefore, promptly supported
and voted in favour of the draft resolution from.now
on to be known as Security Council resolution 401
(1976).
89. Before concluding, I should like to express my
Government’s deepest appreciation and gratitude to
the Secretary-General. We are all aware of the difficulties involved in the fulfilment of his mission with
regard to Cyprus. We owe him a great debt for the
unshaken faith he has displayed. I am sure we shall
feel more and more indebted to him in the near future,
from the very beginning of his second term of office,
to which we look forward with great expectations.
My Prime Minister had the unique opportunity
of
congratulating Mr. Waldheim personally, as he met him
shortly after his re-election. I wish to associate myself
whole-heartedly with those congratulations and those
contained in the message addressed on the same day
to the Secretary-General by the Foreign Minister of
Italy.
90. I also wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to
UNFICYP and to its officers and men for the untiring
and successful effort it has carried on in Cyprus.
I should like to express, as well, our gratitude to all
the contributing Governments for their generosity.
Finally, I want to express the warmest tribute to the,
outgoing Commander of the Force, Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, who has performed his duties brilliantly
in the seven years he has spent in the service of the
Organization in Cyprus, as he did in a former United
Nations peace-keeping operation.
91.

Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (infc,,pr,Ptotinn
Spcuri,sh): I wish to express my whole-hearted

from

thanks
for the kind words of Mr. Murray of the United
Kingdom and Mr. Leprette of France addressed to me
in connexion with my exercise of the functions of
President during November.
92. Before referring to the position of my country
on the resolution we adopted yesterday on the situation
in Cyprus, I should like to place it on record that
the delegation of Panama is particularly pleased to
associate itself with the friendly words of welcome
addressed by the members of the Council to the new
representative of France, Mr. Leprette. Panama,
like the other Latin American nations, has benefited
from the spiritual legacy that France has bequeathed
to the world in its culture and its legal and political
institutions. Thus, in cordially greeting Mr. Lepf’ette,
1 not only greet him but pay tribute to the noblhty of
his country, which he represents with such distinction.
Therefore I am most pleased to offer Mr. Leprette
the friendly co-operation of the delegation of Panama,
both officially and personally, certain as 1 am that
the Council will benefit from his ingenuity, moderation
and rectitude, as well as his great erudition and,
to use a famous French expression, “sly ,firrcsse

86. It is on the basis of these considerations that the
Italian deiegation whole-heartedly associates itselfwith
the appeal by the Secretary-General to the parties
concerned to make a determined .effort towards the
resumption of the negotiating process at an early date.
87. We also share his concern for the feeble response
given by Member States to his repeated appeals for
voluntary contributions in order to cover the large
outstanding financial deficit. Even symbolic contributions would help, since, in our opinion, they could
signify the attachment of all Members of the world
Organization to the principle of collective security,
put into practice by the remarkable and significant
activities of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force.
88. Mr. President, the text of the draft resolution
introduced by you and adopted by the Council reflects
to a great extent the feelings and the hopes I have just

tl’csprit”.

IO

93. During the debate we have reviewed the report
of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus. My delegation has listened with
the greatest interest to the statements made in the
Council. Accordingly, I shall not insist on dealing in
detail with the contents of the report. My delegation
wishes to confine itself to expressing its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his efforts and to expressing its
appreciation for this thorough and full report which
reveals the gravity of the situation in Cyprus.

9X. What does Ihe General Assembly resolution say’!
The resolution expresses the profound concern of the
overwhelming majority of the international communitY
over the prolongation
of the Cyprus crisis, which
endangers international
peace and security. Furthermore, the resolulion reiterates the General Assembly’s
full support for the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of
Cyprus. I wonder, does any one here disagree with
these precepts which are the key to the problem’!
The problem will be resolved as soon as there is
complete
respect for the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and independence of the Republic of Cyprus.

94. Likewise, my delegation wishes to express its
gratitude to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. PCrez de CuCllar, and to the UnderSecretaries-General Mr. Urquhart and Mr. Guyer, who
have devoted their time and skill to the problem.
We also express our appreciation
to LieutenantGeneral Prem Chand, who until now has commanded
the Force, as well as to Major-General James Joseph
Quinn, who has been designated by the SecretaryGeneral as Commander of the Force in replacement of
General Prem Chand. We wish General Quinn every
success in his duties and request him to transmit to the
officers and men of the Force our delegation’s gratitude; in so doing, we feel that we are interpreting
the feeling of all the peoples of our region.

99. The General Assembly resolution demands the
urgent implemenlation
of resolutions 3212 (XXIX)
of I November 1974 and 3395 (XXX) of 20 November
1975. We atso have Security Council resolutions
that must be observed. Now, I wonder: does any
one disagree that United Nations mechanisms should
be put into effect to ensure that the resolutions adopted
by the United Nations are implemented?
100. The President of the Security Council, thanks
to his dedication, perseverance, ability and humanity,
s’uceeded yesterday in securing the -adoption
of
resolution 401 (1976). We wish to express our special
appreciation to the President, However, from a political point of view, his success in securing the adoption
‘of that resolution was eminently political in character.
From a human and moral point of view, the resolution
adopted here yesterday does not introduce anything
new. That situation is, of course, understandable
and we therefore agree that the Council; under the wise
guidance of the President, should have acted prudently,
in keeping with thecircumstances.
Weall know that the
United Nations Secretariat, which is the pillar of the
Organization,
was in a period of transition.
The
Secretary-General
had just been re-elected, and, of
course, prudence counselled that he should be given an
opportunity to plan action, since he is responsible for
exercising his good offices in the search for a solution.

95. Very briefly, I should like to refer to a situation
which seems to me to be somewhat confusing, because
what we require from the Council is vigorous and
decisive action to put an end to this painful situation
in Cyprus.
96. Yesterday confusion grew as we listened to
Mr. Vedat Celik [i/d.], who said here in the Council
that resolution 3 l/12, adopted by the General Assembly
on 12 November 1976, was not acceptable to the
interests which he purports to represent. Among the
reasons given for not accepting that res,olution, we
heard that it was regarded as inappropriate
and
unrealistic. Further, the Assembly, was accused of
trying to influence or prejudge the deliberations
in
the Security Council. Such expressions, I rep.eat,
create confusion because Mr. Celik had begun his
statement by expressing, on ,behalf of the Turkish
Cypriot community,
his gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his dedicated and tireless efforts in seeking
a just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.
Now we wonder, does the Secretary-General act as the
representative of the United Nations in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions or not? Does he
act in accordance with Security Council resolutions or
not?

101. There is also, on the international scene, a lull
in the efforts to solve most crucial problems affecting
Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and my own
country. What is the reason for this lull? It is that one
of ‘the permanent members of the Council, one of the
major,Powers of our times, the United States, is itself
in a period of transition. Moreover, some permanent
members of the Council will shortly be appointing
new representatives,
who, of course, will then be
spokesmen for a new political will.
102. The Council’s ‘action is fully justified, but it is a
cautious holding action which must be of very short
duration. Its cut-off date has been fixed as 30 April
1977, in paragraph 6 of the resolution
adopted
yesterday. Why does my delegation maintain that that
is a suitable period for reaching a solution, or at least
to coming close to a solution? Because the SecretaryGeneral is requested in that paragraph of the resolution:

97. So there is.cqnfusion when Mr. celik says that
he does not accept a General Assembly resolution
while at the same time he praises the SecretaryGeneral’s action. I am bringing this to the attention
of members of the Council because, in so far as the
situation continues to deteriorate, United Nations
institutions are affected also.
11

matter to be dealt with, so that they will provide an
occasion for the Secretary-General to lend his further
good offices, which, we trust, will bring about positive

“to continue the mission of good offices entrusted
to him by paragraph 6 of resolution 367 (1975), to
keep the Security Council informed of the progress
made and to submit a report on the implementation
of this resolution by 30 .April 1977.”

results.

107. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
At the outset, may I, on behalf of my delegation,
extend a hand of welcome and co-operation, to
Mr. Jacques Leprette, the representative .of France,
on his assumption of office at the United Nations.
We are confident that, being a seasoned and
experienced diplomat, he will make a useful, constructive and valuable contribution
to the work of the
Council and to the other bodies of the United Nations.

103, We are very pleased that the Secretary-General
has been re-elected by unanimous recommendation of
the Council and by acclamation in the General
Assembly. The Secretary-General has reaped what he
has sown: a seed of dignity, of self-sacrifice, of
devotion and of respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, which
guarantees to States, large and small, like Cyprus and
Panama, their integrity, sovereignty and independence.
Strengthened now, the Secretary-General presents
himself before mankind with the acclamation of all
the ‘nations of the world and has a right to the full
co-operation of the Council and of the parties to the
conflict so that a solution may be reached.

108. My delegation has supported the renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP and voted for the draft resolution contained in document S/12256, on the understanding that such an action will facilitate
the
maintenance of peace in Cyprus. We hope that
UNFICYP will make it possible to achieve a just and
lasting settl’ement of the problem. But in keeping with
my country’s, position concerning peace-keeping
operations, I wish to reiterate our stand to the effect
that UNFJCYP is only a step towards complete
restoration of peace in the area. A peace-keeping
operation should never be regarded as a permanent
institution, but ‘only as a temporary measure-a
lnotllls lliw/di.
Therefore, we cannot accept the
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP as an indefinite,
recurring exercise.

104. To say, for example, that a General Assembly
resolution is not accepted means that the good offices
of the Secretary-General are not accepted; hence
my confusion, which we might claim has been clarified
in the course of the discussion. We trust and are
optimistic that through his good offices, within a brief
and limited time, with the co-operation of the parties,
with the respect fue UNFICYP to allow it freedom of
movement and the free exercise of its functions and
with the support of the Council and of the entire
international community, the Secretary-General will
bring the parties to a harmonious negotiated solution
respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus.

109. At the same time, we wish to express our
concern at the non-implementation
of United Nations
resolutions.
General Assembly
resolution
32 12
(XXIX), which was endorsed by Security Council
resolution 365 (1974), remains unimplemented.
This
disregard of the United Nations only adds to the
agony of the Cypriots. Implementation
of United
Nations resolutions by the Council is the real means
of resolving the problem of Cyprus. Negotiations
are, of course, useful; they are very, very important;
but they would be even more important if they were
addressed to constitutional and domestic matters.

105. But it is not the Secretary-General alone who
is committed, but also the Council. And, in the opinion
of my country, this organ must meet before the
expiration of this further mandate of UNFICYP so as
to comply with the request contained in paragraph .S
of General Assembly resolution 31/12, which states
that the Assembly:
“Exp~‘c,~.sc.sthr hope that the Security Council
will consider appropriate steps for the implementation of its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December
1974.”

110. In this regard, we wish to underscore the
concern expressed by the Secretary-General
in his
report concerning the restriction of UNFICYP
to
certain areas of its mandate. We sincerely hope,
therefore, that UNFICYP will not be hindered in its
efforts to carry out its functions, including those of a
humanitarian nature.

Thus the Security Council is charged in this expression of the will of the Assembly with the consideration of appropriate steps for the implementation
of its resolution 365 (1974).

111. My Government continues to be distressed
by the presence of foreign troops in Cyprus. To us,
this is a violation of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of that State and contrary to
the Charter of the United Nations, We believe that no
solution can be imposed by force on the people of
Cyprus. Left to themselves, the Greek and Turkish
Cypriots can reach a solution acceptable to both
communities; and such a solution can be achieved

106. I shall conclude by reiterating to you, Mr, President, my appreciation for the wise, appropriate and
effective manner in which you have resolved the
immediate political problem of the renewal of the
UNFICYP
mandate. At the same time, we address
ourselves to the members of the Council that will be
presiding during the months of January, February and
March, when there will be an opportunity for this
12

through talks, not by might. As the Secretary-General
has rightly noted in paragraph 76 of his report:

when a man assumes public trust, he should consider
himself as public property.

“I continue to believe that the best hope of
achieving a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem as called for by the Security Council, is
through negotiations between the representatives
of the two Cypriot communities.”

117. The PRESIDENT finterprefntio~l~onl
Frerrd~):
With the permission of the members of the Council,
I wish now to make a statement as representative
of ROMANIA.
118. My country has always laid stress on the need
for a political settlement of the situation in Cyprus by
negotiations between the two communities, undel
the aegis and with the active contribution of the
United Nations. We believe that it is necessary for the
solution of the problem of Cyprus to be in keeping
with the rights and legitimate aspirations of the two
communities and that such a solution should be based
on United Nations resolutions which have laid down
the precepts of sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus.
My country has always been in favour of the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed on the
territory of the Republic of Cyprus and the cessation
of all foreign interference in that country’s affairs.

We wish to endorse that pertinent observation, as
indeed we have in our resolutions, the last being
resolution 391 (1976).
112. All efforts at achieving peace in Cyprus would
be more difficult but for one important factor: the
restraint and patience of the Government and people
of Cyprus. We pay tribute to their magnanimity in
their times of trial.
113. In this connexion, we wish to commend the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
Cyprus for the sustained efforts made in the mission
of good offices. We urge the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts so that a satisfactory end can be
achieved. We also wish to express our appreciation
to the officers and men of UNFICYP for their dedication and selfless work in a noble cause.

119. In spite of the little progress achieved this
year, we remain convinced that it is possible to achieve
an equitable settlement of the problem in Cyprus
which would ensure the coexistence of the two communities within a single independent State. Until we
achieve such a settlement, we believe. as indeed
the Council has repeatedly confirmed. that it is of the
utmost importance for all the interested parties to
demonstrate restraint. to refrain from any unilateral
action or any other action likely to exacerbate the
situation and to delay further a settlement of the
conflict. Also, the parties concerned must respect
the letter and spirit of agreements already achieved
in the course of intercommunal
negotiations.
Obviously, the search for a peaceful settlement of the
situation in Cyprus requires the maintenance ofcalm in
the island. As the Secretary-General stated in his
report, the presence of UNFICYP is essential in order
to achieve those results. That is why my delegation
voted in favour of the draft resolution which the
Council has just adopted. particularly because the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus gave its
consent to a further extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Force.

114. Lastly, we wish to thank the Governments
which have contributed troops and funds for the
expenses of the Force. The maintenance of UNFICYP
would not have been possible were it not for the
voluntary and generous contributions of those Governments. We urge them to continue their contributions
and, where possible, to increase them.
115. As the Secretary-General
noted both in his
report and in his statement yesterday [ihid.], the
financial situation of UNFICYP is critical. It is therefore very urgent that action should be taken to improve
the Force’s financial position. That is the only way
we can ensure the continued functioning of the Force.
We trust that the contributing Governments will
continue to show generosity in order to minimize
the anguish and suffering of the people of Cyprus, as
was clearly stated by the Foreign Minister of that
country [ihid. 1.
116. Finally, may I take this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
on his re-election to his high and trying post. We pay
tribute with immense satisfaction to his outstanding
performance, e’ndeavours and achievements attained
during his previous tenure of office. With his unflinching courage, he has shown that he is a man of values.
responsibility, sense of duty, dedication. devotion and
dignity. Above all, he has s’howri that he is a man
with a sense of impartiality, which he has shown to
all nations and States, large and small alike. His
impartiality is really the hinge of all his other qualities.
His piirish has not been Austria; it has been the whole
world. He has kept in mind the wise saying that.

120. We should like to stress the appeal which the
Council has just made to all the parties concet;ned
to lend their whole-hearted co-operation SO as to
ennble’the Force in Cyprus to discharge effectively
all the functions entrusted to it by the Council.
including the maintenance of the s/tr///.s (~/IO in the
neutral zone between the forward military lines.
121. Now the representatives of the two conimunities must resume their negotiations in order to arrive
at ;I just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem. To that end, the Secretary-General whose efforts
nli\lje hitherto. and indeed those ~SO of his Special
13

declined to reply to my charges concerning,
among other things, the expulsion of Greek Cypriots
from the occupied area and the behaviour of the
Turkish army of occupation towards UNFICYP.
My
charges, which were based on facts and substantiated
by references to the Secretary-General’s
report,
were directed at Turkey and not at the Turkish
Cypriots.
[ihid.],

Representative Mr. Wrez de CuBlIar, are’very highly
appreciated by us all, should continue the mission of
good offices entrusted to him by the Council. It would
appear necessary for the Secretary-General, in agreement with the parties concerned, to take the necessary
measures for the resumption of negotiations, by
drawing up a timetable and indicating the stages of
this process, so that all the substantive aspects of the
problem can be discussed and that an overall solution
of the Cyprus problem can be found as soon as possible.

130. By his silence the Turkish representative cannot
escape his country’s grave responsibility
for the
tragedy which Ankara brought upon the people of
Cyprus; for it is Ankara which invaded Cyprus and
it is its troops which are in hostile occupation of a
large part of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus.
And, of course, it is Ankara which is expelling the
indigenous population from the occupied area and
colonizing it.

122. The confidence which the parties to the conflict,
the members of the Council and the Members of the
United Nations as a whole have once again expressed
in “the role and mission of the Secretary-General
assures us that we.are right to believe that his actions
will lead to positive results. I should like to take this
opportunity to repeat to him our warmest congratulations upon his re-election to this post of such lofty
and heavy responsibilities. We wish him every success in the service of the United Nations; we wish to
offer him our gratitude for his work and our confidence
for the years to come.

I’3 I, Mr. Tiirkmen cannot escape so lightly and throw
on to the shoulders of my Turkish Cypriot compatriots,
whose voice cannot be heard through the instruments
of the invader, responsibility for the inhuman acts
which his country’s military forces perpetrate daily
against the Greek Cypriots. Nor can he deny the
obstacles put in the way of the freedom of movement
of UNFICYP or the shooting incidents directed against
the Force, which are certainly the work of the Turkish
army. The Secretary-General’s report on these issues
is very clear and speaks eloquently. But if anyone
doubts that it is Ankara which runs the show in the
occupied area, I should like to quote from an article
in The Economist of 29 May 1976:

123. For its part, Romania is ready to do its best,
along with other interested States, to promote negotiations between the two communities in order to find
solutions to their common problems on the basis of
respect for the independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus.
124. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I call on the
Secretary-General who has asked to be allowed to
speak.

“The mainland Turks, who are now in charge of
northern Cyprus, say frankly that the area is being
absorbed into, but not annexed by, Turkey. They
claim that the experiment of letting the Turkish
Cypriots run their own affairs has failed-a failure
that was at least partly due to the fact that the
Turkish Cypriots, cleverer and more efficient than
the mainlanders, were never given a free hand. Be
that as it may, the decision has been taken that,
from now on, northern Cyprus is to be run openly
and officially by mainlanders.”

125. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
May I express
my warm appreciation and deep gratitude to all those
who have said such kind words about my reappointment as Secretary-General.
126. In the past five years, one of the most rewarding
and gratifying aspects of my work has been the close
and warm co-operation with the members of the
Security Council. I look forward to continuing this
co-operation in the years to come.

132. Beyond that, Mr. Ti.irkmen’s deliberate silence
serves the well-known purpose of Ankara’s policy
of falsely presenting the Cyprus problem as a dispute
between the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots.
It is certainly not a dispute between the Greek Cypriots
and the Turkish Cypriots. The problem of Cyprus, as
it stands today, is the pi-oblem of aggression and
occupation of territory of Cyprus by Turkey. Jt is
the problem of the military presence of Ankara in an
independent and sovereign State, in violation of the
United Nations resolutions on Cyprus and the fundamental principles of the Charter. Mr. Tiirkmen knows
very well that that is the correct position and that the
responsibility for the crimes perpetrated in Cyprus
falls squarely on the shoulders of Ankara’s military
forces. But, if he wishes to refresh his memory,

127. We all know that the Council will be facing a
series of heavy responsibilities in the coming years.
I hope that by our combined efforts we shall succeed
in discharging those responsibilities. For my part I
wish to assure the members of the Council that I shall
continue to do my utmost to be of assistance to the
Council in the performance of its vital task in relation
to international peace and security.
128. The
PRESIDENT
(intPtpl’L’t~rtic)lr
afiwtu
F,enc~h): I now call on the representative of Cyprus,
who has asked to be allowed to make a statement.

129. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES
(Cyprus): Mr, Tiirkmen, in his statement before the Council yesterday
I4

he can refer to the official report of the European
Commission
of Human
Rights of the Council
of
.Europe, to which my Government
resorted,
indicting
Turkey
for its continuing
crimes
and inhuman
behaviour
in Cyprus.
The report
has been made
available
to all the members
of the Council
of
Europe-and
both Cyprus and Turkey
are members
of the Council.
I am not, however,
at liberty
to
disclose the contents of the report at this juncture.

to pay for the transport
but all had been
sign the application
to move.

forced

to

I‘ . *.
“One
of the most
to the United Nations

blatant
papers,

[incidents],,
according
occurred
in October.

133. In his statement
yesterday,
Mr. Tiirkmen
referred
to my statement
as a “distortion”.
He
implied, among other things, that the Greek Cypriots
are leaving the occupied
area of their own free will.
In this connexion,
I think I could do no better than to
quote from a news report which appeared
in 77110 7i'1nc~.s
of London
the day
before
yesterday-that
is,
13 December.
It should be noted that this report
is
based on the most authoritative,
reliable and unbiased
sources: the officers of UNFICYP.
The report reads, in
part:

“On
Y October
this year, summary
404 again
dealt with Sector Six and stated: ‘During
night time
3 to 4 October
1976 five Turkish
Cypriot men entered
the house of Greek-Cypriot
Lysandros
Foka in the
village of Ayias Trias, beat him up, robbed money
in the value of 581 Cyprus
pounds
(83O’pounds
sterling) and raped his l4-year-old
daughter.
Another
Turkish
Cypriot was guarding outside while the five
committed
the crimes. The Turkish
Cypriots
were
carrying
a shotgun and fired at least one shot in the
air’ .”

“Confidential
United Nations military documents,
circulated
to officers in the United Nations
PeaceKeeping
Force in Cyprus, disclose
that looting
is
being systematically
carried out on a massive scale
by the Turkish
and Turkish
Cypriot
authorities
in
the north of the island.

The report goes on to speak about the looting, but it is
rather late and I shall therefore not take any more of the
Council’s
time by quoting further from this article.
134. It is fortunate
that these facts, which come as no
surprise to us, have been disclosed,
so that the world
may know the kind of peace that Ankara has in mind
for the people of Cyprus; so that the world may know
the kind of solution-“
final solution”
were the words
used yesterday
in this chamber-to
which
Ankara
aspires. Perhaps
the appropriate
word in this respect
would be “EI~L//~~,YIII~R”, that infamous
term.

“In terms never pubiicly
used by the United
Nations, they also state categorically
that scores’of
Greek Cypriots
are being forced
to leave their
houses in Turkish
areas and that robbery
is now
widespread
in parts of Turkish-held
Cyprus.
“
. . .

135.
It has been said during this morning’s
debate
that the Cyprus question
is a story of missed oppor-t
tunities.
There
may be an element
of truth in that,
but it is equally true that the Cyprus question is a story
of foreign interventions
when there should have been
none and of failure to intervene
when there was an
obligation
to do so.

“Publicly,
the United
Nations
here acknowledges that its movements in the north are ‘restricted’
but it has otherwise
given no indication
of the
officially-sanctioned
theft goimg on in that area.
The documents,
which speak of Greek
Cypriots
being forced
to sign applications
to leave their
homes in Turkish-held
districts, also refer to attacks
on Greek Cypriots.

136. We appreciate
what has been said about the
patience
shown
by the Council
in the face of the
parties’
failure
to reach agreement.
But I believe
I
would be justified
in saying that there would have been
no need for such patience if the Council had not failed
so far-for
reasons
which
are too well known
to
require
elaboration-to
take
effective
action
to
implement
its own resolutions,
in the face of Turkish
intransigence.
Had it taken such action to implement
its own resolutions,
it would have ensured a just and
lasting solution
to the Cyprus problem,
in accordance
with the Charter
and United Nations resolutions,
and
would have made unnecessary
the repeated renewals
of the mandate
of UNFICYP.

“
. . .

“There
are reports of robbery in other parts of the
north and continuous
references
to Greek Cypriots
being forced
to leave their homes.
Most of the
evictions are noted by troops of the Canadian
United
Nations contingent
in Sector Four, which includes
part of Nicosia. On 27 April this year, for example,
the Canadians
recorded
that two Greek Cypriots
from the village of Bellapais near Kyrenia
‘were
forced to sign applications’
to leave their homes.
“The
subsequent
report tells of how 11 Greek
Cypriots
from Bellapais
were escorted
from the
office of the Turkish
Cypriot
leader,
Mr.
Rauf
Denktag, to the Red Cross centre. They did not have

137, Before concluding,
I should like to make some
brief remarks
on resolution
401 (1976), adopted
by
the Security
Council
yesterday.
15

1976 [sect S///993, ~r/rnc.~l, the resolution deals also
with the need for normal life for the Greek Cypriots
remaining in the north and takes a position against
the inhuman expulsions of those ,unfortunate people
contrary to their legitimate wishes.

138. While the resolution was the result of a compromise, bearing in mind the objective of obtaining
the unanimous support of the members of the Council,
it goes considerably beyond the mere renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP.
And even though in some
respects more categorical terms would have been
more in accordance with the requirements of the
situation in Cyprus, the resolution, taken as a whole,
meets our basic demands.

143. In the same way, the Council has also taken a
position regarding the resumption of the intercommunal talks, which should take place in accordance
with the procedural agreement of February 1976that
is, through the submission of practical proposals on
the territorial aspects by the Turkish Cypriot side,
as the Greek Cypriot side did in April of this year.

139. It was the Turkish contention that the Council
should do no more than renew the mandate and possibly call for a resumption of the intercommunal
negotiations. In fact, the resolution adopted emphatically reaffirms Council resolution 365 (1974), in which
General Assembly
resolution
3212 (XXIX)
was
endorsed and the urgent and effective implementation
of that resolution was demanded.

144. It remains for me to express my Government’s
appreciation and thanks to the Security Council as a
whole for the position it has taken and more particularly to those among its members which have taken a
strong stand in favour of the just cause of Cyprus.

140. The Council also reaffirmed its resolution 367
(1975) which, irrtc~r (~/ill, expressly rejected creation of
the so-called Turkish Federated State and stipulated
that it should not prejudice the solution of the Cyprus
problem. Thus, the Security Council on that occasion
also stressed the essential broader aspects of the
approach of the United Nations to the Cyprus question
as a whole, as was ,my delegation’s request at that
juncture, leaving the door w.ide open for the next
step: the taking of appropriate measures for the
effective implementation of resolution 365 (1974),
as urged by the General Assembly in its latest resolution on the subject, resolution 31112 of 12 November
1976. This is further stressed by the request in paragraph 6 of the resolution the Council adopted yesterday that the Secretary-General
should submit a
report on the implementation of the resolution by
30 April 1977, thus providing the opportunity at that
time, if not earlier, depending on intervening developments, for the Counc,il to examine the Cyprus
questions in all their dimensions and for the appropriate
measures for implementation to ‘be taken.

145. A special tribute is owed to you, Mr. President,
for your statesmanlike efforts in the best traditions
of your office for the adoption of the ,resolution by
general consent.
146. The PRESIDENT
(intc~lp~Ptcrtic~rr.~orn
I call on the representative of Turkey.

Frc~ack):

147. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): I wish briefly to refer
to the statement of the representative of Panama.
He said he was confused by Mr. Celik’s statement
regarding his position on General Assembly resolution
31/12. It is not incumbent upon me to reply on behalf
of Mr. Celik, but I wish to point out that, as far as we
are concerned, there is no link whatsoever between the
missionof the Secretary-General and any resolutions
of the General Assembly on the question of Cyprus.
The intercommunal talks have indeed been proceeding
within the framework of a procedure whose salient
point is that the parties a,re aot .negotiating ‘on the
basis of any pre-conditions. The Secretary-General
and the ,parties are on <recordon this point.

14.1. On a different level, the iresolution, by noting
Ithe information contained in the Secretary-General%
report concerning the restrictions on the freedom of
movement of UNFICYP in the Turkis’h occupied area
of Cyprus, and ‘by urging, in its operative part, the
parties to refrain from’ unilatera’l actions and to
co-operate fully wit,h IJNFICYP so that .it may perform
its functions effectively, ‘meets our preoccupation
regarding the encroach,ments into the buffer zone and
the freedom of movement of ‘UNFICYP
in the
occupied areas and strengthe.ns *the hand of the
Secretary-General
,in these respects.

148. The *PRESIDENT (intrr&tafion
from French):
I have been informed that Mr. Cilik, who is participating in ithis debate at the invitation of the Security
Council under rule 39 <of the Council’s .provisional
rules of procedure, ,wishes .to address <the Council
again. If I <hearno objection, 1 shall call upon him.
149. I !invite Mr. Cdik ,to take a place at the Council
and !to ,make,his additional state,ment.
150. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I Qliank you and the
membersof ‘the Council for giving. me the opportunity
to address,the Council again.

142. The resolution also covers (the point regarding
the changes in the demographic composition of Cyprus
through colonization. Similarly, by emphasizing the
need for adherence to the agreements reached at the
previous rounds of the talks, which in fact means the
substantive agreement of 2 August I975 [see S/l/789,
(IIIIIC.~] and the procedural agreement of 21 February

151. I made a lengthy statement yesterday
[/979th meefiug]. The Turkish Cypriot side does not
often have the opportunity to address the United
Nations, and I hope that my lengthy statement will
be viewed in that light. I thank you, Mr. President, and
I6

each and every member
indulgence.

of the Council

for your

come to us, and we are ready and willing to enter into
a dialogue to resolve the problem.

152. In my statement yesterday I replied at some
length to the issues raised by Mr. Christophides.
It is therefore not my intention to take up much of the
Council’s time today to enter into a new dialogue
with my counterpart on the issues raised either today
or yesterday. We believe that a dialogue of that nature
can go’ on forever, each side coming up with new
arguments in support of its case. It therefore becomes
more evident that we should do less talking here and
should go back to negotiations, in which, in secrecy,
with good will and mutual accommodation,
we should
try to find a settlement to our long-standing conflict.

15.5. I welcome a change of heart, Mr. Christophides
has just referred to us as his compatriots, This is
really something we expected to hear years ago,
decades ago. We have never been recognized, and we
have never even been mentioned as part of Cyprus for
the last two decades. The Cyprus problem
has
been considered by the United Nations since 1955-for
21 years-and never have the Turkish voice or Turkish
legitimate rights been mentioned or supported here by
Greek Cypriot delegations. Therefore no one can
presume to be representing the whole of Cyprus here.
156. Mr. Christophides knows he cannot represent
me, and I definitely do not presume to represent him.
In this light I again call upon my counterpart and
extend to him my hand in friendship and ask him to
be as realistic as possible and to look upon us as the
party with which they have to resolve the Cyprus
problem.

153. Mr. Christophides’ statement of this morning,
however, leaves very little room for optimism. I regret
to say this, but from the fact that he still persists
in ignoring us as his counterpart in Cyprus, it is evident
that in the circumstances there is little willingness
or readiness to engage in a dialogue with us.
154. The Cyprus problem is a problem between the
two communities. The Cyprus problem is a problem
that must be resolved between the two communities.
If we do not resolve our problem, no one else will be
able to resolve it for us. It is futile for Mr. Christophicles to try to avoid us as a counterpart and to turn
to Turkey as a partner in the negotiations. He must

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be ohtaincd
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations.
Salts Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
mondc
entier.
Informcz-vous
aup&
dcs ventes.
New York OLI Gcntve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en lib&as
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agenccs
cle votre libraire
(XI adressez-vous
?I : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
to&s
partes del mundo.
Consultc
Nueva
York o Ginehw.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

dCpositaircs
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distrihuidoras
en
Unidas.
Sccci6n
de Ventas.

83-60801-April

198%-2,200
