TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
st

MEETING: 18 JUNE 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l43 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent Representatives of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8630) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
i

S/PV.143 I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Secu-ity Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

,’

lhe resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

I

‘,

~.

,:

:

,I
I

!

‘,

I’

/

,:
:

;

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 18 June 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President; Mr. Arthur J. GOLDBERG
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and-Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l431)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8630):

Adoption of the agenda
The agendawasadopted.
Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent Representativesof the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressedto the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/8630)
1. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
proceed with its considerationof the question before it.
The first speaker inscribed on my list to take part in the
debate this morning is the representativeof Canada,our
friend and colleagueAmbassadorIgnatieff, on whom I now
call.
2. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada):Mr. President,I shouldlike
at the outset to associatethe Canadiandelegationwith the
well-deserved tribute you paid to the outgoing President,
the distinguishedrepresentativeof the United Kingdom.
3. As to your good self, Mr. President,perhapsI may be
allowed to illustrate the predicamentin which I find myself
with the anecdote. of the general who, finding he had
overlooked sendingbirthday greetingsto his sovereignon
the proper date, madea qick recovery with the following
message:“Your loyal troops continue to drink to the long
life, reign, health andhappinessof Your Majesty”. That is a
quotation, of course, But perhaps the time is also appropriate for me to, confessthat when I first took up my
post asCanadianrepresentativeon the Security Council at
the beginning of last year, it was with someapprehension

that I viewed the prospectsof my associationwith sucha
distinguishedpersonage,apprehensionof the somewhat
awesomequalificationsthat you personally brought Into
our midst: your distinguishedservicein the highestlegal
tribunal of this great nation; your serviceasa memberof
the Cabinetof the United Statesfor many years;and your
serviceas the distinguishedGeneralCounselof one of the
world’sgreatestassociations
of trade unions.
4. I can now look back on my year and a half of
associationwith you in the Security Council with even
enhancedregardfor your diverseprofessionalskills,andno
less for the warm and human qualities with which you
blended those skills and usedthem for the public service
and that we are now going to missvery much. You have
served this Council, this Organization and your own
country in the causeof peacein a mannerwhich hasearned
the admiration of Canadians-your closest friends and
neighbours-in all walksof life.
5. It hasbeensaidthat “parting is suchsweetsorrow”. In
your case,Mr. President,perhapsI might be permitted to
say that my sorrow has beensomewhatdiluted, but not
dispersed,by your continuing participation in our work
right down to the last minute,Wecanat leasttake comfort
from the fact that when you do leaveus it will be with a
resoundingbangof the gavelsignifyingthe accomplishment
of an outstandingmission.
6. Now, as to the non-proliferationTreaty, Canadahas
taken the position that non-nuclear-weaponStates, in
return for their renunciation of nuclear weapons,should
have the right to expect someassurances
in respectof their
security. In the courseof the negotiations,many possible
ways of achieving this have been discussed.On the one
hand, the nuclear-weaponPowershave been reluctant to
undertakeadditionalformal treaty commitmentsto provide
specificassistance
to countriesattacked or threatenedwith
nuclear weapons.On the other hand, while somenonnuclear-weaponStates already have such assurances
by
virtue of their treaty links with one or more of the nuclear
Powers,other non-nuclear-weapon
States,becauseof their
adherenceto a policy of strict non-alignment,have been
reluctant to contemplate any ties which could be considered a departure from that policy. The question of
security assurances,
therefore, has been one of the most
difficult issuesencounteredin the course of the nonproliferation negotiations.
7. The proposal now made by the nuclear Powersfor
assurances,
falling squarelyasit doeswithin the framework
of the United NationsCharter,seemsto US to be the best
answer attainable at the presenttime to this extremely

difficult and complex question. Under the terms of the
resolution [S/8631] and the accompanying declarations
[see 1430th meeting], three of the nuclear Powers, the
United States of America, the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom, would regard any act of aggression with nuclear
weapons, or the threat of such aggression against a
non-nuclear-weapon State which has signed the nonproliferation Treaty as creating a qualitatively new situation
which required their immediate attention and response. In
such circumstances they would agree to act immediately
and collectively through the Council, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter, to take the necessary measures
to counter a threat or an act of aggression and to prevent
and remove the threat to the peace. It is our continuing
hope, of course, that the other two nuclear Powers will in
due course follow suit.

Council for the month of May; the representative of the
United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, who, during that month,
once again manifested not only his deep faith in the United
Nations but also his mastery in making this Council work
effectively and in unison in the cause of the principles of
the Charter.
12. My Government wholeheartedly welcomed the a&p.
tion of General Assembly resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12
June 1968 commending the Treaty on the Non.
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. To our mind the historic
importance of that accomplishment is obvious because any
unnecessary delay might have jeopardized the very possi.
bility of ever obtaining such a treaty, and thus have left us
face to face with the awesome potentiality of a further
spread of nuclear weapons. It also constitutes a necessary, if
not in itself sufficient, prerequisite to a comprehensive, end
in particular a nuclear, disarmament process,

8. To those who contend that action by the Security
Council is by no means assured, I would point to the special
significance of the draft resolution together with the
accompanying declarations which were made in this
Council yesterday, 17 June. While they cannot and do not
alter the provisions of the Charter, they do constitute
unequivocal evidence of a com’mon intent by three major
nuclear Powers to act in common in the event of nuclear
aggression or the threat thereof, with a view to restoring the
peace. It seems to us that this concert of understanding
here recorded in the resolution of the Security Council and
the solemn declarations made by the nuclear Powers is of
the highest political importance. It is one of the most
encouraging international developments in many years. It
represents a great step forward in the pursuit of a durable
world peace.

13. In adopting the resolution by an overwhelming major.
ity, the General Assembly, in our opinion, displayed alli&
sense of responsibility. At the same time, however, concern
was expressed by several countries that appropriate meas.
ures be undertaken to safeguard their security.
14. The Government of Denmark, therefore, welcomes the
agreement established among three nuclear-weapon
States-the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the
United States-expressed in the draft resolution submitted
by them and in their statements in presenting this draft
resolution to the Council to meet this concern.
15. We see this agreement as a token that these countries
consider it in their own vital and proper interest that no
non-nuclear-weapon State shall be subject to nuclear
aggression or the threat of such aggression. It is therefore an
agreement whose political significance goes far beyond the
very text of the guarantee formula contained in the draft
resolution now before the Council.

9. Finally, I would emphasize that the resolution also
reaffirms Article 51 of the Charter under which the
inherent right of individual and collective self-defence of
Member States is recognized until the Security Council has
taken measures necessary to maintain international peace
and security. The Canadian delegation considers that this
part of the resolution, taken in relation to the preceding
paragraphs, represents an important assertion that a nonnuclear-weapon State party to the non-proliferation Treaty,
which is the victim of nuclear threat or nuclear attack, may
reasonably expect assistance from one or more of the
nuclear-weapon States which have made declarations in
support of this resolution, until such time as the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security,

16. Furthermore,
the agreement between the three
nuclear-weapon States must be considered a reasonable
basis committing the parties, a basis upon which the
Security Council, should the occasion arise, may intervene.
17. We are satisfied that the solution now proposed
provides such global security as may be obtained in the
prevailing international situation? and that this solution in
any case provides a greater measure of security than is
today at hand.

10. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank Ambassador
Ignatieff for his contribution to our debate and for his
warm and generous remarks concerning me. It is often said
that good fences make good neighbours, The experience of
our two countries belies this cliche. There are no fences
between Canada and the United States, and certainly they
have been, are and, God willing, will always be good
neighbours. And certainly, Ambassador Ignatieff, there
have never been any fences between us during our common
service together-an experience that I shall always treasure.

18. For the several reasons I have mentioned, my delega.
tion will vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/863 1.
19. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Borch for his
contribution to the debate.
20. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated $rom
Spanish): Before I turn to the item on the agenda, I should
like to associate my delegation with the tributes paid by
you, Mr. President, and other members to Lord Caradon,
our President for the month of May. I can add nothing to
what has’already been said about the outstanding qualities

11. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): At the outset allow me,
Mr. President, fully to associate my delegation with the
words of praise that you expressed at our meeting
yesterday with regard to the President of the Security
2

that make Lord Caradon the distinguished figure he is, here
and everywhere.

relation to the possibilitiesof the peaceful use of the
atom. Wearejust asstronglyin favour of the extensionof
the peaceful uses of atomic eiiergy as against the
disseminationof atomic weapons.We know the great
potential of nuclearenergy for the productive tasksof
peaceand we thereforewant to have it in order to speed
up our progressas developingcountries by the useof a
technology to which we have no accesstoday owing to
our limited resources.“2

21, With regard to your good self, Mr. President, I have
already had an opportunity, at the 1428th meeting of the
Council, to express my appreciation. Please accept the
sincere reiteration of those sentiments.
22. At the meeting of the Security Council held yesterday
afternoon, the representatives of the United States of
America, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union
submitted for the Council’s consideration the draft resolution contained in document S/8631. They also made
identical declarations to the effect that their respective
countries had undertaken to seek immediate Security
Council action to provide assistance, in accordance with the
Charter, to any non-nuclear-weapon State party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that is
a victim of an act of aggression or an object of a threat of
aggression in which nuclear weapons are used. The three
States reaffirmed in particular one of the fundamental
provisions of the Charter, namely the inherent right, set
forth in Article 51 of the Charter, of individual and
collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council
has taken measures necessary to maintain international
peace and security.

25. When the United States and the Soviet Union submitted the draft Treaty on the Non-Proliferationof Nuclear
Weaponsto the twenty-secondsessionof the General
Assembly, my Government, taking as its criteria the
principlesand considerations
to which’1 have just referred,
examined the text of the draft with the greatestcare. It
found that the text was open to improvement; and we
therefore endeavoured,in conjunction with all the other
membersof the Latin Americangroup, to improve it. Our
efforts were well received,andthe two sponsorsagreedto
introduce certain amendments
which resultedin the revised
text that appearedas an annex to the draft resolution
submitted subsequentlyto the General Assembly for
decision.We were fully awarethen, aswe arenow, that the
treaty does not fully meet our wishes,that it doesnot
include certain provisionswe shouldhave liked to seein it,
and that it will certainly not allay all fear of the possible
wrongful use of nuclear weapons.But we knew also,and
still know, that it will at all eventsprevent suchfearsand
preoccupationsfrom continuingto grow indefinitely.

23. There is an extremely close link between these
declarations and the decision adopted by the United
Nations General Assembly at its afternoon meeting on 12
June.1 At that meeting the Assembly adopted by a
majority vote a draft resolution (2373 (XXII)/
cornmending the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons proposed by the United States and the Soviet
Union. In view of this close link, first of all I should like,
before commenting on the three declarations I have
mentioned and on the draft resolution which has been
submitted to us, to refer to the Treaty itself.

26. After weighing the reasonsin favour of this treaty
against the remarks made about its deficiencies,my
Government concludedthat its duty was to work actively
in favour of the draft. Such,in brief, were the reasonswhy
my Government first of all co-sponsored
the reviseddraft
resolution and then addedits vote to those of ninety-four
other membersof the General Assembly in adopting
resolution2373 @XII).

24. Paraguay’s views on the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons were defined by Mr. Sapena Pastor, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Chairman of the Paraguayan delegation,
at the twenty-second
session of the General Assembly, in
his statement made at the 1570th plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on 27 September 1967. I quote his
words:

27. In assumingthe special responsibilitiesinvolved in
co-sponsoringand commending the draft treaty, and
thereby provisionally accepting-until the treaty is signed
and ratified by the appropriateconstitutional processesthe obligations that the treaty imposeson non-nuclearweaponStatessuchasmy own, particularly the obligations
under articles II and III, we are making our own modest
but, as we believe, worthwhile contribution, and we are
making it with genuineconviction and with faith in the
causeof international peace and security. It wasin this
samespirit of zeal and faith that Paraguaymuch earlier
subscribedto the Treaty of Tlatelolco, whereby the States
of Latin America decidedto bannuclearweaponsfrom our
continent.

L‘. . , At the same time, the threat of the dissemination
of nuclear weapons hangs over the world. Recent events
give us reason to think that perhaps .the time is coming
when this dissemination will be halted and when, as a
result, the dread that nuclear weapons, against which we
have not the slightest defence, inspires in our peoples will
begin to diminish. We long to be free of this threat. When
more countries join the hitherto restricted group of States
that are able to manufacture and use nuclear weapons,
the sufferings and anguish of the great masses of the
inhabitants of this world will be even greater.
“This concern
nuclear weapons
1 See OfficioI
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

28. Within the geographicalarea where my country is
situated, relationswith near and more remote neighbours
alike are such that we are far removedfrom the fear of
possibleaggression.
However,presenttechnologicalprogress
being what it is, particularly insofarasnuclearweaponsare
concerned,no country, whateverits location, its zeal in the
cause of peace, or the level of its economic and social
development,is completely safefrom the possibilitiesof

about the possible dissemination of
should, moreover, be appraised in
of the General

Assembly,

Twenty-second

1672nd meeting.

2 Ibid.,

3

1570th meeting, paras. 148 and 149.

aggression, or the threat of aggression, involving nuclear
weapons.

to do with our faith in the future and in the innate good
sense of the human race. It is an expression of our
confident belief that in this world, which is already
disturbed more than enoughby the problemsarising from
the unjust and immoral distribution of wealth wherebya
few nationshave too much and many have too little, cases
of aggressionor the threat of aggressionwith nuclear
weaponssuchasobligeusto resort to the guaranteesweare
now discussing
will ceaseto occur.

29. But just as we have voluntarily assumed special
obligations as a non-nuclear-weapon State, it is our legitimate right to require special guarantees on the part of the
nuclear-weapon States against the contingency that, contrary to all possible expectations, a non-nuclear State may
find itself the subject of aggression or the threat of
aggression involving nuclear weapons. That is our interpretation of the declarations made by the representatives of
the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet
Union-in other words, the promised fulfilment by those
three States of an unavoidable obligation to the non-nuclear
States, to which of course it was only right that they should
make such a declaration.

34. The PRESIDENT: I thank AmbassadorSolanoLopes
for his remarks,and I now call on the next speaker, the
representativeof Hungary.
35. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Before making my
statement on the item on our agendaI wish to join the
other representativespreceding me in referring to the
activities of the former Presidentof the Security Council.I
recall that Lord Caradon, when I greetedhim last month,
replied that he would try to live up to the high level of
performanceof his predecessor.The Hungariandelegation
noted that promisewith satisfactionandthe efforts andthe
performancethat followed in a very delicate and complex
situation, when Lord Caradon took a resolutestand,asa
statesmanof his stature is expected to do. Weextend our
congratulationsto him,

30. There is a fourth nuclear State in the Security Council,
one of the permanent members, which is not one of the
sponsors of the draft resolution before us: I am referring to
France. Because of this, we listened with particular interest
to the statement made yesterday by the representative of
France, Ambassador Berard, in which he repeated what he
had said earlier at the 1672nd meeting of the General
Assembly on 12 June. On that occasion he stated that when
the Security Council had before it the draft resolution
proposed by the United States and the Soviet Union, which
was designed to give the non-nuclear Powers assurances
regarding the risks which might result for them from the
nuclear weapons in the possession of the nuclear Powers,
France would abstain. He added, and I quote: “Such
armaments”-that is, nuclear weapons-“are manufactured
in France only for strictly defensive purposes, and France
does not intend to use them either to threaten or to attack
anyone.“3

36. Mr. President,we already havecongratulatedyou ona
previousoccasion,I wish only to say how we regret to see
you leave our circle here in the United Nations. Wenot
only considered you an able representative of a great
Power, the United States, but appreciatedyour personal
capacity which created an atmosphereof warm friendship
in official as well asin private contacts with everyone,.no
matter how divergent their convictions might have been,I
wish you good health and happiness,and we shall always
remember you with the same friendship you have so
generouslydisplayedtowardsus.

3 1. It is certain that no guarantee, however comprehensive
it may appear, can give absolute security. We must not have
any illusions on that score. But limited guarantees are
better than no guarantees at all. The nuclear States offer
them to us in their declarations, and my Government
considers that it is in our own interest to accept them; it
considers also that the appropriate framework in which to
take them up is that of the United Nations, and within the
United Nations, that of the Security Council.

37. The Hungarian delegationwelcomesthe fact that the
Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States,
promptly respondingto the desireof many Membersto see
appropriate measurestaken to safeguardtheir securityin
conjunction with their adherenceto the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which has been
commended overwhelmingly by the General Assembly,
askedfor a meeting of the Security Council at an early
date. The three Powers,in submittingthe draft resoIution
contained in document S/8631 on security assurances,
madeidentical declarationsandclearly expressedtheir joint
resolve to take immediate action in the event of nuclear
aggressionor the threat of such aggression
againstany
non-nuclear-weaponState party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferationof NuclearWeapons.

32. The draft resolution submitted by the United States of
America, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union gives
the assurance legal form, and my delegation will therefore
vote in favour of the draft, as contained in document
S/8631.
33. While I am making this statement and this assertion, I
should like to add two comments which I think are
essential First, we believe that the proposed resolution and
the declarations made by the representatives of the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and the Soviet
Union are of a temporary nature, and that their validity will
disappear with the coming of the time, much to be desired,
when we shall have progressed so far towards general and
complete disarmament under effective international control
that the manufacture of nuclear weapons will be stopped
and existing stockpiles destroyed. The second comment has
3 Ibid.,

38. The Hungariandelegation, highly appreciativeof this
prompt and meaningful action, attachesgreat importance
to the security assurances
thus given.Theseassurances
area
matter of vital self-interestto the nonnuclear Powersand
to the nuclearPowersaswell.
39. The provisionsof the draft resolutiondo constituteill1
important step in applying the Charter to the realmof
nuclear weaponsthat could not have been foreseenat the
time the Charter was drafted. By adopting the draft

1672nd meeting, para.16.

4

reso]utlon before us the Council will contribute to a large
extent to the meaningful implementation of Charter provisions to maintain peace and security all over the world. It
provides for immediate action on the part of the Security
Council and, above all, its nuclear-weapon-State permanent
members. The draft resolution puts a potential nuclear
aggressor in a position where he must be aware that his
actions will be resisted effectively and immediately.

45. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translatedjkom Rench): First of
all, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation I should like
to offer my warm congratulations to you predecessor in the
presidential chair, Lord Car&don, who guided our proceedings last month with a talent, competence and tact
such as one seldom encounters.
46. I have already had occasion, Mr, President, to express
my opinion of your own abilities as a diplomat, jurist and
negotiator. We only hope that you will continue to serve
the cause of peace in your future functions as you have
always done while you have been with this Organization.

40. Contemporary international law provides that international security properly emanates from the United
Nations through the Security Council in the spirit and letter
of the Charter. The resolution of the General Assembly on
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the resolution of the Security Council on security
assurances constitute an entity. The identical declarations
of three nuclear Powers set up a bridge between the Treaty
and the resolution of the Security Council and thus provide
for the widest possible adherence to the Treaty and lead to
strengthening the collective security system under the
Charter.

47. In voting in favour of the draft resolution commend-.
ing the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weap
ons, Senegal wished to show its approval of a policy of
ditente and peace, and to hail the passing of an important
milestone on the road to disarmament.
48. Since the adoption of the General Assembly resolution
of 24 January 1946 concerning disarmament, the solution
of this problem has never ceased to be one of the major
preoccupations of the United Nations. In 1965, in resolution 2030 (XX), the General Assembly endorsed a proposal
on the convening of a world disarmament conference not
later than 1967. In implementation of resolutions 2153 A
and B (XXI) adopted at the twenty-first
session of the
General Assembly, the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament has met almost without
interruption from 27 January 1967 onwards to carry out
the tasks which were entrusted to it, striving above all to
reach agreement on a treaty on the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons.

41. There is no doubt that if there is a need to give
security assurances against possible use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons in the present d;lngerously tense situation
of the world, there is even a greater need to create an
atmosphere devoid of such dangers and threats. The action
taken at the resumed twenty-second session of the General
Assembly followed up by the adoption of the draft
resolution in the Security Council and the early coming
into force of the Treaty itself should as soon as possible
lead to effective measures on the cessation of the nuclear
arms race, on the complete prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons and on nuclear disarmament.

49. The efforts made both in the Eighteen-Nation Committee and outside it have led to the submission of a joint
text by three nuclear Powers. The General Assembly, by a
large majority, has just recommended the signing of the
treaty. Knowing the major preoccupations of the nonnuclear States, the sponsors of the draft treaty have today
submitted a draft resolution with the intention of providing
formal guarantees of security in the event of nuclear
aggression or the threat of such aggression.

42. Hungary is a small country which does not possess
nuclear weapons, The resolution on security assurances and
our forthcoming adherence to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons provide us, as they do
other small non-nuclear-weapon States, with genuine guarantees. The Hungarian delegation welcomes the draft
resolution on security assurances, which not only reaffirms
the right of individual and collective self-defence but, by
virtue of the three identical declarations we have heard,
introduces a powerful element of deterrence against nuclear
aggression. Indeed, the non-nuclear Powers could hardly
obtain stronger assurances than that of the immediate
assistance of the three nuclear Powers commanding the
overwhelming preponderance of nuclear-weapon power in
the world today.

50. We should like to make two comments. First, we are
still convinced that the ultimate solution is to stop all
manufacture of nuclear weapons and to destroy existing
stocks. But at the same time we wish to be guided by the
facts and to take a realistic attitude. In the present
international situation, the fact that the two giant nuclear
Powers, the fact that East and West, have reached an
agreement, is a historic event which we must applaud, while
at the same time encouraging them to continue their
discussions in the hope of reaching a solution leading to
general and complete disarmament. The stage that has just
been completed is, let us hope, a decisive step forward in
international co-operation for the achievement of the ideals
of peace.

43. Hungary voted in favour of the Treat); on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We shall vote for the
draft resolution on security assurances, because we believe
that in doing so we shall be contributing to the strengthening of peace and international security.
44. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to thank Ambassador
Csatorday for his contribution to our debate and for the
personal comments which he has again made. The Ambassador and myself cannot always harmonize our official
positions but we have never encountered any difficulty in
developing close and friendly personal relations. These, I
would venture to suggest, are not irrelevant in our common
search for a better ditente in our official relationships.

51. My second comment concerns the guarantees of
security offered to non-nuclear States in the draft resolution which has been submitted to us and in the solemn
declaration of the three nuclear Powers.
52. We for our part have no reason to doubt the good
faith of the sponsors, and in any case we must evaluate the
5

54. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Ambassador Boye
for his remarks and for his reiteration of his regard for me,
which I reciprocate in full measure.

situation objectively and ask ourselves what would happen
to the non-nuclear States in the event of nuclear aggression
or the threat of nuclear aggression if no guarantees of
security existed. That is what has led us to take cognizance
of the declarations solemnly made here by the Governments sponsoring the draft resolution and to understand
that, in the event of aggression or the threat of aggression
those Governments would take immediate joint action to
put an end to such aggression or threat of aggression by the
appropriate means.

55. After consulting the members of the Council, I should
like’ to announce that all have agreed that we should resume
tomorrow afternoon our consideration of the matter at
present before us, with a view to hearing further statements
and proceeding to a vote on the draft resolution that has
been submitted in document S/8631. Accordingly, with the
consent of the Council, I shall schedule a meeting for
3 p.m. tomorrow, when we may hope the Council will
conclude its consideration of the question under discussion
this morning.

53. In the belief that the draft resolution and the solemn
cleclarations supporting it, which we regard as forming one
entity, constitute a formal guarantee of protection for
non-nuclear countries from the nuclear-weapon countries
sponsoring the draft treaty, Senegal will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.

!

v;
,,

4””

,I <YJr,

,T
:”

_

&

/.I’
‘.

‘,

!
/:;
j” :,
(:1’ ,. 1
.:I,,. I
:);,i

The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

i

,j,

6

,.^

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivnlent

in other

currencies)

357034eptember

1972-2,100
