S/PV.9021

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9021st meeting

Monday, 25 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-32867 (E)
*2232867*

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, the
Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Wennesland is joining via video-teleconference.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Neville
Gertze, Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: Allow me to begin by wishing
all Muslims a blessed Ramadan. I also extend my best
wishes to all Christians and Jews who celebrated Easter
and Passover.
2/30

25/04/2022

When I briefed the Council in March (see
S/PV.9000), I expressed my hope that this month and
its holy days would be a peaceful and celebratory
time. Sadly, this period has been marked by violence
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and terror attacks in Israel, which have killed and
injured scores of civilians. In Jerusalem, the situation
remains relatively calm, despite inflammatory rhetoric
and violent clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces that have taken place at the Holy Sites.
In Gaza, the launching of rockets is undermining
the fragile stability that has prevailed since last May.
Let me be clear — there is no justification for acts
of terrorism or violence against civilians. Violence,
provocations and incitement must stop immediately and
be unequivocally condemned by all.
I also reiterate that political, religious and
community leaders on all sides must continue to do their
part to reduce tensions, uphold the status quo at the holy
sites and ensure that their sanctity is respected by all.
In this regard, I welcome statements by senior Israeli
officials reiterating Israel’s commitment to upholding
the status quo and ensuring that only Muslims will be
allowed to pray on the Holy Esplanade.
At this sensitive and volatile moment, Israeli and
Palestinian leaders have made some commendable
efforts to ease tensions, condemn attacks and rein in
violence. Regional and international partners, such as
the United Nations, Egypt and Jordan, have engaged to
help restore calm at the holy sites and ensure continued
access for Muslim worshippers. These efforts
should continue.
Daily violence escalated sharply in the occupied
Palestinian territory and in Israel.
In the occupied West Bank and Israel, 23
Palestinians, including three women and four
children, were killed by Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest operations,
attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis and other
incidents, and 541 Palestinians, including 30 women
and 80 children, were injured. Israeli settlers or
other civilians perpetrated some 66 attacks against
Palestinians resulting in nine injuries and damage to
Palestinian property.
In all, 12 Israelis, including two women, as well
as three foreign nationals, were killed and 82 Israelis,
including some six children and four women, as well
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

as one foreign national, were injured by Palestinians
in shooting, stabbing and ramming attacks, clashes,
the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails and other
incidents. In total, Palestinians perpetrated some 104
attacks against Israeli civilians resulting in injuries and
damage to Israeli property.
Over two weeks, four terrorist attacks took place
inside Israel — the deadliest such attacks in years.
On 22 March, an Israeli Arab man killed four Israeli
civilians, including two women, in an attack in the
Israeli city of Be’er Sheva, before being shot and killed
by Israeli civilians. A week later, two Israeli Arab men
carried out a shooting attack in the Israeli city of Hadera,
killing two Israelis and injuring four others, before
being shot and killed by the Israeli security forces.
On 29 March, a Palestinian man from the West Bank
shot and killed three Israelis and two foreign nationals,
injuring 10 others in a shooting attack in the city of
B’nai Brak in central Israel. The assailant was shot and
killed by the Israeli police. On 7 April, a Palestinian
from the Jenin refugee camp in the West Bank carried
out a shooting attack in the centre of the Israeli city of
Tel Aviv, killing three Israeli civilians and injuring 14.
Following an intensive manhunt, the assailant was shot
dead by Israeli security forces on 8 April.
Following the attacks in Israel, Israeli authorities
significantly reinforced Israeli security force presence
along the separation barrier and increased military
operations inside the occupied West Bank.
On 31 March, two Palestinians, including a 16-yearold boy, were killed during clashes and armed exchanges
in Jenin during an Israeli security force search-andarrest operation; 20 Palestinians were injured.
On 10 April, Israeli security forces shot and killed an
unarmed Palestinian woman with a vision impairment
who ran with raised arms towards an Israeli security
force checkpoint near Husan. Israeli authorities said
they were investigating the incident.
On the same day, Israeli security forces shot and
injured a 16-year-old Palestinian boy, who later died of
his injuries.
On 13 April, a 14-year-old Palestinian boy was
shot dead by Israeli security forces during clashes in
Husan. The Israeli security forces said that boy had
attempted to throw a Molotov cocktail at Israeli security
forces when he was shot — an account disputed by
Palestinian eyewitnesses.

S/PV.9021

Palestinians were also killed by Israeli security
forces during search and arrest operations, exchanges
of fire and clashes, including on 2 April and 9 April
in Jenin; 10 April in Bethlehem and Jenin; 13 April in
the village of Silwad, near Ramallah, and in Nablus;
14 April in Kafr Dan, near Jenin and 18 April in the
village of Yamoun, near Jenin.
Other Palestinians were shot and killed, reportedly
in the context of attacks or attempted attacks by Israeli
security forces or Israeli civilians on 31 March near the
settlement of Neve Daniel and on 10 April in Hebron.
On 15 April, during the early morning hours, a
large number of Palestinians gathered at the Al-Aqsa
compound. Some Palestinians threw stones, fireworks
and other heavy objects towards Israeli security forces,
which used stun grenades, sponge-tipped bullets and
batons, including against some bystanders. In the midst
of these clashes, several dozen Palestinians entered
a mosque in the compound, with some continuing to
throw stones and fireworks towards the Israeli security
forces. Following a standoff with those inside, Israeli
police entered the mosque and arrested those barricaded
inside. During the clashes, some damage was caused to
the structure of the mosque.
Some 160 Palestinians were injured, including four
women, 27 children and at least one journalist, while
some 400 were arrested, most of whom were released
later that day. According to Israeli security forces,
three policemen were injured during the clashes. The
conduct of Israeli forces has raised concerns about
possible excessive use of force. Importantly, noon
prayers subsequently took place that day without
major incident.
Over the following days, there were additional,
though more limited clashes at the holy sites and in
and around the Old City. Some 52 Palestinians were
injured by Israeli security forces in these incidents and
10 Israelis were injured by Palestinians in two separate
incidents. On 19 April, Israeli authorities decided, in
line with past practice, that non-Muslims would not be
allowed to visit the Holy Esplanade between Friday,
22 April and the end of the month of Ramadan.
Despite the tensions, overall, hundreds of thousands
of Muslims, Jews and Christians have been able to
celebrate the holy days in and around the Old City in
relative peace and without further escalation.

22-328673/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I reiterate that perpetrators of all acts of violence
must be held accountable and brought swiftly to justice.
Security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in
order to protect life. I am particularly appalled that
children continue to be killed and injured. I urge the
Israeli authorities to conduct thorough and transparent
investigations into all instances of possible excessive
use of force.
Against the backdrop of continued settlement
activities and ongoing pressure on Palestinian
communities in the occupied West Bank, as well as
heightened tensions, settler-related violence remained
high, particularly following the terrorist attacks
in Israel.
On 10 April, dozens of Palestinians vandalized and
set fire to a Jewish holy site located in Area A in the
West Bank city of Nablus, before being dispersed by
Palestinian security forces. Vandalizing religious sites
is unacceptable and has the potential to further escalate
the situation. I call on all parties to ensure religious
sites and places of worship are respected and protected.
Turning to settlement-related developments, on
27 March, members of an Israeli settler organization
accompanied by Israeli police took over the first floor of
a historic building in Jerusalem’s Old City. The settlers’
seizure took place amid ongoing legal proceedings
over ownership of the property between the settler
organization and the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate. In
a statement issued on 29 March, the Patriarchate called
the seizure a threat to the continued existence of a
Christian Quarter in Jerusalem.
On 19 April, thousands of Israeli activists,
accompanied by right-wing members of the Knesset,
marched to the evacuated Homesh settlement,
demanding its re-establishment. Prior to the march,
Israeli security forces temporarily closed the main road
and blocked the entrances to several villages, prompting
clashes with Palestinians. At least 14 Palestinians were
injured by rubber-coated metal bullets. I reiterate that
all settlements are illegal under international law and
constitute a marked obstacle to peace.
Ahead of and during the month of Ramadan,
there was a slowdown in the demolition of Palestinian
homes. Overall, the reporting period saw Israeli
authorities demolish, seize or force owners to demolish
27 Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and one in
occupied East Jerusalem, displacing eight Palestinians,
4/30

25/04/2022

including four children. The demolitions were carried
out due to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits,
which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. On
30 March, Israel’s Supreme Court decided to postpone
by some six months a ruling on the potential demolition
of 38 homes in the Palestinian village of Al-Walajeh,
near Jerusalem, citing progress in discussions between
the Palestinian residents and Israeli authorities on
advancing a building and zoning plan for the village.
I call on Israeli authorities to end the demolition of
Palestinian property and the displacement and eviction
of Palestinians, and to approve additional plans that
would enable Palestinians to build legally and address
their development needs.
Turning to Gaza, the security, humanitarian
and economic situation remains deeply troubling.
Palestinians in Gaza continue to suffer as a result of
years of severe economic and movement restrictions
resulting from the Israeli closure regime, as well as
the nature of Hamas rule and the ongoing threat of
violence. After several months with no rocket fire,
militants in Gaza launched five rockets towards Israel,
with one landing in the Israeli town of Sderot and
causing property damage. The others were intercepted
by the Iron Dome system, landed short in the Strip, or
landed in open areas inside Israel.
In retaliation, the IDF conducted air strikes against
what it said were Hamas targets in the Strip, with
no injuries reported. Following the rocket launches,
Israeli authorities closed the Erez crossing into Israel
to Palestinian workers and traders on 24 and 25 April.
I reiterate that the indiscriminate launching of rockets
towards Israeli population centres violates international
law and must stop immediately.
Some positive developments related to movement
and access in and out of the Strip took place during the
reporting period. On 27 March, the Israeli Government
approved the issuance of 20,050 permits for Palestinian
workers from Gaza to enter Israel, in addition to
some existing 2,500 permits issued for traders and
businessmen. The Government also allocated some
$12 million to improving the crossings between Gaza
and Israel, as the amount of goods exiting Gaza remains
at a relatively high level.
In a separate decision, Israeli authorities approved
essential medical equipment, such as mobile X-ray
machines, and reduced restrictions on the import to
Gaza of 56 communications items, many of them
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

routine. Separately, following agreement by the
Palestinian Authority and Israel, preparations are
under way to facilitate under the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism the entry into Gaza of dual-use materials
and equipment needed for the repair and maintenance
of Gaza’s fishing boats as part of revitalizing the fishing
sector. The success of this initiative should pave the
way for a similar easing of restrictions in other sectors.
Reconstruction of homes fully or partially
damaged during the May 2021 escalation is continuing,
albeit slowly, largely owing to lack of funds. In a new
development, around 3,000 tons of rebar entered Gaza
through the Egyptian-controlled Rafah crossing during
the reporting period. While these developments are
welcome, additional steps are needed by all parties to
further enhance access and trade and to improve the
prospects for economic development of the Strip.
The fiscal condition of the Palestinian Authority
remains precarious. While Palestinian Authority
revenues have risen in recent months, expenditures
continue to grow, and adequate budget support from
donors has not been forthcoming, making it increasingly
difficult for the Authority to address outstanding debts
and make critical investments in the economy and
its people.
Following the outbreak of the conflict in Ukraine,
rising prices and market disruptions, which are taking
place across the Middle East, threaten food-security
levels of vulnerable families in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The cost of the quarterly United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) distribution has increased
by 42 per cent since the end of 2021 in Gaza where
the United Nations accounts for nearly 60 per cent
of food supply, which, in addition to meeting needs
for food security, is a key stabilizing factor. Spiking
international prices for construction materials will
also affect reconstruction efforts all over Palestine and
in Gaza. Without additional funding, the World Food
Programme and UNRWA will not be able to meet the
food needs of the Palestinian population this year,
which could have a destabilizing impact across the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip. I echo the Secretary-General’s appeal for urgent
support for UNRWA, which continues to face a critical
financial situation.
The parties and regional and international partners
must work in concert to move the Palestinian Authority

S/PV.9021

onto a firmer fiscal footing while addressing broader
systemic issues. While we have seen some encouraging
initiatives and Israeli-Palestinian cooperation to
address economic challenges in recent months, a
coherent strategy is needed to ensure that the progress
made is not reversed. Policy changes and initiatives to
better regulate the economic interdependence between
Israelis and Palestinians and to promote more effective
and integrated governance are much needed.
Turning to the region, on 21 April, Jordan convened
a ministerial meeting of the Arab League to discuss
tensions at the holy sites. The ministerial committee
issued a statement following the meeting calling for the
respect of the legal and historic status quo.
The ceasefire between Israel and Syria is being
maintained in a volatile security situation characterized
by violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement between Israel and Syria by the parties. As
always, such developments present the risk of escalation
Lebanon is preparing for parliamentary elections
to be held on 15 May. The United Nations continues
to support the authorities’ operational preparations,
encouraging women’s political participation and urging
campaigning without hate speech. On 7 April, the
International Monetary Fund announced a staff-level
agreement with the Government of Lebanon that would
unlock around $3 billion in financial aid, subject to
the implementation of major reforms. At a sensitive
time of ongoing tensions in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, I am concerned by the firing of a
rocket across the Blue Line into Israel in the early hours
of this morning. No group has claimed responsibility
for these attacks. The IDF responded with artillery
fire into Lebanon. There were no casualties reported,
and I urge restraint on all sides. The United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon continues to engage with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to increase its counter-rocketlaunching operations to prevent further such incidents
and contribute to stability along the Blue Line.
The violence and spiralling tensions of the past
month have underscored yet again that efforts to manage
the conflict are not a substitute for real progress towards
resolving it. We must work immediately to lower
tensions and maintain calm. Alongside that, collective
efforts are needed to address the drivers of conflict.
Reducing violence and halting settlement activity,
while shoring up the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal
stability and strengthening Palestinian institutions, are

22-328675/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

crucial. Steps to improve economic conditions must be
implemented in a way that lays a foundation for a return
to a meaningful political process. Let me repeat what
I said to the Council last week, which is that a serious
escalation is avoidable. A sustained calm can open
the space for a more serious discussion about further
improvements and perspectives, and I urge the parties
to maintain calm so that the final week of Ramadan can
be celebrated without interruption.
Having said that, we must not lose sight of how vital
it is to end the occupation and advance towards a twoState reality. The ultimate goal remains clear — two
States, living side by side in peace and security, in line
with United Nations resolutions and international law.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting
Israelis and Palestinians in moving towards that future,
even as they address pressing political, security,
economic and humanitarian concerns and needs. We
will continue to work with the parties and with regional
and international partners to achieve that goal.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s stewardship of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and for
his efforts at this critical juncture. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to all the
countries of our region and beyond, as well as to the
Secretary-General, for rising in defence of the historic
and legal status quo in Jerusalem.
In these sacred weeks, in the holiest of lands, we
are reminded of its identity. It is a land of diversity and
pluralism, not exclusion and exclusiveness. Everything
in its DNA rejects monopoly and discrimination.
It is barely visible on the map of the world, but its
significance reaches every corner of our globe. And at
its heart lies Jerusalem, Al-Quds, where every street
and stone is testimony to the unique history to which
it stands witness. Each year thousands of Orthodox
Christians flock to the Holy Sepulchre to witness the
holy fire, the symbol of the resurrection of Christ.
Israel has decided to disrupt that millennia-old religious
tradition, severely restricting the number of believers
allowed to come to the site. And yet Israel claims that
6/30

25/04/2022

it is upholding the historic status quo. A few days ago,
the Israeli occupying force stormed Al-Aqsa Mosque
Al-Haram Al-Sharif yet again, shooting at worshippers
and desecrating the mosque with military boots and
violence. Some 200 Palestinians were wounded, among
them women and children, and more than 400 people
arrested. And yet Israel claims it is upholding the
historic status quo.
Israeli officials are clearly the only people who
believe that such actions are anything but a flagrant
violation of the historic status quo. When its illegal and
violent actions were condemned, Israel resorted to its
favourite justification — security. It is the one-size-fitsall justification — security to justify illegal occupation;
security to justify forcible displacement; security
to justify an inhumane blockade; security to justify
killing children on their way to school; security to
justify bombing entire neighbourhoods; security to
justify attacking our people, our land and our holy sites.
And as if that were not enough to dissuade countries
from criticizing Israel, they labelled our worshippers
terrorists. That is no surprise, as Israel accuses even
our human rights and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and our human rights defenders and
peaceful civilian protesters of terrorism. The distortions
are endless, offensive and dangerous. Jewish extremists
and settlers are not just visitors, as Israel claims.
They are in fact pursuing an agenda when they enter
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. They are seeking a takeover.
How do we know that? We just listen to them. They do
not hide their intentions. They proclaim them. When
Israeli forces allow them to enter the site and provide
them with protection and support, they do it knowingly.
Pretending not to understand the outrage provoked by
such assaults on Al-Haram Al-Sharif, when each time
it triggers the same reaction, is outrageous.
But does not the fact that this situation occurs every
year beg one simple question? Why are the occupation
forces there in the first place? That is what Israel hopes
people will forget — the fact that East Jerusalem is
occupied and unlawfully annexed, in breach of the
Charter of the United Nations. Israel has no rightful
claim or sovereignty over any part of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. It
has no authority over Al-Haram Al-Sharif, where the
historic and legal status quo must be upheld and the
authority of the Islamic Waqf and the custodianship of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan respected.
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We should make no mistake. Israel is not only
attacking a Muslim or a Christian holy site, in total
disregard for the feelings not only of Palestinian
Muslims and Christians but of Muslims and Christians
all over the world. It is also targeting the Palestinian
identity of the city. That is its true enemy. Israel
proclaims the city its eternal and indivisible capital, but
Palestinians in the city, and their faith, traditions and
existence, are trampled on and viewed and treated as
a constant challenge to that proclamation. Israel is the
occupier. It feels and acts as such in East Jerusalem.
It erects military checkpoints, conducts mass arrests,
and forcibly displaces the sons and daughters of this
land. It continues its attempt to uproot our nation
from its ancestral land. One would think that by now
Israel would have understood that there is no power
on Earth — I repeat, no power on Earth — that can
accomplish such a feat, regardless of how many crimes
it is ready to commit.
Every day, Israel kills Palestinians, oppresses
Palestinians and displaces Palestinians. Yet somehow
it is always outraged when they react, when we react.
It then goes on to say that its violent, repressive and
cruel actions were justified by their reactions. But
history has taught us that regardless of their respective
actions, there can be no equating a colonial Power and
a colonized people, the occupier and the occupied,
the oppressor and the oppressed. There is nothing
that justifies colonialism and apartheid, nothing that
justifies oppressing an entire nation and depriving it of
its right to self-determination.
We are seeking a peaceful path to freedom and
remain committed to that. The international community
and the Security Council have a responsibility to help
us chart that path and not to allow Israel to continue
blocking it. They have a responsibility to afford the
Palestinian people international protection, including
in East Jerusalem, or to provide them with the means
to defend themselves against aggression. They have a
responsibility to summon the will and the means to end
the occupation and the conflict. In the absence of such a
horizon, no one can expect anything but more suffering
and the bloodshed of innocents.
The Council has adopted resolutions to solve the
Palestinian question. Mr. Wennesland told us what
the United Nations stands for, which is an end to the
occupation and the achievement of a two-State solution
on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines, with, of course,
East Jerusalem as our capital. We are grateful to the

S/PV.9021

international community for that global consensus.
What the international community lacks is the political
will to implement it with the same stake in it that it
shows regarding other issues, and not to be selective
or ignore us when it comes to implementing that
global consensus and the relevant international law
and resolutions.
When we speak of the rules-based multilateral
order, we do not mean that one of us gets to set the
rules while others have to observe them. Nor do we
mean that there are different rules depending on whom
they are being applied to. The only multilateral order
possible is one based on international law. There is one
set of rules, one United Nations Charter, one Fourth
Geneva Convention, one Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, one set of peremptory norms. Does
Israel violate those rules? Does Israel violate Security
Council resolutions reflective of those rules? It does,
and I am certain that no one around this table can
say otherwise.
The question therefore is what has been done to
hold Israel accountable for grave violations that have
spanned decades. Let me rephrase that. Is it not true
that the fact that Israel’s impunity has never been
truly challenged is the main reason that Israel has
persisted in its disregard for international law? Double
standards, selective outrage and justice denied will fuel
only despair and anger, when what we need is hope.
The Palestinian people are asking the Security Council
why Israel is allowed to get away with it. How does
it get away with murder in broad daylight and while
everyone is watching, perhaps in the most-documented
conflict in the entire world? Why do some countries
come to talk to us about singling out Israel when what
most singles out Israel is the fact that it has never been
held accountable for its actions, even those that all
here condemn?
The international law is crystal clear and the
international consensus on how to end the occupation
and the conflict has been solid and consistent, thanks to
the Council. But there is an Israeli Prime Minister who
says no to a two-State solution; who says that there are
no occupied territories; who says no to negotiations and
the international terms of reference; and who says that
what Palestinians need are jobs, not human rights. There
is an Israeli Government that continues expanding
settlements and consolidating Palestinian Bantustans.
What will the Council do about it? Does it not have a
role to play? What was the Security Council established

22-328677/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for, if not for the maintenance of international peace
and security? Is what is happening in our region not a
threat to international peace and security? The Council
continues to observe and repeat statements on a just
solution to the conflict, but it does nothing. Is it not the
Council’s job to implement its will and decisions and,
above all, international law and the principles contained
in the Charter of the United Nations?
We all stand united in our defence of international
consensus in international forums, but on the ground,
it is Palestinians who are killed, displaced, arrested,
besieged and suffering. Their rights are recognized by
the Council, but they are denied on the ground — we
all know by whom. Settlements are condemned by
the Council, but continue to expand on the ground. A
two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders was
forged by the Council, but it is being destroyed on the
ground. The historic status quo has been affirmed by
the Council, but it is being undermined on the ground.
The fact is that there is no international law-based order
if there is no will to enforce the law on the ground.
What is a law that does not protect a people when they
need it most? What is a law if a bulldozer can challenge
it and prevail; if a sniper can ignore it and prevail; if a
settler can burn it and prevail? What is a law that has
no courts to uphold it and no power to enforce it? We
were told that the tools were lacking. Never has that
statement been less convincing than today.
I started my speech speaking of the holy fire that
manifests itself each year to celebrate resurrection.
Palestinians everywhere, every day, embody that holy
fire, a light that cannot be extinguished. When some
believe that darkness has prevailed, it reignites the
skies, revived by a faith and a resilience that cannot
be extinguished in our people no matter the trials and
traumas they have now been forced to endure for a
century. Palestine is our land; and we are here to stay,
come what may. The day Israel accepts that fact, peace
will become possible. It is the Council’s duty to make
sure that Israel does not delay that prospect any longer.
Peace is done and undone on the ground. Those who
want peace should start from Jerusalem. Change reality
there, and it will change everywhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Last week, for the first time
in 30 years, the holy holidays of the three monotheistic
religions of the world converged on the same day,
8/30

25/04/2022

with Passover, Easter and Ramadan celebrated
simultaneously by worshippers around the globe.
While the holidays were recognized by billions,
there was one place where that day held extra-special
significance — Jerusalem, Israel’s capital and the holy
city of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. That special
day presented an opportunity for Muslims, Jews and
Christians to exercise their fundamental right to
peaceful worship in the democratic State of Israel. It
was an opportunity to demonstrate how adherents of
the three monotheistic faiths could pray side by side
in peace.
Yet that opportunity for coexistence was instead
used by Palestinian extremists to incite violence.
Unsurprisingly, some on the Security Council
and within the United Nations were quick to once
again embrace the lies and falsehoods. Here is the
truth — hundreds of Palestinian terrorists rioting on
the Temple Mount posed a threat to both Muslims
and Jewish worshippers at the Western Wall, and the
Israeli police therefore had to intervene, acting with
exemplary restraint, while protecting the people and
restoring law and order. Nevertheless, many in the
international community called for calm on both sides,
a request that is completely detached from reality. It
serves only to fan the flame of violence, promote
radicalization and reward the thugs inciting the chaos.
The very notion that mobs of violent rioters motivated
by radical Islamic terror groups could be placed on the
same moral scale as a law-abiding democracy making
every effort to keep the peace is ludicrous. In fact, such
comparisons play directly into the web of lies spun by
the terror groups.
These fabrications were woven to exploit
international condemnation of Israel for acting precisely
as a democracy should, with restraint, respect and
minimal force only when necessary, in order to ensure
security and freedom of worship. Not only did Israel
use restraint when dealing with the mob of Palestinian
thugs, we also took far-reaching and substantial steps
to de-escalate the situation, implementing lessons
learned from the past — including by forbidding Jews
from visiting the Temple Mount for the last 10 days of
Ramadan and, following recommendations from Israel’s
security apparatus, prohibiting a march of Israeli flags
in the Old City of Jerusalem. Sadly, seeing that some
have decided to adopt the narrative of terrorists instead
of the truth, I am forced to state the obvious.
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

First, Israel has always ensured freedom of worship
for all religions and always will ensure it. By the way,
the Palestinian representative lied with regard to the
Christian ceremony.
Secondly, Israel is committed to the protection
of holy sites and to the status quo according to which
Muslims can pray on the Temple Mount while Jews and
Christians may only visit. There is not and never has
been any intention to change the status quo.
Thirdly, when violence endangers innocent people
and prevents others from exercising their rights, Israel
will not remain idle. For that very reason, when terror
groups such as Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine decide to create
chaos at holy sites, the Israeli police take action. Israel
will not allow any extremist group to violate the status
quo or incite violence. Yet while the Israeli police go
to great lengths to preserve the sanctity of the Temple
Mount, the Palestinian terrorists are the polar opposite.
They defile their Mosque with rocks and firebombs;
they desecrate it with barricades made of trash; and
they sully it with riots and violence, all for the sake
of hijacking the holy site and inflaming Jerusalem in
order to gain political favour within Palestinian society.
The lies of that false narrative can be easily
disproved. It is said that a picture is worth a thousand
words, and the truth on the Temple Mount has been
captured by countless camera lenses. An abundance
of photos and videos have clearly demonstrated that
Palestinian terrorists and extremists are the only
ones to blame for the violence on the Temple Mount,
while Israel’s police should be praised for respectfully
restoring the peace. In fact, I asked to share those videos
here today but was banned from doing so, sadly. The
United Nations must change with the times and update
its anachronistic regulations to permit the presentation
of photos and video footage. Today a picture or video,
especially one from a reliable source, is worth a million
words. That is one of the reasons why this institution is
becoming increasingly irrelevant. Even when the truth
is so abundantly clear, Israel is always faulted, and false
moral comparisons are made. It is frustrating that just
as an ostrich buries its head in the sand and refuses to
recognize reality, so international bodies can see the
truth with their own eyes but choose not to.
The time has come to stop being an ostrich. The
facts are clearer than ever. The Permanent Mission of
Israel to the United Nations has sent Council members

S/PV.9021

videos depicting the truth that Israel protects the right
to worship, while Palestinian terrorists are the ones
who endanger it. No one can make distorted moral
comparisons between such terrorists and Israel. The
narrative of lies carries not a grain of truth in the face
of the sources of such overwhelming proof. The only
people violating the status quo on the Temple Mount
are the Palestinian terror groups inflaming things at the
holy sites.
When people blindly accept the narrative that Israel
is preventing Muslims from exercising their right to pray,
is changing the status quo or is using excessive force,
they are embracing the narrative of Palestinian radicals.
Once that narrative of lies is spread, the spotlight is
given to Palestinian terrorists and their violent actions
are only intensified. Sympathy for those false narratives
has emboldened Hamas and Islamic Jihad to inflame
the situation outside Jerusalem, as well. Throughout
the past few days rockets were fired indiscriminately
from Gaza at Israeli cities and civilians, and a rocket
was fired at Israel from Lebanon just last night. Where
is the United Nations and the Council’s condemnation
of such actions? The escalation is the direct result of
Member States spreading terrorist lies when the truth
is so clear, and that is why the absurd calls that morally
equate both sides must end. But let me be clear. The
narrative of lies and the unwillingness to accept any
Jewish presence in Jerusalem — not to mention at our
holy sites — did not begin just a week ago on the Temple
Mount. It began before Israel was even founded, and it
remains the main and only obstacle to peace.
Israel is in the midst of a terror wave that has so
far claimed 14 lives in Tel Aviv, Bnei Brak, Hadera and
Beersheba over the course of a few weeks. While the
horrific attacks were perpetrated by various different
radical Islamic groups, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and
Islamic Jihad, there is one thing that all of the terrorists
share — the desire to murder Jews purely because
they are Jews. That deep-seated hatred is not born
overnight. It is the result of a culture of hate that has
existed for many years under the Palestinian Authority.
The incitement that drives Palestinians to become
shahids and celebrate the death of innocent Israelis is
the main obstacle to peace. Nevertheless, despite the
riots, violence, incitement and terror, Israel is making
every possible effort to ensure that life continues for
both Israelis and Palestinians. Israel has permitted and
continues to allow the entry of hundreds of thousands

22-328679/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Palestinians worshippers to the Temple Mount,
while providing work permits to more than 100,000
Palestinians working in Israel.
Considering that the focus of these debates never
changes, they should honestly be called “The Palestinian
question, rarely including the Middle East”, which
would be a better reflection of this debate’s top priority
than “The Middle East, including the Palestinian
question”, the agenda item’s official title. But seeing
that title has still not been officially changed, I want
to address a topic of real, critical urgency regarding
regional stability that constantly falls by the wayside,
despite its importance.
While the Security Council spends the precious
time dedicated to the Middle East discussing the lies
of Hamas or the Palestinian Authority, a true threat
to regional security is growing and may soon cause
profound devastation. But that threat is not news to the
Security Council. In fact, it is a threat that the Council
has committed to addressing numerous times. Yet while
resolutions have been adopted and bold declarations
made, the United Nations and its bodies have not only
allowed the threat to stagnate, but through inaction
have enabled it to grow exponentially. Hizbullah, the
Iranian terror proxy, was once a terror organization, but
today, as a result of global carelessness, it has grown
into a terror army.
Sixteen years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1701 (2006), which, in paragraph 8, calls for
“the establishment ... of an area free of any armed
personnel, assets and weapons other than those of
the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL”.
Since then, Hizbullah has multiplied its arsenal
in Lebanon tenfold, with more than 150,000 rockets
and missiles. Hizbullah now has military drones and
factories, and the brazenness to launch drones into
Israel from the area of operations of United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Hizbullah,
with the help of Iran, can now convert its rockets
into precision-guided missiles. Even the SecretaryGeneral, in a report released on Friday (S/2022/214),
said that Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia
in the country and is operating in direct violation of
resolution 1559 (2004). Hizbullah has become a State
within a State, all under the watch of UNIFIL and the
Security Council. In order to prevent disaster, surely
the time has come for the Council and its resolutions
10/30

25/04/2022

and forces to take action and demand accountability
from the Lebanese Government.
UNIFIL has an annual budget of half a billion
dollars and 10,000 troops. Nevertheless, despite its
numbers and clear mandate, it has very limited freedom
of movement within its area of operations. When the
peacekeeping force dares to stray into areas where
there is terror infrastructure — primarily in and around
private homes — its entry is restricted, and its members
often violently attacked by Hizbullah operatives. That
is not a marginalized phenomenon. It is a blatant,
organized effort to keep UNIFIL away from Hizbullah’s
growing terror capabilities, especially in civilian areas.
Sadly, the alarming and unhindered military build-up
that the Council is committed to preventing will have
far-reaching ramifications for Lebanon.
Hizbullah knows that it cannot defeat Israel on
the battlefield, so it builds up its arsenal of rockets
and precision-guided missiles for the sole purpose of
attacking Israel’s home front, civilians and critical
infrastructure. Those rockets, their launch pads and
other munitions are sprinkled all across southern
Lebanon — UNIFIL’s very area of operations — and
they are concealed within and under homes and civilian
infrastructure. Hizbullah uses the citizens of Lebanon
as human shields for its missiles and rockets. I invite
any ambassadors interested in seeing with their own
eyes Hizbullah’s use of Lebanese civilian infrastructure
as cover for its rocket arsenal to ask the Israeli Mission
to send over our detailed intelligence briefing on
the matter. While the villages of southern Lebanon
have become terror bases and every tenth home is a
Hizbullah arms depot, it is now only a matter of time
before that critical strategic threat to Israel — second
only to a nuclear Iran — will force Israel’s hand. Israel
will have to defend its citizens. If action is not taken
today, not tomorrow but today, the next conflict with
Hizbullah will come at a very heavy cost. The price of
today’s neglect will be tomorrow’s destruction.
Tragically, the priorities of this debate, which
prevent the true regional threats from being discussed
thoroughly, extend far beyond ignoring Hizbullah’s
military build-up. Hizbullah represents only one
tentacle of terror belonging to an even more menacing
threat — Iran. Hizbullah is one of six terrorist proxy
armies that Iran funds and arms. And Iran, as the
world’s number-one State sponsor of terror, uses those
armies to spread death and chaos across the region. As
we speak, advanced Iranian centrifuges continue to
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

spin. The Ayatollah’s regime is now mere weeks away
from enriching enough uranium from a nuclear bomb.
Iran, the Member State openly threatening Israel with
annihilation, will have enough uranium for a nuclear
bomb in weeks. How is it possible that the body tasked
with global security does not dedicate a majority of this
debate on the Middle East to the Iranian nuclear threat?
Should not preventing radical Islamists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction be a top priority of the
Security Council? We should try to imagine what the
Middle East will look like when Iran’s terror proxies can
operate under a nuclear umbrella. Will UNIFIL have
any freedom of operation once Hizbullah gets its hands
on tactical radiological weapons or has the protection
of Iran? How much bolder will the Houthi attacks on
international trade routes and civilian infrastructure
be once they have nuclear backing? While the world
continues to take a passive approach to that very real
and terrifying threat, Israel will not stand idly on the
sidelines. Israel has full freedom to act anywhere, at
any time and with no constraints in order to defend its
security and its existence.
We are living in an area of distressing instability.
Nevertheless, we still sit here today discussing the
false narrative that radical Palestinians wanted us to
focus on. When the democratic State of Israel is put
on an equal footing with terror organizations, the false
narrative of extremists becomes legitimized, and the
terrorist violence only intensifies. That cycle must
end. While these debates remain focused entirely on
Israel, the Middle East is becoming a tinderbox. That
is a wake-up call, and, unfortunately, there may not be
many more before the region erupts. The time has come
to repair the Middle East. The time has come for the
Security Council to take real action. The time has come
for us all to work together to ensure a brighter future.
The State of Israel implores all those present to work
towards a stable Middle East and a stable world.
The President: I shall now give the floor those
members of the Security Council who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. The
United States supports his continued close engagement
with all parties to promote calm and to foster dialogue.
As we just heard, this month billions of people
around the globe celebrate Ramadan, Passover
and Easter. Those holidays are a reminder of our

S/PV.9021

shared humanity and compassion. Unfortunately,
we have witnessed a deeply concerning increase in
violence during what should be a period of reflection,
introspection and communal celebration.
The United States is particularly concerned by the
recent violence in Jerusalem on the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount, which should be a site of peace and
tranquillity. We appeal to all sides to exercise maximum
restraint, avoid provocative actions and rhetoric and
preserve the historic status quo. We urge Palestinian and
Israeli officials to work cooperatively to lower tensions
and ensure the safety of everyone, and we welcome the
recent steps taken in that regard. We acknowledge the
special role that is played by Jordan as the custodian of
Muslim holy places in Jerusalem and its engagement
with all parties to prevent further escalation.
The recent spate of violence only underscores the
need to further expand dialogue and pursue paths to
peace. The United States condemns the rocket launches
from Gaza and Lebanon by militant groups that are
seeking to exploit the situation in Jerusalem to advance
their narrow interests. We must all condemn such
actions, which risk further destabilizing the situation.
The United States is engaged diplomatically with
all sides, including through outreach by our Secretary
of State. Our Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern Affairs, Yael Lempert, and Deputy
Assistant Secretary Hady Amr also travelled to the
region to work with the parties and the neighbouring
countries to promote calm.
During today’s open debate, I expect many
Members will offer their own support for the region,
but I would urge them to provide more than just
rhetorical support. In Gaza, the need for humanitarian
relief, reconstruction and recovery remains acute. Due
to President Putin’s unprovoked aggression against
Ukraine, food insecurity could worsen even further
in the coming weeks in both Gaza and the West Bank
as prices of food, fuel and other commodities rise.
During the historic Negev summit, leaders involved
in normalization discussed how they could support
Palestinians in concrete ways and have a positive
impact on the daily lives of Palestinians. In that vein,
we encourage all Member States to provide concrete
assistance, including financial contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, to help meet the needs of
vulnerable Palestinians.

22-3286711/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, the United States reiterates its firm
belief that both Israelis and Palestinians are entitled to
equal measures of security, freedom, opportunity and
dignity. But the realization of that vision will require
good-faith efforts by the parties and the generous
support of the international community. Dialogue,
negotiation and cooperation can create the path to a
better future for all. They can keep alive the prospects of
a two-State solution, in which a democratic and Jewish
Israel lives in peace and security alongside a viable
and prosperous Palestinian State. The United States
remains firmly committed to a two-State solution and
will continue pushing for and pursuing a lasting and
sustainable peace that benefits Israelis and Palestinians
alike. I hope that all Council members will join us in
supporting a pathway to peace.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his remarks and for all his efforts to
calm tensions on the ground.
Our first and foremost priority must be to avoid a
new escalation, such as we saw in May last year. All
parties, including political and religious leaders, must
contribute to lowering tensions. The integrity of the
holy sites and the historic status quo in Jerusalem must
be upheld and fully respected, and we acknowledge
Jordan’s important role in that regard.
Those with influence on the ground should have
access to adequate channels of communication that
can be used to avoid misunderstandings. Dialogue
between religious leaders should also resume. Stun
grenades, rubber bullets and Molotov cocktails have
no place inside a mosque. Israeli security forces must
act proportionally and in line with international law.
All civilians must be protected, especially children.
The human rights of Palestinians and Israelis are
equally important.
We condemn all acts of terrorism, including those
recently seen in Tel Aviv and other locations in Israel.
We also condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza into
southern Israel.
While addressing the immediate challenges on the
ground, we should also not lose sight of the underlying
causes. The Israeli occupation and settlement activity,
as well as violence against civilians, are drivers of
this conflict. We need more long-term solutions and,
most important, a political horizon. Norway remains
committed to the two-State solution and will continue
its efforts to that end.
12/30

25/04/2022

Norway will reconvene the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) in Brussels, hosted
by the European Union, on 9 and 10 May. Preliminary
reports tell us that progress has been made on several
of the priority projects that were defined in Oslo last
November. The parties and the donors will therefore
continue to review their status, and they will set goals
for efforts during the second half of this year.
There is a need to strengthen the Palestinian
Authority (PA) as a trusted and legitimate Government
for its people. There is also a need for well-functioning
and financially sustainable institutions, providing
essential public services to the Palestinian people.
The PA must implement the necessary reforms to
achieve that.
Building a foundation for the Palestinian State,
within the context of the two-State solution to the
conflict, will continue to be our aim.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me start by thanking
the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his
briefing on the present situation in the Middle East
and for his efforts in facilitating de-escalation on the
Palestinian question.
All of us are deeply concerned by the highly
volatile situation in Jerusalem. The violent clashes at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and in the compound of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, which begun on Friday, 15 April, during the
sacred celebrations of Ramadan, Passover and Easter,
require urgent attention and dialogue. We equally note
with deep concern the effect on the freedom of worship
on the Temple Mount of the activities of those inciting
violence or engaging in violence.
The recurrence of tensions and violence around
the holy sites, which have resulted in casualties of
both Palestinians and Israelis, raises serious concerns
for stability in the Middle East region. We therefore
call for the preservation and continuing full respect
for the historic and legal status quo of the holy sites
to preserve the sanctity of the religious grounds,
manage access, guarantee freedom of worship and
ensure non-interference in the peaceful practice of the
monolithic faiths of the Middle East.
Ghana also reiterates its condemnation of the
recent violent attacks in Israel against innocent
civilians by militants, leading to death and injury.
The destabilizing objectives of such militants do not
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9021

align with the international consensus for a peacefully
negotiated solution.

including Jordan and Egypt, as they have an immediate
influence on the ground.

However, Ghana welcomes the various efforts
being made to achieve reconciliation between Israel
and her neighbours. We encourage renewed efforts
towards the realization of the two-State solution, with
Israelis and Palestinians living side by side within
secure and recognized borders and in peace, on the
basis of international law, the tenets of the Charter and
the parameters set out in the numerous decisions of
the Council.

Let me reaffirm that Kenya’s interest remains
to support an end to that protracted conflict, whose
damaging effects have proved to be far-reaching.

We nonetheless note with concern Israel’s
closure of the border crossings used by pedestrians,
civilian workers and traders, and urge the easing of
the restrictions and the reopening of the crossings as
soon as possible, bearing in mind the potential impact
of the closure on the ailing Palestinian economy.
However, we welcome the commitment expressed by
the Israeli Government to ensure unhindered access for
humanitarian aid during the period of the closure and
ask that more be done to alleviate the living conditions
of the Palestinian people. In that regard, we encourage
the parties to sustain their engagements on concrete
measures that would make a positive impact on the
daily lives of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.
Taking into account the present situation in the
occupied territory and the challenges that exist in the
Quartet, the Council must assume its responsibility
and facilitate a renewed commitment by the parties to
reinvigorating a robust political process that builds on
the outcomes of previous initiatives, cognizant of the
need to define a clear political horizon in the direction
of the two-State solution.
Despite the intractable nature of the conflict, we
believe that it is possible to bring finality to the decadeslong question of Palestine. Ghana will continue,
therefore, to support international efforts to achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace between Israel
and Palestine.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Given the trajectory of
events in recent weeks, we welcome the briefing from
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland. Kenya also
welcomes the high-level outreach by the SecretaryGeneral and the Office of the Special Coordinator, as
well as the openness to engage on this issue shown
by the top officials of the Israeli Government, the
Palestinian Authority and key neighbouring States,

The ongoing holy days for Muslims, Jews and
Christians should be a period of peace and reflection.
Yet year after year, those holy days are tainted by
recurrent violence that has led to fatalities of civilians,
including children.
The many decades of meetings of the Council
continue amid a fragile peace characterized by cycles
of escalation of violence followed by calls for calm,
de-escalation and ceasefires. Perhaps it is time for a
shift in approach.
Of course, Kenya appreciates the fact that the
recommendations and principles stemming from
the Council’s long-term engagement, including the
comprehensive pillars of resolution 2334 (2016), when
fully implemented, will contribute to framing the intent
of a negotiated peaceful settlement and the actualization
of the two-State solution, with a viable Palestinian
State based on the 1967 lines; that the important work
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force remains
vital to the stability of the subregion; that official and
grass-roots channels working to invigorate conditions
conducive to peace and mediation and recovery efforts
in Gaza, as well as enhanced economic and security
cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian authorities,
are important practical confidence-building measures;
and that the call for a cessation of Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and compliance with obligations under
international law, including modalities for ensuring the
safety and protection of the civilian population, will
remain critical.
But that said, the Council, in our view, needs to
move beyond the existing cyclic and, in many ways,
stagnated state of engagement. I therefore make two
propositions on what needs to be prioritized to safeguard
the rights and security of both Palestinians and Israelis.
First, strong condemnation must continue against
those who call for the application of human rights
and freedom but still violate the same within their
own communities, among them being Hamas, the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other affiliated militant

22-3286713/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

groups. There is need to look deeper and address the
mechanisms and sources of weapons and funds that
reinforce such activities, including the barrage of
rocket attacks from Gaza and the 7 April terror attack
in Tel Aviv, which Hamas was quick to welcome and
glorify. We reiterate that no cause, for whatever rights,
can justify the deliberate targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
Secondly, the right of self-determination for
Palestinians is closely linked to the right of freedom
for the exercise of religion. That interlinkage inevitably
has to form part of the underpinnings of lasting peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.
The recent riots and acts of aggression in the Old
City and in and around the holy sites in Jerusalem,
including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, are concerning. The
historic and legal status of Jerusalem must be respected
and upheld by all parties.
We note the steps taken by political, religious
and community leaders calling for the safety of and
respect for the sanctity of holy sites. In that regard,
efforts to contain the proliferation of provocations,
misinformation and incitement by extremists are
important to mitigate against actions that serve only to
fuel tensions and religious sensitivities, which trigger
further destabilization, as witnessed in the events of
last May.
We make these observations not to make any
false equivalencies but to urge for actual movement,
longer-term solutions and tangible outcomes that are in
keeping with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Council’s resolutions.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his
informative briefing on the situation in the Middle
East region.
We continue to closely monitor developments in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem in the context of the
ongoing clashes at the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, in
which more than 152 Palestinians were injured after
Israeli security forces used tear gas and rubber bullets
against the protesters. We express our deep concern over
the escalation of tensions that took place against the
backdrop of a general surge of violence in Israeli cities,
which resulted in the deaths of more than 40 people,
both Palestinians and Israelis, over the past month.
14/30

25/04/2022

In that regard, we note the need to exercise restraint
as well as to refrain from provocative steps and unilateral
actions in order to prevent a repetition of the scenario
of last May, when unrest in Jerusalem escalated into
days of violent Palestinian-Israeli military clashes.
We recall once again that violating the historical
and legal status quo of the holy sites is unacceptable,
and we would highlight the stabilizing role of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, which is historically
responsible for protecting the Muslim holy sites of
Jerusalem and ensuring free access thereto.
The situation, as we heard today from
Mr. Wennesland, is aggravated by Israel’s aggressive
settlement policy on the West Bank of the Jordan River
and in East Jerusalem, which contravenes international
law. For instance, procedures to authorize the expansion
of 132 settlements are moving ahead at full speed. Last
year alone, construction began on 1,270 settler housing
units, and tenders were announced for an additional
3,467 housing units in the West Bank and more than
500 in Jerusalem. More than 140 settlement outposts
also remain, even though they are illegal, including
under the Israeli legal system.
Settlement plans for the occupied Syrian Golan
also create the risk of general destabilization in the
region. There has also been a significant increase
in settler aggression, amid the acquiescence of the
Israeli authorities.
We call on Israel to abandon radical steps to
create irreversible realities on the ground, including
the demolition of Palestinian homes, the confiscation
of their property and arbitrary arrests, and to resume
the peace process within the internationally recognized
legal framework.
The root cause of the regular outbursts of tension
and the cyclical escalation of violence in the Middle
East is the unresolved Palestinian question. Recent
developments in Jerusalem demonstrate the urgency
of resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In order
to prevent such recurrences of violent confrontation,
international and regional efforts should focus
on creating the conditions for relaunching direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis within
the framework of the agreed two-State solution, with
Palestine and Israel coexisting side by side in peace and
security on the basis of the 1967 borders.
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

At the same time, we are convinced of the need to
intensify multilateral efforts to create an atmosphere
conducive to negotiations. For our part, we continue to
engage with Palestinians and Israelis, as well as with
international and regional stakeholders. On 18 April,
Russian President Vladimir Putin had a telephone
conversation with Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas, during which he emphasized the importance
of relaunching direct dialogue between Palestine and
Israel, in particular under the auspices of the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators.
We reaffirm our readiness to work with our Quartet
partners to improve the effectiveness of the work of
that format, which has been endorsed by the Security
Council. At the same time, we would like to note the
importance of coordination between international
mediators and regional partners. That is precisely what
prompted the Russian initiative to hold an expanded
ministerial meeting of the Middle East Quartet with
key members of the League of Arab States.
We would also like to emphasize that advancing
the peace process is impossible without restoring
inter-Palestinian unity on the basis of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. We are ready to work with
other interested parties, especially our Egyptian
friends, to provide the necessary assistance in that area.
Russia will continue its efforts to build international
consensus and to coordinate joint actions in favour
of a just solution to the Palestinian problem. We are
disappointed that our Quartet colleagues again and
again refuse to cooperate on resuming the Middle East
peace process. As we see it, attempts to monopolize it
and to impose economic peace on the Palestinians as a
substitute for the just fulfilment of their aspirations to
the establishment of an independent State will not yield
concrete results.
Unfortunately, today we again heard attempts to
shift the blame and accuse Russia of a looming food
crisis, including in the Middle East. We see that as an
attempt to divert attention from the failures of Western
States and the sanctions and unilateral coercive
measures they have introduced, which are precisely
the root cause of the current situation. Our Western
colleagues could easily solve this problem if they
simply chose to do so. There is therefore no need to
engage in demagoguery and mislead the members of
the Security Council.

S/PV.9021

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We strongly endorse
the briefing of Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland.
The Council must consider very seriously how to
respond to the extremely worrying situation on the
ground. In that regard, we echo the Special Coordinators
remark that a serious escalation is avoidable.
As the Secretary-General has said, the ongoing
holy days for Muslims, Jews and Christians should
be a period of peace and reflection. Ireland is deeply
concerned about the violence in Jerusalem over the
past two weekends, particularly at Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount.
Ireland reiterates that the status quo at the holy
sites in Jerusalem must be upheld, with full respect
for Jordan’s custodial role, so as to ensure existing
worship rights. Excessive and disproportionate use of
force by Israeli security forces exacerbates an already
tense situation.
We have heard the Special Coordinator outline
the number of Palestinian deaths and injuries in
recent weeks in incidents across the West Bank. We
remain extremely concerned about the loss of civilian
lives, including of women and children. Israel, as the
occupying Power, must ensure that its security forces
exercise the utmost care in order to preserve civilian life.
It is clear to Ireland that unresolved conflicts,
especially those with no discernible political horizon,
breed instability, extremism and violence Ireland
joins other members of the Council in condemning
terrorism and all attacks against innocent Israelis and
Palestinians. We never underestimate the suffering
violence causes or the obstacles it puts in the way of
peace. Resolving conflict is not to give in to terrorists,
but to overcome them.
All of us around this table know that instability,
violence and extremism easily spread across
international borders. We also know, indeed too well,
that a security response alone cannot address the issue.
A credible political horizon is both vital and urgent.
Unresolved conflicts between peoples — and longrunning occupations — inexorably lead to violations of
the rights of individuals, in this case, the rights of the
Palestinians to equality, to live without discrimination,
to self-determination, to justice and to peaceful
coexistence; the rights of Israelis to live in peace and
security; the rights of Palestinian and Israeli youth to

22-3286715/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

build a future where peace is not just an aspiration, but
a reality.
Unresolved conflicts are also inconsistent
with — and eventually undermine — international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. That is especially true
of this unresolved conflict. The Council has a duty
to act.
Today we call the Council’s attention, yet again, to
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. If there is one thing
that could be done now to preserve the possibility of
an eventual negotiated solution between the parties and
open a horizon for hope, it would be an end to settlement
expansion. It is possible, and it should be done.
Not only are continued settlements wrong in
and of themselves, but the associated infrastructure
encroaches on scarce Palestinian land and resources.
We are concerned about the rise in severe settler
violence incidents. The Israeli authorities must address
these issues comprehensively and without delay. Those
responsible for carrying out violent attacks must be
held fully accountable.
The Palestinian institutions must work together
to build greater democratic legitimacy so that they
can, in turn, build the confidence and the esteem of
the Palestinian people in their capacity to lead them
towards a peaceful and sustainable solution.
The Palestinian people need concrete international
support. Conscious of the mounting financial and
interlinked humanitarian challenges they face, Ireland
will continue to play its part, including through its
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
remains so critical to regional stability. Ireland calls on
others, particularly those in the region, to step up and
match their political commitments with the financial
resources to enable the Agency to continue to provide
vital services to Palestine refugees.
Ireland will continue to support Palestinians and
Israelis to resolve the conflict through a negotiated twoState solution, on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Special Coordinator for his
very detailed briefing and to assure him of France’s
full support.
16/30

25/04/2022

France is very concerned at the increase in tensions
and violence that have multiplied in recent days in
Jerusalem, and which have also claimed many victims
in the Palestinian territories. We strongly condemn the
terrorist attacks that have killed 14 people in Israel,
including one of our compatriots.
France calls for restraint and the avoidance of
all forms of violence and provocation. Our shared
collective priority must be to prevent an escalation
similar to that of May 2021. We call for the utmost
vigilance, as the situation remains explosive during
this period of religious holidays. In this context,
France strongly condemns the rocket attacks that
targeted Israel recently. Respect for the status quo at
the holy sites is essential, and we recall in turn the
essential role of Jordan. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the proportionate use of force. Any
allegations of disproportionate use must be rigorously
and transparently investigated.
Beyond immediate efforts to preserve calm, there is
an urgent need to address the root causes of the conflict,
of which this escalation is but an all-too-familiar
symptom. We have warned since October against the
resumption of unilateral measures in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. The resumption of settlement activity,
as well as record levels of demolitions, evictions and
settler violence, are fuelling an explosive situation,
which is reinforcing the extremes. We call on the
Israeli authorities to put an end to settlement activities
and fully respect its responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
France also reiterates the importance of recreating
a political horizon for the resumption of negotiations to
implement the two-State solution, with Jerusalem as its
capital. Without a genuine political process between the
parties, the same causes will produce the same effects,
and the cycles of violence will be repeated.
In coordination with its partners, France remains
mobilized to support all efforts aimed at de-escalating
the situation and relaunching the peace process. In this
regard, I reiterate our full support for the efforts of the
Special Coordinator. We have increased our financial
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in 2022
because the Agency is essential to the stability of the
region. We in turn call on all Member States to increase
their support.
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
begin by thanking Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing, as well as for his Office’s tireless efforts
towards de-escalation.
It has been less than a week since the Security
Council last met to discuss the situation in Jerusalem.
The situation on the ground was already extremely
serious then and has deteriorated further. In the days
following our meeting, we have seen renewed violence,
including in and around holy sites in Jerusalem, as well
as in Gaza and elsewhere. It is even more regrettable
that the escalation is happening during a period of
religious celebrations for the three major monotheistic
faiths, which is a time to practice peace, tolerance and
self-reflection.
The scenes we have witnessed over the last few
weeks are shocking and unacceptable. Places of
worship should not be battlegrounds, especially a place
of such religious significance as the Holy Esplanade.
The safety and security of religious sites is an essential
component of freedom of religion or belief and should
be preserved at all costs. In this context, we recall
such initiatives as the 2019 Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites and the 2020
Declaration on Safe Places of Worship adopted by the
International Freedom of Religion or Belief Alliance.
The confrontations of May 2021 in Gaza resulted in
hundreds of civilian deaths, thousands of injuries and
the widespread destruction of infrastructure. Slowly
and with great effort from the United Nations, regional
partners and from the parties themselves, a measure
of stability had been re-established. The sporadic
launching of rockets from Gaza over the last few days,
which we thoroughly condemn, stands as a reminder of
the risk of returning to 2021 and of losing more civilian
lives and any progress made since then.
The ongoing violence and provocations are a
costly setback — another in a long line of incidents
that obstruct the search for a lasting peace. Refraining
from incitement and inflammatory rhetoric is of utmost
importance at this juncture. We therefore call not only
for restraint from political, religious and community
leaders, but also for proactive engagement towards
de-escalation.
Most importantly, we urge Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to engage with each other, be it directly or
through the mediation instruments offered by the
United Nations and by regional partners. Measures

S/PV.9021

taken to prevent acts of provocation are also essential.
In this context, we welcome the engagement of
Israeli authorities with parties on the ground to ease
tensions. We also welcome the Israeli assurances on
the enduring historical and legal status quo of the holy
sites in Jerusalem, which must indeed be preserved. As
custodian of the Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is also an important
partner in bringing this crisis to an end.
Amid this tense escalation, Christian holy sites
in Jerusalem must be kept safe and open for worship.
Bringing the violence to an end and returning to a
credible political process is a priority shared by all,
and the international community should use all means
available to it to support de-escalation.
The current crisis is the result of years of frustration
with the lack of progress in finding a lasting solution to
the conflict — a solution that seems even more distant
when dialogue breaks down and parties take unilateral
actions. Bringing the violence to an end and returning
to a credible political process within the framework of
a negotiated two-State solution is a priority shared by
all, and the international community should spare no
effort to support it.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing and welcome the delegations of Israel and
Palestine to today’s meeting.
Mexico expresses its concern that, despite calls for
calm, the situation in the West Bank, and particularly
in Jerusalem, continues to be very volatile. It is
regrettable that during religious festivities violence
has been exacerbated to such a degree. Jerusalem, the
cradle of millenary civilizations, should be a place of
coexistence and tolerance.
Mexico deplores the violent incursion into religious
sites by Israeli forces of law and order. Attacks against
churches, synagogues, mosques or any other place
of worship are simply unjustifiable. We deplore the
number of civilian casualties, including of minors, and
urge the Israeli security forces to exercise maximum
restraint and to respect the principle of proportionality.
Mexico also calls for a redoubling of efforts to guarantee
freedom of movement, association and worship.
Recognizing the special status of Jerusalem, and in
accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council,
in particular resolution 476 (1980), we urge Israel to

22-3286717/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refrain from altering the demographic composition,
institutional structure and physical, cultural and
historical character of Jerusalem.
We call on Israeli elected representatives and
religious and social leaders to refrain from all acts
of incitement and the use of inflammatory rhetoric.
We also call on Palestinian leaders not to use those
serious incidents as a justification for promoting
anti-Israeli sentiment.
Mexico also urges Israel to redouble its efforts to
deter clashes in and around the Old City of Jerusalem.
In addition, Mexico condemns the recent attacks
against the Israeli population in such cities as Be’er
Sheva, Hadera, Bnei Brak and Tel Aviv, among others,
as well as rocket fire from Gaza.
To end such cycles of violence, negative trends
on the ground must be reversed. These include the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements and
all attendant activities, such as the confiscation of,
eviction from and demolition of Palestinian property.
Similarly, reconstruction and economic development in
Gaza must be facilitated. It is therefore essential to lift
the blockade on the Strip.
In other matters, Mexico welcomes the organization
of the second phase of municipal elections in the West
Bank on 26 March. We hope that general elections will
soon be held in the Palestinian territory, including in
East Jerusalem. At the same time, we are concerned
about the ongoing unpredictable fiscal situation
of the Palestinian Authority and call for continued
civil, fiscal and security cooperation between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, Mexico
takes note of the holding of the Negev Summit at the
end of March. Such initiatives are an opportunity to
strengthen regional cooperation and understanding, but
they cannot be considered a substitute for the IsraeliPalestinian peace process.
We welcome the mediation efforts of Egypt, Jordan
and Qatar to de-escalate the situation. Mexico reiterates
its full support for the work of the Special Coordinator
and the Peace Quartet.
Mexico reaffirms its commitment to a two-State
solution that addresses Israel’s legitimate security
concerns and allows for the consolidation of a
politically and economically viable Palestinian State,
in accordance with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
18/30

25/04/2022

Before concluding, let me reiterate the call to focus
diplomatic efforts on addressing the historical and root
causes of this hostile situation. The resumption of the
peace process is indisputably the responsibility of Israel
and Palestine. However, the international community
and the Council are responsible for promoting and
facilitating the process.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.

Special

We are deeply concerned about the series of
incidents at holy places in Jerusalem during the ongoing
holy month of Ramadan. The historic status quo at holy
places in Jerusalem must be respected and upheld.
All acts of obstruction, vandalism and desecration,
which violate the sanctity of the holy places — be
they in Jerusalem, Nablus or elsewhere — must be
unequivocally condemned.
We recognize the efforts made by Israel, Jordan,
the Palestinian Authority and other countries to avert
escalation. It is unfortunate that despite those efforts,
the situation on the ground has once again deteriorated.
We appeal to all parties to stop the provocations and
incitement, which could further worsen the situation.
We extend our support for all steps that are aimed at
reducing tensions and restoring calm. We appreciate
the efforts made by the Secretary-General and the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
in that regard.
We are also gravely concerned about the acts of
terrorism and incidents of violence in Israel and the
West Bank. We have consistently advocated against all
acts of terrorism and violence. We strongly condemn
such acts, which have resulted in an increasingly high
number of casualties, including women and children. It
is time to show restraint, desist provocative actions that
fuel tensions and abide by resolution 2334 (2016). We
urge all sides to take immediate steps for a complete
cessation of violence.
The recent rocket fire from Gaza and the retaliatory
air strikes by Israel demonstrate the fragility of the
situation and the potential for escalation. We call on all
parties to de-escalate and respect the ceasefire.
The continued precarious financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a matter
of concern, as the Palestinian refugee community in
the Palestinian territories and elsewhere depend on
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the services provided by the Agency. I reiterate India’s
commitment to supporting UNRWA financially and
helping the Agency overcome its liquidity crisis. India
has already contributed $20 million over the past four
years and has also pledged $5 million for the UNRWA
programme budget for the year 2022.
The ongoing incidents once again underscore the
need for the immediate resumption of peace talks
between Israel and Palestine. The absence of such
direct negotiations is not conducive to securing longterm peace and will only increase the risk of recurrence
and the escalation of such violence. An early return to
the political dialogue process by launching credible
direct negotiations, while addressing the security and
economic challenges, is an immediate necessity.
India has consistently called for direct peace
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, taking
into account the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for statehood and Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. The United Nations and the
international community must prioritize the revival of
those negotiations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm India’s unwavering
commitment to the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and viable State of Palestine, living within
secure and recognized borders, side by side and at peace
with Israel. There is no other alternative to a negotiated
two-State solution.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his second briefing to the Council in less than a week
and commend his tireless efforts to support stability
and peace in the region.
We find ourselves at a critical juncture. As previous
years have demonstrated, either we will witness a
dangerous escalation that will further increase tensions
in the region, or the situation will be defused so as
to prevent further aggravation. In that context, we
condemn the repeated incursions by Israeli forces into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the assaults perpetrated
by settlers in the courtyards of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
What we need now is restraint, as well as intense
and continued regional and international efforts and
pressure to de-escalate the situation and introduce
constructive initiatives for rebuilding trust between
the parties. In that regard, we must use all available

S/PV.9021

diplomatic means, including existing channels of
communication with the parties, to achieve those goals.
As my country’s Foreign Minister stressed in
his call with his Israeli counterpart, there must be
de-escalation, and practices that violate the sanctity of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque must be stopped. In that context,
we appreciate some of the decisions taken recently by
the Israeli Government to de-escalate the situation and
reduce tensions. We urge that more such decisions be
taken to create a stable and sustainable situation that
will create a political environment that will allow for
Palestinians and Israelis to sit together at the negotiating
table and revive the Middle East peace process.
In that context, we also commend the efforts of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the Arab Republic
of Egypt and the United States in urging the parties
to abide by the recent truce and restore calm in the
region. We also support the call made at the latest
emergency Arab Ministerial Committee meeting
regarding the need to relaunch serious and effective
negotiations to restore confidence in the feasibility of
the peace process and put it on a clear path towards
a negotiated solution based on the two-State solution,
whereby the Palestinian State would live side by side
with Israel in peace, security and mutual recognition.
That constitutes a strategic Arab choice and a regional
and international necessity.
The current situation, which has already led to
hundreds of injuries and arrests among worshippers
as well as severe damage to the facilities of the Holy
Mosque, underscores the need to ensure the protection
of worshippers, while simultaneously refraining from
any provocative actions in Al-Aqsa Mosque. We also
stress the need for the Israeli authorities to respect the
right of Palestinians to practice their religious rites
and to have free access to holy places, including the
Al-Aqsa and Al-Ibrahimi Mosques.
We once again emphasize the need to preserve the
existing legal and historical status quo of the city of
Jerusalem and its sanctities in line with international
law. We stress the need to avoid undermining the
authority and powers of the Jerusalem Endowment
Administration and the affairs of Al-Aqsa Mosque.
We also emphasize the need to respect the role of the
custodianship of the Islamic and Christian holy sites
and endowments, which is entrusted to His Majesty
King Abdullah II of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.

22-3286719/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Furthermore, the United Arab Emirates also
appreciates all multilateral efforts to protect the city
of Jerusalem, including the efforts of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation’s Al-Quds Committee, chaired
by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of the Kingdom
of Morocco.
In conclusion, we affirm the United Arab Emirates
support for achieving the independence of the Palestinian
State based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in accordance with the Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative and other agreed international
terms of reference. Our region is in dire need of finding
just, comprehensive and peaceful solutions to crises
and conflicts, including through joint action, in order
to pursue development and meet the aspirations of its
peoples for progress and prosperity.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his
enlightening briefing, to which we paid close attention.
I also welcome the participation of our colleagues the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine in this meeting.
We are holding this debate in a particularly tense
context due to the violence witnessed in recent weeks,
particularly in the occupied Palestinian territories
and in the Old City of Jerusalem, which raises fears
of a deadly new escalation in the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis. Tensions recently escalated on 15 April as a
result of clashes between Palestinian demonstrators
and Israeli police, culminating in an intervention by
Israeli police inside the Al-Aqsa Mosque, leaving many
people injured, particularly on the Palestinian side.
That serious incident is just one of the violent events
that have occurred since the beginning of this delicate
period of religious celebrations for the Muslim, Jewish
and Christian communities.
We cannot help but be fearful that an easing of the
situation is not on the cards as, after days of violence,
particularly at the holy sites, there have also been
rocket attacks against Israel from a Palestinian enclave
and air strikes on the Gaza Strip. That increase in
local tensions is all the more notable because it has not
happened for months. Many of those acts of violence,
characterized by brutality and the disproportionate
use of force against civilians, are claiming increasing
numbers of victims, including women and children.
My country strongly condemns all such violence,
which is not conducive to building lasting peace and
20/30

25/04/2022

stability between Israel and Palestine. On the contrary,
it only fuels frustration, deepens wounds and damages
efforts to build trust between Israel and Palestine,
which is an indispensable prelude to dialogue and a
political settlement to the conflict. It is clear that such
a complex situation with intractable issues cannot be
resolved by the protagonists’ unilateral initiatives,
but by constructive dialogue in good faith between
the parties.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s call on leaders
on all sides to calm the situation and immediately cease
provocations along the Esplanade of Mosques to prevent
any further escalation and to maintain and respect the
status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem.
We commend the role of the King of Morocco as
Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s
Al-Quds Committee in preserving the special status
of the Holy City as a symbol of the common heritage
of humankind and the peaceful coexistence of the
three monotheistic religions, as well as a place for
dialogue and mutual respect. It is necessary to preserve
the particularities of Jerusalem as a city of peaceful
coexistence, as underlined in the appeal for Jerusalem
launched on 30 March 2019 by the King of Morocco
and Pope Francis.
We also believe that neighbouring countries
have an important role to play and, in that regard, we
commend the efforts of Jordan and Egypt in seeking to
ease tensions on the ground.
It is more important than ever to break the deadlock
in which the Council finds itself, as it risks leading to
international fatigue with many grave consequences for
the future of the peoples of Palestine and Israel.
For decades, Palestine has been in the grip of a
major political crisis with devastating consequences,
particularly in the humanitarian and economic spheres,
in the context of the devastating coronavirus disease
pandemic. In the course of the conflict, the Palestinian
Authority has gradually lost its capacity to provide
essential services to its population, including food,
education and health.
The security situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories remains precarious and volatile, owing
in part to the continuing illegal policy of settlement
expansion and the demolition of Palestinian homes and
other evictions affecting many Palestinian families. Not
only are such actions contributing to the destabilization
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the occupied Palestinian territories and exacerbating
the territorial fragmentation of the West Bank, but
they are also fuelling anger and the desire for revenge.
It is essential to implement resolution 2334 (2016),
which calls for an immediate and complete cessation
of all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.
It is crucial for the parties to build on the momentum
for calm. To that end, we hope that the announcement
by the Israeli authorities calling on all to support efforts
in good faith to restore calm to Jerusalem and ensure
freedom of worship on the Temple Mount for both Jews
and Muslims will help to ease tensions.
It is high time to activate the channels of diplomacy
to ensure that restraint, reason and responsibility
prevail. Neighbouring countries and key partners in the
region have a crucial role to play in that respect towards
relaunching a more credible peace process. We welcome
the initiative of the meeting held in Negev on 28 March,
at the end of which the participants recognized the need
to strengthen multilateral cooperation and resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, inter alia. We encourage
the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to show restraint,
to refrain from provocation and to invest in peaceful
coexistence, as well as to give peace a greater chance.
We reiterate our commitment to the two-State
solution, which cannot be achieved without the firm
political commitment and the will of the parties, as
well as the support of the international community,
including regional actors
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for Special
Coordinator Wennesland in his efforts towards
ensuring calm and maintaining close contact between
the parties, as well as among the key regional partners.

S/PV.9021

have led to more casualties among Palestinian civilians.
The Israeli police has entered the Al-Aqsa Mosque on
multiple occasions and has clashed with Palestinians,
further aggravating tensions.
Exchanges of rockets between the Gaza Strip
and Israel have made the situation more volatile, and
attacks against Israeli civilians have also occurred
from time to time. Religious holidays should provide
an opportunity to realize peace rather than trigger a
relapse into hostilities. China condemns all attacks
against civilians and violations of the historic status
quo at the religious holy sites. Israel and Palestine’s
security is interdependent and indivisible.
If one side’s security is ensured at the expense of
the other side’s security, it will be impossible to break
the cycle of violence or resolve the security conundrum.
Only by upholding the common comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept can
peaceful coexistence be realized. We call on all parties,
in particular Israel, to exercise restraint and prevent the
situation from further escalating, or even getting out
of control.
Israel recently indicated that, from now until
the end of Ramadan, non-Muslim worshipers will
be banned from the holy site. That is an important
step in the right direction. Under international law,
the occupying Power has the obligation to take the
necessary measures to prevent security threats or
provocations against Palestinian civilians. China
supports continued communication among the Special
Coordinator, Israel, Palestine and other parties to move
towards de-escalation.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process Tor Wennesland for his briefing and
welcomes the Permanent Observer of the Observer
state of Palestine and the representative of Israel at this
meeting today.

A ministerial meeting of the League of Arab States
was held days ago and issued a communiqué calling
on the Security Council to prevent any escalation of
violence and restore peace and security. China supports
the Arab League and Arab countries in actively playing
their respective roles. The Security Council should very
seriously take into account the current situation and the
calls of Arab States, urgently take action and speak
with one voice in playing the role conferred upon it.

Recently, major Islamic, Jewish and Christian
holidays have followed one another in succession.
While worshippers were all looking forward to
celebrating their respective religious holidays in peace
and security, the Palestinian-Israeli situation has been
faced with a new round of tensions and escalation.
Enforcement operations by the Israeli security forces

The Palestinian question is always at the heart of
the Middle East issue. Regardless of developments at
the international level, the Palestinian question cannot
be sidelined, let alone be forgotten. In that regard,
what is lacking is not a grand or just plan, but rather
the courage to take action. The fundamental reason for
the repeated escalation is the fact that the legitimate

22-3286721/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

national rights of the Palestinian people have not
been realized and that the two-State solution has not
been implemented.
Settlements upend the contiguity of the occupied
territories, constrain the living space of the Palestinian
people and jeopardize the prospects of realizing a twoState solution. China urges Israel, pursuant to resolution
2234 (2016), to halt the demolition of Palestinian homes,
the eviction of Palestinian people and the expansion
of settlements and create the conditions necessary for
the development of Palestinian communities in the
West Bank.
We call for the timely and full lifting of the embargo
against Gaza and support the work of United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and assistance to Palestine to improve
its financial situation and people’s living conditions.
China hopes that Palestine and Israel can continue
their high-level engagement for the timely relaunch of
dialogue on an equal footing.
We call on the international community to make
greater efforts based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international consensus, such as the
principle of land for peace, to advance the Middle East
peace process. The Security Council should increase its
sense of urgency, shoulder its responsibilities in earnest
and work actively for a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question.
In conclusion, I reiterate that China supports the
establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
Palestine based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, supports the peaceful coexistence of
Palestine and Israel and the joint development of the
Arab and Jewish people. Together with the international
community, China will continue its tireless efforts
towards a comprehensive and just solution to the
Palestinian question.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to express my
delegation’s appreciation for the briefing by the Special
Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process and
his efforts and calls for calm and restraint. We fully
support his work.
To have hope is to want an outcome that makes
our lives better in some way, since envisioning a better
future motivates us to take the steps to make it happen.
Therefore, hope is an obligation for the Security
Council to play any role it can in helping achieve peace
22/30

25/04/2022

between the Israelis and the Palestinians. We regret
to see that recent developments on the ground are
shattering once again the hopes that we must entertain
to arrive at a point where just and lasting peace appear
on the horizon.
Civilians remain targets of violence. We condemn
in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks against Israeli
civilians. Terrorist acts are abominable actions that
should be universally and unambiguously condemned,
whenever and wherever they occur. Albania understands
the legitimate concerns of Israel for its security and the
need to respond to terrorist attacks against its civilians.
Terror has no place anywhere, and there can be no
justification for it. It must never be left unanswered; it
must never be condoned. We condemn any incitement
to violence whatsoever. Holy places and holy days
should be used for prayer and spiritual reflection, as
billions are doing across the world. That is, and should
always be, incompatible with the incitement to violence
or any inflammatory rhetoric. The holy places should
not be places or targets of violence or vengeance, but of
veneration and reverence.
We remain equally concerned about the loss of life
among the Palestinians, especially women and children.
Israel must show self-restraint to prevent further
escalation, and any excessive use of force leading to
civilian casualties must be properly investigated. The
response to terrorist acts must be firm. Yet it must be
legally rooted, institutionally carried out and always
proportionate. We are also concerned that unilateral
steps, the expansion of settlements, the demolition of
homes and the eviction of Palestinians can only make a
bad situation worse. Rising settler violence must stop,
and those responsible for it must be held to account. We
have and will continue to call for concrete, continued
and sustained steps that diffuse tensions.
This grim picture of recent developments should
not obscure the fact that there is only one path that
is worth fighting for: a reality where Israelis and
Palestinians enjoy equal rights and freedoms. We
know from past examples that anytime the parties have
come together they have been able to make progress, to
foresee a track for their future. That is why we welcome
high-level contacts between Israelis and Palestinians,
which should contribute to renewing confidence and
help create conditions towards the relaunch of the peace
process as soon as possible.
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We believe that direct and meaningful negotiations
between the parties, with the help of and facilitation
by important stakeholders, within the framework of
relevant United Nations resolutions, should lead to the
creation of two States: a secure State of Israel and an
independent, democratic and viable State of Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security, with mutual
recognition, trust and respect, and with Jerusalem as a
shared capital.
We know only too well that there is a plethora
of grievances. Narratives are utterly opposed, and
interests could not be more divisive. But each day
passing without contacts, negotiations and meaningful
engagement is a day lost to peace, which will only
maintain and widen that divisive gulf, with all its
known regrettable consequences.
The Abraham Accords have opened important
doors for strategic cooperation between Israel and its
neighbours. We welcome that and encourage further
similar steps. We want to believe that this positive
atmosphere will be seen as a strong encouragement to
help the parties work together with renewed energy. We
commend the active engagement of Egypt and Jordan
in favour of peace.
We remain convinced that a sustainable solution to
the peace process remains an imperative if Israel and
all its Arab neighbours are to be able to construct a
robust regional economic and security architecture
that will not be evanescent. Its dividends would be
felt way beyond the region itself. Therefore, knowing
what the solution may be for this enduring conflict to
end and continuously failing to do what is required
to come closer to that solution is equal to a neverending misfortune.
How many times has a timid ray of hope appeared
somewhere only to have something dark and more
powerful come along to brutally crush it, as if hope for
the Middle East peace process were always misplaced?
Extremists and their agendas will always be around the
corner; they should not be allowed to occupy a central
place. On the contrary, hope, vision and rationality
should be the ingredients to foment progress towards
peace. Therefore, we should not yield to failure, since
it measure not only in terms of time — of years and
decades lost — but also in the loss of human lives and
futures and dreams that are squandered, and aspirations
that are destroyed.

S/PV.9021

Peace is made by people and for the people; but
people without hope are people without dreams,
aspirations and projects. And when you happen to be so
tragically dispossessed of anything meaningful in life,
you remain stuck in time with nowhere to go.
That is why we see no alternative to a situation
where Israelis and Palestinians work and learn to
live together by respecting each other’s rights and
aspirations and by sharing hope and sharing that land
they both identify with. As per the words of Martin
Luther King: “We must accept finite disappointment,
but never lose infinite hope.”
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me start by thanking Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland for his briefing, and for the tireless efforts
of him and his team on the ground.
The United Kingdom shares the concerns
expressed around this table about the fragile situation
in Jerusalem. It is crucial that all parties take urgent
steps to reduce tensions and avoid further escalation.
Jerusalem is a city holy to so many, and the United
Kingdom remains firmly of the belief that maintaining
the historic status quo is the only means of ensuring
freedom of worship. Amid rising tensions on the
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, we urge the parties
to engage and de-escalate the situation, particularly in
terms of ensuring sensitive policing. All religious sites
must be treated with utmost respect.
We condemn recent terror attacks in Israel, resulting
in the deaths of 14 people. Our hearts go out to the
families of those killed. We fully support Israel’s right
to ensure its security, and we unequivocally condemn
rocket attacks against Israel by militants in Gaza.
The United Kingdom is also concerned by the
number of Palestinians, including minors, killed by
Israeli security forces in recent weeks. We continue to
urge thorough and transparent investigations into the
deaths of Palestinian civilians and call for restraint in the
use of force. Israeli security forces have a responsibility
to ensure the safety of the Palestinian population.
In conclusion, let me stress that it is not too late to
reverse those trends. We must do all we can to prevent
a return to the violence we witnessed last May and
to rebuild trust and work towards a sustainable and
comprehensive peace. The United Kingdom remains

22-3286723/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2022

fully committed to a two-State solution and to playing
its part in efforts to that end.

the brotherly Palestinian people on the basis of the twoState solution.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has recently
engaged with our Palestinian brothers and other
international actors, including Israel, the United States
of America and major European countries, within
the framework of Jordan’s efforts and ongoing role in
protecting Islamic and Christian holy sites, to restore
and maintain a comprehensive calm and to prevent
further escalation, which would have significant
consequences for security and stability in the region as
a whole.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I congratulate you, Madam President, on
the friendly United Kingdom’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
The dangerous Israeli escalation at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif requires international
coordination to prevent any illegal escalating measures
aimed at altering the historical and legal status quo
in Jerusalem. The storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
by the Israeli army and police in recent days, which
led to injuries among worshippers and the arrest of
hundreds, is a dangerous and condemnable escalation
that threatens to ignite tensions. Those incursions have
caused a major rift in the most basic rules of coexistence
in the holy land.
Israel, the occupying Power, bears responsibility
for what is happening in Jerusalem. It must respect the
legal and historical status quo, abide by the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international law
related to the duties of the occupying Power and not
attempt to infringe upon basic principles, especially
with regard to the historical status quo at Muslim
and Christian holy sites, in particular in the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, all of which fall under
the historical Hashemite custodianship.
In that vein, we stress that the Jordanian
administration of the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf is
the only entity authorized under the provisions of
international humanitarian law to manage all the affairs
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in its entirety, amounting to
144,000 square metres. Comprehensive calm should be
maintained, which requires Israel to respect the legal and
historical status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and to find a genuine political horizon that
guarantees the fulfilment of all the legitimate rights of
24/30

In the context of Jordan’s efforts to maintain calm
and respect for the historical and legal status quo in
Jerusalem, we demanded that Israel take a number
of measures that it was hoped would contribute to
preventing clashes, including, but not limited to,
allowing free access for Muslim worshippers to the
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, lifting the
restrictive barriers to Jerusalemites and the people of
the West Bank and removing all restrictions aimed at
limiting the right of Christians to free and unhindered
access to the churches of the Old City, especially the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Israel, the occupying
Power, should not obstruct the administration of the
Jerusalem Islamic Waqf and should enable it to perform
its duties, including with regard to controlling security
inside Al-Haram Al-Sharif and access to the site.
Finally, the historical Hashemite custodianship is a
duty and a responsibility that the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan will perform with all its resolve, capabilities
and means in a way that supports the right of Palestinian
brothers and sisters to obtain their legitimate rights,
in particular their right to self-determination and the
establishment of their independent sovereign State
within the 4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Jardali (Lebanon): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate at such an
important time when our collective resolve is being
tested around the world.
This month was supposed to be a special month for
the three Abrahamic religions: Islam, Christianity and
Judaism. The three religions were supposed to engage
in a holy and peaceful celebration. But, during this
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

holy month of Ramadan and Easter, which Palestinian
Orthodox Christians celebrated yesterday, Palestinians
were subjected to a dangerous escalation of violence
and a campaign of violations of their religious and
human rights through continuous Israeli attacks
on their holy places, in contravention of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
The Israeli occupying forces carried out several
incursions on the Al-Aqsa/Al-Haram Al-Sharif holy
site, injuring and detaining hundreds of worshippers.
Israel’s repeated provocations stoked religious
tensions. We call on the Security Council to uphold
its responsibility and to take immediate measures to
protect the Al-Aqsa Mosque from the repeated attacks
by Israel and settlers and to ensure that Israel respects
international law.
Israel is trying to unilaterally and illegally change
the legal and religious status of the holy places in
Jerusalem by gradually creating facts on the ground.
Lebanon rejects any attempt to change the current legal
and historic status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and we warn
that such a step incites only more violence and conflict.
Preserving and respecting the legal and historic
status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
restoring the situation to that prior to the 2000 period
and respecting the fact that it is a Muslim religious
prayer site and that visiting it is organized by the
Islamic Waqf, which is administered by the Jordanian
Islamic Ministry of Awqaf, the legal administrator of
the affairs of the holy Haram, are very important for
peace in the city.
Israeli violations of Palestinian rights are taking
place across the occupied Palestinian territories. The
Israeli occupying forces are raiding neighbourhoods and
killing and assaulting Palestinians, including women
and children. Such violations in Jerusalem, settlement
activities and the forced displacement of Palestinian
families from their homes and lands continue unabated.
All those actions are in contravention of the Charter
of the United Nations and United Nations resolutions,
especially resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 476
(1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
All of this is happening at a time when Israel
has closed all avenues and extinguished all hopes for
a political solution based on international legality,
the two-State solution and self-determination for the
Palestinian people. The Palestinian State is becoming
more difficult to establish because of the continued

S/PV.9021

Israeli settlement policies and the deeply entrenched
occupation. The legal basis for a solution is enshrined in
a series of United Nations resolutions, from resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) to the latest resolution
2334 (2016), and the Arab Peace Initiative, which was
adopted in 2002 during the Arab summit in Beirut,
which called for a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East based on the Israeli withdrawal to the
1967 borders, the establishment of a Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee problem, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III). There is a need
for a real commitment from the international community
to ending the occupation, protecting the Palestinian
people and endorsing a settlement to this conflict.
The Lebanese Government continues to work to
address the multifaceted crisis facing the country. The
staff-level agreement reached between Lebanon and the
International Monetary Fund earlier this month is an
important step towards that objective. Food insecurity,
coming on the heels of a debilitating political and
financial crisis and a cruel pandemic, is more than the
Lebanese people can endure. Lebanon, along with many
other developing countries, is being severely impacted
by the rise in essential food and commodity prices.
The triple crisis of food, fuel and finance is
affecting the whole world, but developing countries,
countries in debt and vulnerable countries that are in
conflict are especially impacted by that crisis. The risk
of hunger and famine is looming large in some parts of
the world. The international community needs to work
together to solve the global crisis. It cannot be solved by
countries on their own. Solidarity is needed now more
than ever to face that growing challenge.
In few weeks from now, on 15 May, Lebanon will
hold its parliamentary elections, with the Lebanese
diaspora voting a week earlier, on 8 May. The
Government is committed to guaranteeing a smooth
electoral process. There are a record number of women
running in the elections, pointing to the active role that
women are increasingly playing in Lebanon’s political,
economic and social life. Observers from regional and
international organizations have been invited to help to
contribute to an inclusive and transparent process.
The upcoming elections are important to resetting
the political dynamism and infusing the system with a
new momentum for an energized political life that brings
about reform and breathes new life into the country.

22-3286725/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lebanon welcomes the appointment of the new
Head of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), Major General Aroldo Lázaro Sáenz, who
took up his duties in February, and pays tribute to his
predecessor, Major General Stefano Del Col, for his
dedication, work and accomplishments.
We cannot stress enough how invaluable UNIFIL
has been for the stability, peace and security in southern
Lebanon. Its role in de-escalating and reducing tensions
and in preventing any miscalculation or escalation
along the Blue Line remains indispensable. That role is
all the more important in the context of the daily Israeli
violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which violate resolution 1701 (2006) and
increase tensions in the area, thereby threatening peace
and security. We reiterate our call on the Security
Council to put an end to such Israeli violations, and we
reiterate Lebanon’s commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety.
The economic crisis that Lebanon is facing has also
hit the Lebanese Armed Forces, a critical element of
the country’s stability, hard. Lebanon is particularly
grateful to UNIFIL for its provision of additional
non-lethal material and logistical support to the
Lebanese Armed Forces, in line with paragraph 11 of
resolution 2591 (2021).
Due to the critical role that that support played
in helping the Lebanese army continue its work in
implementing resolution 1701 (2006) and preserving
peace and security in the South, Lebanon asked the
Security Council, in a 15 March letter, that this organ
consider extending that support for one more year.
We hope that the Council will look favourably on
this request and continue to support the partnership
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese army in their quest
for a more peaceful Lebanon and region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Madam President, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We wish you success in that
endeavour. Allow me also to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.
Our meeting today is being held as a dangerous
and unfortunate escalation has been taking place on
26/30

25/04/2022

the occupied Palestinian territories in the past few
weeks. Israel insists on disregarding resolutions of
international legitimacy, mainly Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016),
particularly in East Jerusalem. Radical Jewish groups
are storming into Al-Aqsa Mosque under the protection
of Israeli occupying forces on a daily basis during
holy Ramadan. That scenario is reminiscent of last
year’s developments, which led to hundreds of martyrs
and injuries.
Egypt condemns the raid by Israeli forces of the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the violence against Palestinians.
We stress the need for all parties to show restraint
and fully protect Muslim worshippers, who must be
allowed to practice their prayers in the mosque, which
is a purely Muslim landmark. Once again, Egypt rejects
violence and instigation in all their forms, including the
calls to raid the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque during Ramadan.
We warn that such actions could jeopardize stability
and security in occupied Palestinian territories and the
region as a whole.
The continual attempts to Judaize East Jerusalem
and the attempts by occupation forces to control the city
and change the legal and historical status of holy sites
augur a very dangerous escalation. That is a violation
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the first of the two kiblahs and
the third of the two holy mosques.
Egypt reaffirms the need to respect the status
quo in the holy sites of the city, which are under the
custodianship of the brotherly Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan. It is important to respect freedom of religion,
ensure access to the Al-Aqsa Mosque, release the
detainees and put an end to the violence and unilateral
measures taken by the occupation forces in the city.
All Islamic and Arab committees related to Al-Quds
must be upheld, especially Al-Quds Islamic Committee
chaired by King Mohammed VI and the Al-Quds Arab
Committee chaired by Jordan. Moreover, all unilateral
measures in the West Bank must stop, namely,
settlement expansion, including in East Jerusalem;
attempts to expel Palestinian families from the Sheikh
Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods; and the demolition
of Palestinian homes and structures.
It is also important for the occupation forces
and settlers to stop targeting unarmed Palestinians,
especially children, end the blockade on Gaza and
facilitate reconstruction. In that regard, Egypt continues
to support reconstruction in Gaza, as Egyptian
22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

companies are implementing projects to alleviate the
suffering of Palestinian citizens. We have invested
$500 million in Gaza.
Egypt continues to work with international and
regional partners to ensure an environment conducive
to the resumption of negotiations between the two
sides, in line with the agreed international terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State
solution, across the lines of 4 June 1967. Egypt took
part in the Munich Group meeting on 19 February,
which issued a statement stressing, among other things,
the need for both sides to resume negotiations, put an
end to unilateral measures that impede the two-State
solution, preserve the legal and historical status of the
holy sites, and support and fund the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. Egypt is making every effort to contain the
current escalation, in cooperation with the two sides
and active regional players.
At the regional level, Egypt continues to support
efforts to ensure a comprehensive settlement of the
Yemeni crisis that meets the aspirations of the brotherly
Yemeni people. We reaffirm our support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Yemen.
We look forward to seeing him succeed in reaching
a comprehensive settlement of the crisis through a
political solution that preserves the unity, sovereignty
and independence of Yemen and ends the human
suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people, in line with
the relevant terms of reference.
We welcome the establishment of the Presidential
Council in Yemen to complete the transitional period.
That is an important development that we hope will
restore safety and stability and lead to a consensus
among Yemenis to resolve the crisis.
We also welcome the announcement by the Special
Envoy of a two-month truce in Yemen. We hope that it
contributes to a comprehensive settlement of that crisis.
We stress the need for the Security Council to play a
more effective role in the crisis to push for a political
settlement, ensure a ceasefire and fight terrorism and
illicit armed groups.
With regard to the situation in brotherly Libya,
Egypt is closely following the latest developments. We
continue to support efforts to achieve stability and hold
the postponed presidential and parliamentary elections
as soon as possible. In that regard, Cairo hosted a
meeting from 13 to 20 April on the constitutional track

S/PV.9021

between the House of Representatives and the High
Council of State, which was sponsored by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and attended by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. That
meeting was aimed at helping our Libyan brothers agree
on the constitutional track in order to hold presidential
and parliamentary elections, in line with Security
Council resolutions and the outcomes of the Paris and
Berlin meetings as soon as possible.
We commend the progress made in the first round
of the Cairo meetings towards a consensus among
Libyans on the constitutional basis. Egypt is in contact
with the various parties in Libya and has consistently
reaffirmed the need to preserve the ceasefire. We urge
all parties to de-escalate and avert a return to violence.
We call on all international parties concerned to spare
no effort to ensure the success of a Libyan-led, Libyanowned political solution. That requires an agreement
among the Libyans themselves, first and foremost, and
respect for Libyan institutions and their roles.
In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms that the only way to
achieve security, stability and peace in the Middle East
is by liberating all Arab territories occupied since 1967
and fully respecting the resolutions of international
legitimacy and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and non-interference
in their internal affairs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): The
Council is meeting today, as it has done for decades,
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, at the heart
of which is the Palestinian question. We are doing
so days before the seventy-fourth anniversary of the
Nakbah of a people whose only fault is rejecting the
occupation of their land and calling for their right to
self-determination and the recovery of their legitimate
rights, like the other peoples of the world.
The Council is also meeting today at a time when
the Israeli occupation forces are continuing their brutal
attacks on unarmed Palestinians in occupied Jerusalem
and around the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Settlers also continue
to storm the Mosque. Those raids have led to the deaths
and injuries of hundreds. Settlers continue to prevent
worshippers from practicing their religion. They
continue their provocations against Muslims around the
world during this holy month of Ramadan.

22-3286727/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Such despicable practices are very dangerous to
the region. They are a threat to peace and security in
the region. They are a flagrant and blatant violation of
human rights and basic freedoms, including the freedom
of religion, which is legally guaranteed by all laws.
At a time when the international community
is unable to implement its resolutions, the Israeli
occupation continues with its settlement policies and
with its systemic work to impose the status quo and
change the legal and historic status of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. They continue to Judaize Islamic holy
sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif in a blatant violation of
international law.
Following the brutal attacks on our brothers in
Jerusalem and at the Al-Aqsa Mosque, our President,
Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, made several phone calls
to international parties in an attempt to put an end to
those attacks. In his statement to the Secretary-General
a few days ago, he stressed the need for the international
community, especially the Security Council, to shoulder
its responsibilities and take urgent and effective steps
to end those attacks and violations carried out by the
occupying Powers. The attacks have been ongoing over
the past 55 years. He called for protecting the brotherly
Palestinian people and their holy sites and ending
their suffering and injustice, which has prevented
generations of Palestinians from enjoying their basic
rights, especially their right to self-determination, by
ending the occupation of the territories of the State
of Palestine.
Our President also said that the credibility of the
United Nations and the Security Council is often tested
by the violence and persistence of Israel to impose the
status quo, which aggravates the legitimate fears of
a people who believe in the international community
and justice.

25/04/2022

because, if they continue, they will block all prospects
for a political settlement due to the intransigence of the
occupation authorities. That — God forbid — would
lead to an explosion in the region and further desperation
among the Palestinian people, especially among young
people, thereby extinguishing any remaining hope for
reviving the peace process in the region.
We reaffirm Algeria’s full solidarity with the
brotherly Palestinian people. We will continue to
support their legitimate question to recover their legal
and inalienable rights, namely, their right to establish
an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
A just and final peace can be achieved only when the
international community, specifically the Security
Council, shoulders its legal and historic responsibilities
and compels the occupying Power to end its occupation
of the Palestinian territories and enable the Palestinian
people to enjoy self-determination, and liberate all the
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting, and I welcome
the briefing by the Special Coordinator.
For all Muslims around the world, including in
Palestine, Ramadan is the holiest of all months — a
time that should be defined by nothing but peace and
calm. Yet what we have seen thus far in Jerusalem has
only increased tensions and is deeply concerning.

In the face of such violations against the brotherly
Palestinian people, the United Nations must adopt
strong and firm response, thereby providing the
necessary protection to unarmed civilians and their
holy sites. That response must meet their legitimate
right to establish an independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in line with relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Since the beginning of Ramadan, many civilians,
including children, lost their lives as a result of the
operations of the Israeli security forces in the West
Bank. More than 400 Palestinians were injured during
the events in the West Bank and the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The intervention of the Israeli security forces towards
the Muslims present at the Al-Aqsa Mosque for
prayers on 15 April was unacceptable, and we strongly
condemned it. We reiterate our calls for restraint during
this holy month of Ramadan, which also coincided with
the Jewish Passover. Further provocations and threats
against the status and sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
must be prevented.

Algeria once again condemns the systemic and
repetitive attacks and violations against the Palestinian
people, especially in East Jerusalem. We call upon the
international community to put an end to such practices

We also condemn the recent terrorist attacks in
Israel. Maintaining calm during this sensitive period
is critical. We take note of the decision of the Israeli
authorities to close the Al-Aqsa Mosque to non-Muslims

28/30

22-32867

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

until the end of Ramadan as a step in the right direction
and towards restoring calm, especially in Jerusalem.
President Erdoğan has been in touch with
Palestinian President Abbas, Israeli President Herzog
and Jordanian King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, as well
as with the Secretary-General, in order to contribute to
efforts to secure calm in the region. He will resolutely
continue those efforts.

S/PV.9021

of April. I appreciate its efforts in leading the work of
the Council. I also wish to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his very important briefing.

What is essential, however, is to move beyond
addressing the periodic tensions and escalations and to
focus instead on the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. That is the only way to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the region. In that connection, there
is no alternative to a two-State solution based on the
established parameters.

We are meeting today in the light of fairly difficult
circumstances — particularly in Jerusalem — for the
Palestinian question due to the events that took place
at the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Mosque Esplanade.
The situation at Al-Haram-Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque has recently evolved dangerously, and the
Israeli occupation force has committed repeated
provocations and violations during this holy month.
The Kingdom of Morocco condemns that aggression
against the Palestinian people and their holy sites and
has called for putting an immediate end to them.

Millions of Palestinian refugees rely on the
life-saving assistance of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). It is essential that its services continue to be
provided in a sustainable, predictable and uninterrupted
manner. Turkey will continue to support UNRWA’s
vital work, both financially and politically. We look
forward to hosting its Commissioner-General soon in
Turkey for comprehensive discussions. Meanwhile, it is
imperative that we follow through with our collective
responsibility to support the Palestinians in their
endeavours to overcome the injustices and challenges
they face.

Unfortunately, the increase in the escalation of
violence is the result of the impasse in the Middle East
peace process, which is an additional element fuelling
tensions and extremism, which in turn are creating
further tensions and hate speech in the region as a whole.
Indeed, they are widening the existing gap between
Palestinians and Israelis and undermining prospects for
restoring peace and security in the Middle East. That is
why the Kingdom of Morocco, under the leadership of
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, who chairs Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
has strongly called for putting an end to all acts that
could lead to further tensions.

Economic and humanitarian steps are important,
but not enough to bring peace. There is an urgent
need to address the root causes of this conflict. It is
important that both sides continue to work on a variety
of confidence-building measures in order to prepare
the ground for the revival of peace negotiations. The
United Nations should also play the critical roles it
has assumed, including as a member of the Middle
East Quartet.

His Majesty King Mohammed VI is committed to
supporting the Palestinian question and defending the
distinct status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Last Monday, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI held a phone call with his
brother His Majesty King Abdullah II, as the Hashemite
Custodian of Jerusalem Holy Sites, to discuss the
developments in Jerusalem and at the Al-Aqsa Mosque
in the light of the incursions and aggression against
holy sites and worshippers. Their Majesties considered
that such an escalation could further fuel extremism,
hatred and violence and could undermine all chances
for reviving the peace process in the region. We would
also like to pay tribute to the efforts of Egypt on the
question of Palestine.

I would like to end by reiterating Turkey’s
unwavering support for the Palestinian people in
reaching their long-delayed right to live in a sovereign
and independent State of Palestine, based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by congratulating the United Kingdom on its
presidency of the Security Council during the month

As Chair of the Al-Quds Committee, the King
of Morocco has made every political and diplomatic
effort to ensure maintaining the historical and legal
status of the holy sites. In that context, in his joint
declaration with Pope Francis during his visit to the
Kingdom of Morocco on 30 March 2019, His Majesty

22-3286729/30

S/PV.9021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2022

King Mohammed VI underscored the importance
of preserving the holy city as a common heritage of
humankind and its historical, legal and demographic
status so that it is open to worshippers of all three
monotheistic religions.

peace and stability, within the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. The Kingdom of Morocco
is convinced of the centrality of the Palestinian
question in the Middle East, which is at the top of the
international community’s priorities.

The Al-Quds Committee has consistently made
every effort, both practically and politically, to support
the Palestinian people, especially Al-Quds residents.
The Bait Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency is working
on the ground, under the supervision of His Majesty
Mohamed VI and with Morocco supplying nearly
86 per cent of its annual budget. Since its inception, in
1995, the Agency has been working to protect Arab and
Islamic rights in the Holy City in the social, economic
and educational areas as well as in health care, and it
has had a direct impact on the residents of Jerusalem.
The Al-Quds Committee is also working with Arab and
Islamic countries on a number of projects in Jerusalem.

In the letter of solidarity that he sent in 2021 on
the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, His Majesty King Mohammed
VI said that the established Moroccan position is
unwavering and a result of the conviction shared by all
Moroccans. He added that we will spare no diplomatic
effort to resolve the just Palestinian question and the
cause of Jerusalem.

As we said during the meeting of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation in Riyadh, we stand in
solidarity with the brotherly Palestinian people
and support their legitimate rights on the basis of
international law and the two-State solution embraced
by the international community that would ultimately
lead to the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel, in

30/30

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that the kingdom
of Morocco will continue its historic role and relations
with all parties in order to guarantee the conditions
necessary for revitalizing talks between Palestinians
and Israelis, which is the only way to achieve security
and stability in the Middle East.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

22-32867
