United Nations

S/PV.4359

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4359th meeting
Tuesday, 28 August 2001, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Valdivieso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Corr
Mr. Ward
Mr. Touré
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Strømmen
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Krokhmal
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Hume

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-52198 (E)

*0152198*

S/PV.4359

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic
(Federal Republic of Yugoslavia) took a seat at
the Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) and
Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia) took the seats reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In the absence
of objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guéhenno.

2

Mr. Guéhenno: I am pleased to brief members of
the Security Council on developments in Kosovo since
the last briefing on 26 July 2001.
I will focus today on outlining developments in
the main priority areas: preparations for Kosovo-wide
elections and the transfer to provisional selfgovernment; engagement of the minority communities
and implementation of confidence-building measures
to bridge the divide between communities; and efforts
to improve law and order.
First, as regards the implementation of the
Constitutional Framework, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is now
finalizing the structure of the institutions of provisional
self-government, in which the departments of the
current Joint Interim Administrative Structure will be
streamlined into a more manageable number of
ministries. In order to build political consensus on the
future structures, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has consulted the local leadership,
who have expressed general support for a reduced
number of ministries. In order to gain acceptance and
understanding of provisional self-government among
the local population, more than 300,000 booklets
explaining the Constitutional Framework have now
been distributed in Albanian and Serbian, and a
Turkish translation is in preparation.
Alongside preparations at the central level, the
consolidation of municipal structures continues, with
further efforts to devolve authority to municipalities in
various sectors as specified in UNMIK regulation
45/2000 on municipal self-government, in order to
build democratic-governance capacity. Parallel with the
devolution of authority, however, has been an
increasing tendency on the part of the municipal
assemblies to challenge UNMIK’s authority in several
areas, such as public utilities and socially owned
property.
Regarding preparations for the general elections,
UNMIK is currently in the midst of voter registration,
which began on 30 July and will run until 8 September.
Voter registration covers four categories: those who
chose not to register last year; returnees and other new
civil registrants since the municipal elections;
registrants from the 2000 municipal elections who need
to correct or amend their information, or who need to
be reassigned to new, smaller polling stations; and
lastly, out-of Kosovo registrants. Voter registration runs

S/PV.4359

alongside the ongoing civil registration process, in the
course of which some 700,000 identity cards have so
far been issued to the local population.
As of 24 August, the total number of people
within Kosovo processed by voter service centres was
39,265. Of these, 4,937 are from communities which
chose not to register last year — mainly Kosovo Serbs.
In Serbia proper, a total of 25,351 people have
registered, and 494 have registered in Montenegro. In
Vienna, the International Organization for Migration
has received a total of 27,848 mail-in applications.
Given that we are more than half way through the
voter registration period, these figures, particularly for
the Kosovo Serb community, are disappointingly low.
The institution-building pillar is, subsequently,
increasing its public information campaign and
drawing on members of municipal election committees
and local village leaders to help encourage not only
registration, but also participation when the election
takes place.
Despite the fact that several Serb leaders have
endorsed
registration,
including
Mr.
Covic,
Mr. Trajkovic and Bishop Artemije of the Serb
National Council-Gracanica — the latter two also
having registered themselves — the majority of the
Kosovo Serb community, both inside and outside
Kosovo, seemed to be waiting for an unequivocal
signal from Belgrade. Since over the weekend both
President Kostunica and Prime Minister Djindjic called
on Kosovo Serbs to register, we hope that now Kosovo
Serbs will register in greater numbers. With time
running out, we call again on the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to fully support the
efforts of UNMIK to have as many Kosovo Serbs
register as possible, and to encourage them to
participate in the elections.
Last month we informed the Council that five
Kosovo Serb parties had applied for party certification.
It transpires that these parties only submitted partial
applications and were requested to provide full details
for certification. As of now, none of these five parties
has submitted the full certification package. Indeed,
some have indicated that they will not do so until there
is an agreement to run a unified Democratic Opposition
of Serbia (DOS) list in the elections. In order to
accommodate eventual certification later, the
institution-building pillar has extended the deadline for

coalitions to certify for the elections. But again, there
is not much time left.
We endorse the message that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General gave to
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Covic, who was
recently appointed as head of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/Serbian joint coordination centre. In that
message, given two weeks ago during their first
meeting
together,
the
Special
Representative
underlined the necessity that the Kosovo Serb
community buy into the electoral process in order to
consolidate the basis for an acceptable security
environment and living conditions.
I would like now to touch upon the engagement
of Kosovo minority communities and relations with
Belgrade. There has been progress in several areas of
mutual concern to UNMIK and to the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, primarily on the issue
of missing persons and returns. On the missing persons
issue, there is now an enhanced programme of visits to
grave sites, both in Kosovo and Serbia proper; an
exchange of photographic and other information
relevant to post-mortem verification work; the
composition of a joint consolidated list of missing
Kosovo Serbs; and protocols for the repatriation of
identified remains. One of the first results achieved by
the Contact Group on Detainees and Missing Persons
was UNMIK’s 15 August return to Yugoslav authorities
of the mortal remains of a Kosovo Serb woman.
With regard to returns, there was an initial
organized return under a security escort provided by
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) on 13 August, of 54 Kosovo
Serbs to the Osojane Valley, in the Pec region. That
was followed by the return of a further 30 persons on
22 August. The Osojane site is one of the 10 locations
identified in 2001 by the action plan of the Joint
Committee on Returns for Kosovo Serbs. The return
took place without incident, apart from a protest staged
by Kosovo Albanians in Istok on 23 August.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is providing
temporary shelter and basic needs while the returnees
reconstruct their houses with the aid of funding from
the European Agency for Reconstruction and bilateral
donors. In order to aid the reintegration of the Kosovo
Serb community in Osojane, additional funding will be
channelled to nearby Kosovo Albanian and Roma
communities.

3

S/PV.4359

By concretely supporting the issues of missing
persons and returns, UNMIK is addressing two of the
five main concerns that were outlined by President
Kostunica during the meeting with the Security
Council mission last June. The third one, normalization
of the tax-collection mechanism in northern Kosovo, is
being settled satisfactorily. The two remaining points
raised by President Kostunica are more difficult to
address. Cooperation in education and police matters
has to be handled carefully so as to take account of
legitimate Kosovo Serb interests while, at the same
time, safeguarding the integrity of UNMIK’s
transitional administration.
Relations with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have generally improved over the past
month. An important step forward was made on 15
August with the meeting between the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
the
Commander of KFOR and Mr. Covic. The Special
Representative clearly reiterated the need to implement
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) in all of
Kosovo, and in particular to ensure that no parallel
security and administrative structures are in place,
especially in Mitrovica and northern Kosovo. Together
with KFOR, and through the UNMIK Belgrade office,
the Mission is exploring administrative ways and
means to improve working relations with the joint
coordination centre. At the meeting, both parties
agreed to meet regularly — a commitment that has
already materialized with the holding, on 21 August, of
a second, very constructive meeting, which took place
near Pristina.
(spoke in French)
I would now like to take up issues relating to
security and law and order.
On 16 August, Mr. Jean-Christian Cady took up
his functions as Deputy Special Representative for
Police and Justice. Under his leadership, efforts will
continue to strengthen law and order, including
completing a package of legislation to tackle organized
crime. Work has also begun to improve conditions at a
witness protection location. In addition, a witness
protection director has been appointed. Progress has
also been made on creating a specialized office to
combat organized crime. That office is scheduled to
open on 1 September.
Following a number of politically motivated
criminal incidents, the Political Violence Task Force,

4

which was established in the run-up to the 2000
municipal elections, has been reactivated to provide a
multi-agency, coordinated response to politically
motivated crimes, a response involving all the relevant
bodies. The most serious of those incidents in recent
days was the attempted assassination of a politician
from the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) in
Srbica, in the Mitrovica region.
The Department of Justice is proceeding with the
so-called quick-build detention facility, that is, a
temporary prison that is quickly set up. In addition to
that project, it is also proceeding with the
refurbishment of the war-damaged Dubrava prison. The
two projects will require six to 12 months properly to
complete, as well as an increased number of
international staff to manage them. There are two
urgent priorities that depend on our ability to recruit
staff with the requisite expertise. I am referring to the
development of an effective framework for parole and
probation services, as well as the provision of qualified
staff to address the needs of mentally ill inmates
requiring psychiatric services.
Efforts continue to build further the capacity of
the Kosovo Police Service (KPS), and to develop an
adequate rank system within the KPS. Two senior
command courses have now been completed at the
Kosovo Police Service School, which is run by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). As a result, a total of 32 senior commanders
have now been trained to serve in Kosovo.
I would also like during this briefing to touch
upon matters relating to the situation in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Council members
are undoubtedly aware of the letters addressed to the
Secretary-General from the President, the Foreign
Minister and the Prime Minister of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. A copy of the SecretaryGeneral’s response to President Trajkovski has been
circulated to Council members. As that response
indicates, UNMIK and KFOR remain fully committed
to countering Albanian extremism and to restoring
normal security conditions. UNMIK will continue to
support KFOR in its efforts to sever any possible ties
that may develop between radical elements in Kosovo
and the self-appointed National Liberation Army that
operates in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

S/PV.4359

KFOR is supervising the activities of the Kosovo
Protection Corps, known as the KPC. It reports that
there is no evidence that the KPC as such has been
involved in the recent incidents in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. When individual members of
the KPC are found to be involved in criminal activities,
they are immediately subject to disciplinary measures,
which may include dismissal, and they are liable to
criminal prosecution. I believe that yesterday one
member of the KPC was subjected to this process.
Since March KFOR has increased its presence at
the border of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Albania. It has conducted a Kosovowide operation to seize weapons and seek out those
suspected of being members of armed groups. In this
connection, I have some figures that have been
communicated to us by KFOR that I would like to
share with you. KFOR reports that since 31 May over
600 individuals have been detained and over 600 rifles,
1,400 grenades, 1,000 anti-tank weapons and 139,000
rounds of ammunition have been seized throughout
Kosovo, mainly in the border area. Where KFOR has
detained individuals, and where sufficient evidence of
criminal activity exists, UNMIK is committed to
investigating and prosecuting these cases to the fullest
extent of the applicable law in Kosovo.
UNMIK is greatly concerned at the continuing
closure of the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, a result of road blockades
inside the country. The border closure not only affects
the Mission’s ability to support its operations in
optimum conditions, but it also has negative long-term
consequences for the Kosovo economy.
I would like to say a few words about the
economy of Kosovo. This border closure is coming at a
time when tax collection mechanisms, especially in
northern Kosovo, had finally been accepted. Two
hundred seventy Kosovo Serbs had applied for the 17
vacancies in the UNMIK tax collection and customs
service. This should improve the tax resources
collected through UNMIK. Total revenue collected so
far by UNMIK passed the 200 million deutsche mark
level just before the end of July. This is more than
twice the amount of revenue raised in the same period
last year, so obviously this means considerable
progress has been achieved.
There are ongoing efforts to attract investment to
Kosovo and to foster economic activities, in particular

through the commercialization of companies. Nine, to
date, have undergone this process. As a result of these
various measures, there has been a 180 per cent growth
in jobs in the industries involved, which is not a
negligible amount. Commercialization has engendered
extra investment and has also led to progress in the
banking sector. The banking and payments authority of
Kosovo has approved two new branches for the new
Bank of Kosovo. Significant progress is reported in the
transport sector as well. In July alone 115,000
passengers were processed by the Pristina airport,
contributing as well to Kosovo’s revenue collection.
The passenger train running between Pristina and Pec
is now a regular service. A train tunnel was opened in
northern Kosovo, which might in the future make it
possible to connect Kosovo with Serbia proper.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the note of
cautious optimism sounded during the last briefing to
the Council at the end of July has been tempered
recently by the figures that I gave you a moment ago
regarding the voter registration by Kosovo Serbs. We
wish those figures were a lot higher. But it is hoped
that the clear signals that have come from Belgrade
will help to reverse this currently unsatisfactory trend
in terms of pre-election registration. Progress has been
made in several areas of mutual concern to all the
communities. I am thinking, for instance, of missing
persons and returnees.
But we must recognize that it would be
unrealistic to expect major developments in a very
short time. The situation in Kosovo can only change
progressively. Tolerance and respect for others take
time. They are not developed overnight. They can
come about only through the participation of all in
forming Kosovo’s future. That is why again we renew
our appeal for massive voter registration within the
communities concerned and call upon those
communities to participate in the elections.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Mr. Guéhenno for his comprehensive briefing.
Mr. Hume (United States): I too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his
detailed briefing on the progress of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Hans Haekkerup, for addressing some of the more

5

S/PV.4359

complicated issues in the process of establishing
provisional interim self-government in Kosovo.
At this time the upcoming elections are the top
priority, one that has the full support of my
Government. We support UNMIK’s efforts to
streamline Kosovo’s administrative bureaucracy as it
transfers authority to a democratically elected
government, as outlined in a legal, constitutional
framework.
Political changes over the last year have opened
the door to UNMIK to strengthen its relations with the
Serb community and to reassure Kosovo Serbs about
their rightful place in a democratic Kosovo. Kosovo
Serbs have begun to register for November’s elections.
I would like to second the comments of the
Under-Secretary-General in stressing the importance of
progress on Serb returns and continued minority
interest in Kosovo, as well as their full participation in
the elections. The Yugoslav Government has helped
encourage this process by expressing in the clearest
terms its own support for resolution 1244 (1999).
UNMIK should continue its constructive dialogue with
Belgrade. We welcome the appointment of Deputy
Prime Minister Covic as the new chairman of the
coordination centre for Kosovo, and we fully support
Special Representative Haekkerup’s efforts to build a
constructive relationship with Belgrade.
Council members were encouraged by their
discussions in Belgrade during their visit there in June.
I would like to reiterate my own Government’s
encouragement to UNMIK to address fully the five
priority areas of the Yugoslav Government with regard
to Kosovo, which President Kostunica outlined during
the June visit. I am also pleased by the progress that
has been registered today, as already explained to us.
During the June visit the Council also discussed
with Foreign Minister Svilanovic resolution 1160
(1998), and I would like to note my Government’s full
support for the lifting of the arms embargo at this time.
Public security and the rule of law continue to be
at the top of UNMIK’s priorities. New regulations on
border control, on extremism and on the illegal
possession of weapons give UNMIK and KFOR
valuable tools for combating violence and preventing
its spread beyond Kosovo’s borders. We understand
that UNMIK has made progress on another series of
regulations against organized crime, and we hope they

6

will shortly become law. UNMIK must also continue
its efforts to strengthen the judiciary and increase the
number of international judges and prosecutors. We
applaud the recent appointment of Jean-Christian Cady
as the head of the new law and justice pillar, and we
look forward to the appointment of a highly qualified
individual to head UNMIK’s department of judicial
affairs. We also applaud KFOR for making full use of
these authorities by seizing weapons shipments and
detaining individuals who present a threat to peace and
order in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
as well as in Kosovo. The border interdiction mission
should be one of KFOR’s and UNMIK’s highest
priorities. In that regard, NATO’s operation “Essential
Harvest” will complement KFOR’s operations in
Kosovo and will address the same problem from the
other side of the border.
My Government has worked on numerous fronts
to reduce violence in Kosovo. President Bush has
issued executive orders to stop individuals in the
United States from supporting any violent groups in
Kosovo, and to deny entry into the United States of
suspected extremists. We have supported more rigorous
controls on the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) and
provided assistance to improve the KPC’s internal
controls. We have encouraged Kosovo’s leaders to
speak out against violence and to support the
Framework Agreement recently signed in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The United States
Government will continue to support UNMIK and
KFOR in their efforts to fully implement resolution
1244 (1999) and to ensure that democracy and the rule
of law are the foundation for Kosovo’s future.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Guéhenno for his
briefing on the situation in Kosovo and aspects relating
to the situation in other parts of the region, particularly
in Macedonia.
I would first like to comment on the main part of
his briefing, namely, preparations for the elections in
Kosovo. This is one of the most important questions,
and although some progress has been made in this
process leading up to the elections, we must say that on
the whole the situation does not encourage optimism.
As is known, in the registration of members of
the Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in the
province by 17 August, three months before elections
are to be held, just over 2,000 people have been

S/PV.4359

registered among the Serb, Gypsy, Turk and other
minorities. Two thousand people in all: this figure
speaks for itself.
The reasons for this situation — and this is not
the first year we have been talking about them —
include the fact that the security problem in Kosovo is
not being duly resolved. The return of refugees is not
being guaranteed, and the numbers Mr. Guéhenno gave
us on organized returns are paltry. Security is not
guaranteed, nor is freedom of movement for the
minorities in the province. All of this is well known.
Unless these conditions are guaranteed, it is hard to
talk about any real democratic electoral process.
The conducting of the elections in these
conditions in November of this year could lead to an
increase in Kosovo separatism. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR must robustly increase their activities in
order to resolve the security problem there, the
problem of returns and freedom of movement; they
must do this well ahead of the elections.
We can say that the main thing is that the
Government of Yugoslavia has unambiguously called
upon the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the elections.
But to expect that this is going to resolve all the
problems is naïve, to put it mildly. We note that the
United Nations Mission is taking certain steps to
establish dialogue with the Government of Yugoslavia.
But these steps are obviously not enough.
At the same time, the head of UNMIK is taking
other decisions that are creating additional irritation in
relations between UNMIK and Belgrade. I am referring
in particular to the creation of tax collection posts on
the administrative border with Serbia. And I refer to
the imposition of the 96-hour notification regime for
travel to Kosovo by officials from Yugoslavia. We are
troubled that UNMIK has not managed to establish
normal relations yet with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Committee on Kosovo. We share the hopes
of many regarding the appointment of Mr. Covic as
leader of the coordination centre of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia on Kosovo.
However, it is clear that this appointment, in and of
itself, cannot resolve all the serious problems
remaining.
Ultimately, the main guarantee of success is the
scrupulous and comprehensive compliance of all with
resolution 1244 (1999). This is possible only if there is

proper cooperation between UNMIK and Belgrade. I
would add that all participants in the process of the
settlement must show as much responsibility as
possible.
In this connection, the decision taken by the head
of the mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) does not add any
optimism that they are able to certify for participation
in the elections the extremist party known as the
National Movement of Kosovo. Clearly that is a
mistake, and that mistake has to be redressed.
Otherwise, we might get the impression that the OSCE
was officially recognizing the legitimacy of a structure
that represents Albanian extremists, and that the OSCE
was actually trying to encourage such structures.
The situation in Kosovo — and this point has
been made before by Mr. Guéhenno and Ambassador
Hume — cannot be seen in isolation of the situation in
the region as a whole. It is clear to all that there is a
link between the conflict in Macedonia and the
situation in Kosovo, since Kosovo has basically
become a rear base for Albanian armed groups in
Macedonia. All this sheds stark light on the failure to
find a solution to the problem of disarming Kosovo
militants and eliminating their illegal armed
formations. We are convinced that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) must take additional
robust steps in this area.
We have no doubt that it is still important to halt
the spillover of extremists from one part of the region
to another and their use of various covers to conceal
their terrorist activities. To cite just one example, on 13
August, Russian KFOR troops arrested two Kosovo
Albanians in the region of Kosovska Kamenica on the
administrative border with Serbia. One of those
detained had an automatic weapon, ammunition, a
bullet-proof vest and a National Liberation Army
(NLA) uniform. He confessed that he was part of the
111th company of the NLA brigade, which had
conducted battle activities in Macedonia in the
Aracinovo region. This June, he was one of the
militants allowed to leave the buses that were being
blocked by the Macedonians in the Aracinovo region.
Now he had turned up in Kosovo on the administrative
border with Serbia with his weapons and his uniform.
That is just one example that shows that the problem is
still there. It has to be resolved.

7

S/PV.4359

We know that during the operation that has just
started in Macedonia, the NLA is supposed to be
handing over the weapons that its militants possess.
Those who are carrying out operation Essential Harvest
have to be sure not to repeat the unfortunate experience
of Kosovo, in which it was ceremoniously proclaimed
that the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) had been
disarmed, stripped of its uniforms and disbanded. But
in fact, it turned out, of course, that the KLA retained
its organizational structures, its weapons, its access to
new arms deliveries and its ability to destabilize
various parts of the Balkan region.
Talking about Macedonia and about the current
operation there, I would add that we are disquieted by
information we are receiving about efforts to create in
Macedonia another army — an Albanian national
army — which is trying to unite under its banner the
most militant fighters and to retain a battle-ready core
of extremists. That cannot be allowed. We have
repeatedly stated that we are in favour of lifting the
arms embargo imposed by resolution 1160 (1998)
against the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and we support the appeal by Ambassador
Hume to resolve this question as soon as possible.
While reaffirming that position, we think it necessary
to stress once again also that the international
presences in Kosovo will have to take very decisive
action to cut off any possible flows of weapons
destined for Kosovo Albanian terrorist groups, because
the military embargo with regard to these groups must
remain in full force.
All this is necessary in order to cut off the
channels of financial and material assistance from the
territory of Kosovo to extremism, terrorism and
separatism in the Balkans. We are convinced that the
lasting settlement of the Kosovo Macedonian pockets
of tension in the region is possible only in a general
Balkan context, and that that goal should be promoted
by the implementation of the Russian initiative: to
conclude a legally binding agreement to strengthen the
security and the sovereignty of all countries of the
region, and to that end to convene a Balkan summit,
with international participation. We believe that that
Russian proposal remains relevant.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Guéhenno for his enlightening
briefing about developments in Kosovo. My delegation
pays tribute to him and to his entire team for their
efforts to keep Council members informed about the

8

vicissitudes being encountered by this region and
others.
At a time when the international community is
closely following developments in the Balkans, and
more specifically the general elections that will be held
on 17 November 2001 in Kosovo, my delegation
welcomes the good conditions in which the
preparations for the elections are being carried out. We
are also pleased to note the positive and productive
attitude adopted by all parties concerned. This attitude
guarantees broad participation by all ethnic
components of Kosovo and points to the success of the
entire electoral operation.
We welcome the decision here taken by Kosovo
Serb political parties to participate in the elections. We
are convinced that this wise decision, which we have
constantly encouraged, will have an important impact
on the future of the province, in general, and on the
participation of ethnic minorities in the new political
structures that will emerge from the elections, in
particular. The goal for those new political structures is
that they be representative and that they guarantee the
right of all inhabitants of Kosovo to safety and
security, respect for differences and participation in
healthy public life. Clearly, the priority of these new
political structures is to banish hatred and attitudes
based on ethnic considerations and to promote peaceful
coexistence. Broad participation in the electoral
process will ensure its success and will give it the
necessary legitimacy. We encourage the continuation of
contacts by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) leadership with
the Belgrade authorities in order to bring about better
coordination in the lead up to the elections.
My delegation once again reiterates its disquiet at
ongoing acts of violence. We deplore this attitude,
whose main victims are civilians. We think that the
approach of the elections is creating a climate of
tension, for which we need to prepare. Increased
vigilance is necessary with a view to addressing any
possible violence. In our view, such violence is based
on the absence of trust that still prevails among ethnic
communities. That trust can be restored, in particular,
by eliminating pockets of tension and by strengthening
confidence-building measures among the inhabitants of
Kosovo. We welcome the signing of the new United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) regulation 2001/17, which is intended to
establish rules on the sale of properties in mixed
neighbourhoods in order to be sure that transactions

S/PV.4359

involving minority properties are valid in those multiethnic areas, and thus to safeguard the multi-ethnic
nature of the province.
The question of refugees and displaced persons
remains a major source of concern. We think it is
essential to speed up the return of refugees and
displaced persons and to guarantee them optimal
security conditions, particularly in areas where they are
minorities. Once they have gone home, refugees must
be able to return to their homes, and their rights must
be restored. Furthermore, we believe that as winter
approaches, UNMIK should be prepared to give them
the best possible living conditions.
It is essential to deal with the question of
prisoners and missing persons with due dispatch and
preferably before the elections. The search for
solutions to the humanitarian aspects of the Kosovo
question will go a long way to help promote
reconciliation among the various ethnic communities.
My delegation is pleased at the economic
progress made in recent months in Kosovo. I saw for
myself, during the visit of Security Council members to
Kosovo, this new economic spirit, which we encourage
and which should be maintained.
Moving from emergency rebuilding to a new
phase of economic reform is healthy for Kosovo and
the entire Balkan region. We are convinced that the
positive impact of these decisions will be felt very
quickly.
Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I should like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing,
which provided a useful update on the situation in and
around Kosovo and the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The first issue on which I would like to focus is
the ongoing preparations for the Kosovo-wide elections
to be held in November. We are pleased to note some
positive developments in that process. However, we
recognize that there are a number of challenges ahead.
We strongly believe that the full participation of
all communities in the political process is essential to
ensure democratic, transparent and fair elections and to
regain stability in multi-ethnic Kosovo. In this regard
we welcome the continued contacts by the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo,
Mr. Haekkerup, with Serbian leaders towards

encouraging Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
province’s elections.
Against this background, we are gravely
concerned by reports of violent acts of ethnic
intolerance that continue to take place in Kosovo. We
maintain that these developments are extremely
dangerous and destabilize the ongoing efforts towards
creating an environment conducive to all-inclusive
elections.
Another important challenge is the overall peace
process in Kosovo and the creation of safe and secure
conditions for the successful and sustainable return to
their homes of Kosovo Serbs displaced by the conflict.
The issue of missing people still remains high on
the Kosovo agenda as an important aspect of
reconciliation.
Among the most recent developments in Kosovo,
we were very much disturbed by the report that
international peacekeepers patrolling the Kosovo side
of the border with Macedonia were attacked by ethnic
Albanian rebels who were trying to cross the border
illegally. We would be grateful if the Secretariat could
give us any information available concerning this
incident.
Unfortunately,
the
incident
further
underscores the regional repercussions of the situation
in Kosovo.
We are particularly concerned about the
continued insecurity in neighbouring Macedonia. In its
recent Presidential Statement welcoming the signing of
the Framework Agreement, the Security Council
reaffirmed the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Macedonia and expressed its support for the actions of
the President and the Government of Macedonia aimed
at resolving the crisis. Being a strong supporter of the
peaceful political means of settlement in that country,
Ukraine remains committed to support the legitimate
aspirations of the Republic of Macedonia to protect its
sovereignty and territorial integrity against those who
follow the dangerous path of forceful resolution of the
problems. Since the Framework Agreement on the
settlement of the crisis was signed, its full
implementation remains a priority.
We welcome the efforts made by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European
Union (EU) in assisting the Macedonian Government
to ease the situation, and we commend their
commitment to support the security, stability and

9

S/PV.4359

territorial integrity of the country. Now, with the
launching of NATO’s disarmament mission operation
“Essential Harvest”, we very much hope that the
security situation there will improve.
In addition to NATO’s effort, there are reports
that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) is contemplating a monitoring role in
the peace process in Macedonia. It would be useful to
have more information on this matter.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): My delegation
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his briefing. It was, as always, an
excellent, useful and helpful briefing, and I would like
straight away to reiterate the United Kingdom’s support
for the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and for
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative towards
peace and stability in Kosovo.
During this short statement I really want to
concentrate only on the elections and what has been
said about spill-over into Macedonia, not least because
the representative of Belgium will be speaking later in
the debate on behalf of the European Union and I
associate myself with what he has to say.
First, the elections. We very much welcome the
support given by the Belgrade authorities for Kosovo
Serb registration in advance of the elections for the
Kosovo Assembly in November. These elections will
mark a correct and important step in returning
significant responsibility for self-government to the
people of Kosovo. We should also not forget that the
elections are a very important opportunity to shape the
future of Kosovo.
In order to make it clear that Kosovo must
develop as a multi-ethnic community, all ethnic groups
must take part in the elections. If they do not, those
who support a mono-ethnic independent State will be
able to claim, with some justification, that other ethnic
groups have no long-term interest in Kosovo. It is
therefore vital for the Belgrade authorities to give the
earliest possible signal of their support for Kosovo
Serbs and others to vote in the elections, not just to
register.
Ambassador Lavrov may have been right to say
that the clear signals from Belgrade, about both the
need to register and the need to vote, may not solve
everything. But they are certainly an extremely

10

important element in the equation, and, as far as we are
concerned, we strongly urge Belgrade to make its
views known and to help in this area.
We welcome also the meetings between Special
Representative Haekkerup and Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic on 15 and 25 August following
Mr. Covic’s appointment as chairman of the Yugoslav
Coordinating Committee for Kosovo. These meetings,
as Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno has said, were
very helpful developments. It is also very good news
that UNMIK and the Belgrade authorities are now
working together positively and quickly to find
practical solutions to address declared Serb concerns
on security, returns and the missing.
I was particularly grateful to Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno for addressing the five points that
were raised with the Security Council mission by
President Kostunica. As Ambassador Hume has said, I
think it is important that we keep on reminding
ourselves of those points as key concerns declared by
the authorities in Belgrade.
Extremism and ethnically motivated violence
have to stop. Small groups of armed Albanians and
others should not be allowed to destabilize the region.
So we welcome the success of the Kosovo Force in the
last few days in arresting Albanian extremists crossing
into Kosovo from Macedonia armed with substantial
amounts of weaponry and ammunition. It is important
that that effort continue.
I also listened carefully to what the UnderSecretary-General had to say about the exchanges of
correspondence, to which the Council has been privy,
between the Secretary-General and President
Trajkovski and other members of the Macedonian
Government. It is clearly important that a close and
harmonious relationship should be built up between the
Secretariat and UNMIK and the Macedonian
authorities in order that the concerns of both sides may
be fully understood and in order that, when necessary,
the appropriate action can be taken to meet those
concerns. I know that, as a first step, our Macedonian
colleague, who will be speaking later in the debate,
will be making every effort to strike up good, close and
cordial relations with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations so that we can make sure that things are
kept fully on the rails.

S/PV.4359

Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guéhenno, for his
comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the recent
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to bring about the
comprehensive implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the progress it has made in
that regard.
I wish today to address two issues. The first
relates to the elections. China has consistently
emphasized the importance of participation by
minorities in order to ensure the fairness and equity of
the elections. But we are concerned that the number of
members of minorities who have registered still
remains low. UNMIK must take further measures to
crack down on criminal activities, to improve the
security environment in Kosovo, to promote national
reconciliation and to build mutual trust so as to create
conditions in which refugees can return and in which
more members of minorities can participate in the
elections. Here, UNMIK should continue to strengthen
coordination and cooperation with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The second point relates to illegal arms flows.
When it comes to security issues, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia is closely linked to the entire
Balkan region. To maintain peace and stability in the
region, it is very important to prevent illegal arms
flows in border areas between Kosovo and Macedonia
and to cut off the sources of supply of illegal weapons.
In our view, UNMIK can and should take more
effective measures in that regard. Like other countries,
we hope that efforts to seize illegal arms that are in the
hands of members of the Albanian minority will be
successful in order to create conditions favourable for
the implementation of the Framework Agreement on
Macedonia and to maintain peace and stability in the
region.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guéhenno, for his useful
briefing this morning. We particularly appreciated his
in-depth analysis of the situation in Kosovo.
At the last Council meeting on this item, held on
26 July 2001, we reiterated our call for the continuation
and strengthening of the dialogue between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

(UNMIK) and the authorities of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. Council members stressed that the
cooperation of Belgrade was essential for the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). In that
context, discussions yesterday, in the latest round of
such talks, between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, and Deputy Prime
Minister Covic marked a step in the right direction. We
encourage them to continue their efforts at achieving
the shared objectives.
One of our main concerns in Kosovo at this point
in time is the forthcoming election. During our mission
to Kosovo, we stressed the need for participation by all
communities with a view to making the election a
success. We underlined the importance of support for
the democratic process that best guarantees the rights
of all communities. The registration of minority
communities, so far, has been extremely disappointing.
Bangladesh appreciates the appeal made in that regard
to the Kosovo Serbs this weekend by President
Kostunica. We urge the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to continue to encourage
registration for the 17 November elections by Kosovo
Serbs and the internally displaced.
I shall make observations on a few specific areas.
First is the question of missing persons and detainees.
This is a humanitarian issue. It has serious political
implications as well. We flagged this humanitarian
question during our first mission to Kosovo, last year.
We stressed the point again this year in Pristina and in
Belgrade. We are pleased that Deputy Prime Minister
Covic met representatives of the families of missing
persons from Gracanica. Such gestures are crucial in
building confidence and in helping reconciliation. We
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Haekkerup, and Deputy Prime Minister
Covic to continue to work together on the issue with
some determination.
The second area concerns the rights of the
minority
communities —
rights,
and
also
responsibilities. We have always stressed that it is
important that the majority ensure that the rights of the
minority communities are respected. In turn, minority
communities too must realize that there is no
alternative to establishing a multi-ethnic society. The
Kosovo Serb community, in particular, must integrate
into the structures being set up by UNMIK rather than
attempting to set up parallel structures. In that regard,

11

S/PV.4359

we appreciate the understanding being shown by
Belgrade on the question of transition institutions.
The
initiatives
taken
by
the
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Haekkerup, to protect the rights of minority
communities deserve our commendation. We should
lend support to the regulation to monitor property sales
in mixed neighbourhoods. That is a positive measure
aimed at preventing irregular sales of property that
would be detrimental to minority rights or to Kosovo’s
multi-ethnic character.
The third area relates to security and law and
order. We reiterate that secure conditions for the
elections must be ensured. We earlier recommended the
development of a comprehensive strategy to resolve the
complex situation in Mitrovica. The emphasis there
should be multi-ethnic initiatives in the social,
economic and religious areas that would facilitate
rebuilding confidence among communities. We hope
that progress has been made in that regard.
It is in the interest of Kosovo to facilitate the
participation of all communities in the elections, as
well as the return of refugees and displaced persons.
Fourthly, as regards the role of civil society, as
we underscored during the Council’s last meeting on
this item, civil society, including Kosovo women’s
organizations, are engaged in reaching across the
ethnic divide, in building confidence, in helping with
reconciliation and in fostering greater tolerance. This is
well recognized. Such organizations should receive the
support of UNMIK and the encouragement of the
international community.
I shall conclude by underlining that all Kosovars,
irrespective of their ethnic background, should accept
the framework established under resolution 1244
(1999) and should contribute to the full implementation
of that resolution. To that end, representation of
different communities in the interim institutions is
essential. Therefore the holding of successful elections
in Kosovo is the most important challenge facing
UNMIK and, if I may say so, the international
community. It is the most important undertaking for the
people of Kosovo. It will be an important step forward
for lasting peace in the Balkans.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the position that will be
stated by Ambassador De Ruyt on behalf of the

12

European Union. I would just like to make several
comments from our national perspective. First, we
thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for the briefing he has
just given. I would like to focus on two issues: the
elections and security.
As regards the elections, we are 90 days away
from election day. The election stems from the
Constitutional
Framework
promulgated
by
Mr. Haekkerup. It is thus a new and important stage in
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We are
gratified by the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). These two organizations are doing their best
to make the elections a success and to ensure that the
transfer of power to the institutions of provisional selfgovernment takes place in an orderly fashion.
But as the date draws near, the commitment of all
the inhabitants of Kosovo, whatever their ethnic origin
may be, is indispensable. All the parties concerned
have responsibilities in that connection. As regards the
registration of members of the Kosovo Serb
community, momentum has developed; we hope that it
will accelerate in the coming days and weeks, and that
the Serb community will decide to participate in the
vote.
By voting on 17 November every Kosovar citizen
will make his or her voice heard. Every vote counts,
every vote has weight. To influence the decisions of the
future autonomous institutions and to promote respect
for their own interests all electors should participate in
selecting their representatives in a democratic manner.
We wish to echo Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno’s appeal to
all ethnic communities to participate, including, of
course, the Serb community.
We also salute the appointment of the Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic, as head of the
Serb coordination centre for Kosovo. That has been
followed in recent weeks by talks between Mr. Covic
and Mr. Haekkerup. These meetings are a very positive
development. We encourage the intensification of the
dialogue.
Secondly, as regards security issues, we are
gratified that UNMIK is promulgating a series of
regulations to combat terrorism and organized crime in
Kosovo. The new police and justice pillar of the United
Nations
Mission
will
promote
the
smooth
implementation of those measures. We must make sure

S/PV.4359

that the regulations in force leave no weak spots that
could be exploited by criminals.
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) too must remain
vigilant. We are gratified that its troops along the
border with Macedonia have recently been reinforced.
The situation in Macedonia requires that increased
attention be paid to illegal activities along the Kosovo
border. In that regard, we read with interest the
Secretary-General’s reply to the President of the
Republic of Macedonia on this issue, among others.
The European Union has become deeply engaged
in the search for a political solution in Macedonia.
Mr. Solana, the High Representative for Common
Foreign and Security Policy and the Special
Representative of the European Union in Macedonia,
Mr. François Léotard, have been vigorously engaged in
the field, along with Mr. James Pardew, to facilitate
dialogue among the parties. This contributed to the
signing by the Macedonian factions in Skopje of the 13
August agreement which provides a foundation for a
thorough reform of the Macedonian State.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is now
engaged in collecting the arms that the National
Liberation Army of Macedonia has agreed to turn over.
Five hundred and thirty French soldiers are
participating in this operation, which springs from the
goodwill of the parties. France is also supporting
European Union efforts to achieve lasting stability in
Macedonia, in particular through a donor conference
and strengthened humanitarian and macro-economic
aid.
Finally, I would like to return to the issue of
resolution 1160 (1998). In harmony with what Russia
and the United States have already stated, France, too,
feels that the conditions have now been met for the
unrestricted lifting of the arms embargo on Yugoslavia.
We hope that the Council will take up the lifting of the
embargo as soon as possible.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): I thank the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Guéhenno, for briefing the
Council on the latest developments in Kosovo. There
has been steady progress on the development of a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo, but there remains much
to be done. That is quite evident from reports of
violence in the territory. Violence against minorities
continues to plague the territory and to impede the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We recognize that these, usually isolated,
incidents are concentrated in a few areas, and that
UNMIK continues to put structures in place to provide
for the maintenance of law and order. We must
recognize, however, that incidents of violence
overshadow the enormous progress that has been made
so far.
My delegation condemns what has been described
as the ghastly and horrific killing of five members of a
Kosovo Albanian family on 21 August. Early in the
month of August, a Serb convoy was ambushed and
three people were injured. Destabilizing incidents like
these must not be allowed to continue.
We would like to see the judicial system equipped
to deal with incidents such as these in an appropriate
and proportionate manner. UNMIK must increase its
effort to recruit a greater number of Serb judges,
prosecutors and lawyers in order to build a multi-ethnic
judicial system that will enjoy the support of all ethnic
groups. UNMIK must continue to seek ways to control
inter-ethnic violence as preparations continue for the
elections in November.
In our last statement on Kosovo in the Council we
mentioned the issue of property sales as an essential
component in ensuring the peaceful coexistence of
ethnic groups in Kosovo. We were concerned about
indications that the sale of minority housing may have
been used as a guise for ethnic cleansing. We therefore
welcome the recent signing of a new UNMIK
regulation to ensure that all proposed contracts for
property sales in certain mixed neighbourhoods in
Kosovo are thoroughly reviewed by a municipal
administrator before being approved.
With regard to relations with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, my delegation is encouraged
by the talks held between the Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr. Covic, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup. We have
maintained that only through dialogue can obstacles to
the improvement of relations with Serbia and to the
advancement of reconciliation in Kosovo be overcome.
Such talks are important to the process of preparing for
elections in November, as the discussions are important
elements of Serb participation and the removal of
parallel security and administrative structures. We
encourage more frequent talks aimed at ensuring the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We also

13

S/PV.4359

welcome the support of the Kosovo Transitional
Council for those talks.
We continue to monitor the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and its impact
on the situation in Kosovo, and vice versa. The impact
on the refugee situation remains of concern, and we
note that the return of Macedonian refugees directly
corresponds to periods of relative calm in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. We note also that the
border crossing between that country and Kosovo
remains blocked, preventing essential supplies such as
fuel from entering Kosovo and resulting in the
rationing of fuel there. Reports indicate that the closure
of the border between the territories has also impeded
rotations of United Nations police. It may also possibly
affect the shipment of medical supplies. It would be
instructive if Mr. Guéhenno could comment on whether
those restrictions on United Nations police have
adversely affected the security situation. Jamaica
supports efforts aimed at a speedy resolution of the
conflict in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, for the sake of the people of that country
and for the sake of stability in Kosovo and throughout
the region.
We are encouraged by the recent return of a
number of Serb refugees to the village of Osojane. We
hope that we will soon see a situation where, having
returned, those Serbs will enjoy freedom of movement,
safety and security.
We commend UNMIK for its work. We are aware
of the difficulties it faces in carrying out its duties. It is
clear that there are serious problems that UNMIK must
address. It is our hope that significant progress can be
made prior to the elections in November.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I too would like to
join my colleagues in thanking the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, for his comprehensive briefing.
We want to begin with a confession. I think that
this is the eighth time we have discussed the situation
in Kosovo since Singapore joined the Council, and it is
very difficult for us to find something new to say. But,
for the record, we want to reiterate the points we have
made in the past on this issue.
There is, however, one new dimension as we meet
today. As several speakers have pointed out, that
dimension is the developments in Macedonia.

14

Everyone, I think, has said that developments in
Macedonia are linked to developments in Kosovo. This
is clearly a variable of uncertainty that we have. We
thought it would be useful to raise some questions in
this area that, we hope, someone may be able to
answer — although I will confess to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno that these may be difficult questions for him
to answer.
I have taken note of the fact that the Council
issued a presidential statement on 13 August, two
weeks ago, welcoming the signing of the Framework
Agreement in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia by President Trajkovski and the leaders of
the four political parties. But my understanding is —
that is, to the best of my knowledge even though I was
not here at the time — that there was no substantive
discussion of that issue. It may be useful to have a
substantive discussion of it. I will illustrate this by
reading a few paragraphs from a recent op-ed piece
written by Gareth Evans on that agreement.
But before doing so, I would just like to raise a
small, procedural matter. I was reading the Framework
Agreement and noticed that the first sentence says that
“The following points comprise an agreed
framework for securing the future of Macedonia’s
democracy and permitting the development of
closer and more integrated relations between the
Republic of Macedonia and the Euro-Atlantic
community”.
I am somewhat intrigued by the phrase “Euro-Atlantic
community”. Is this a new organization? Does it have
an address? Does it have a legal structure? Or is it a
general political body? I am just sort of curious as to
the origin of that phrase.
But, turning to the agreement, let me just read
what was said by Mr. Gareth Evans, the President of
the International Crisis Group.
“Macedonia’s peace agreement is signed
and within a few days, barring further hitches,
3,500 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
[NATO] troops will be on the ground to collect
the ethnic Albanian rebels’ weapons. But no one
who cares about the future of the Balkans is
breaking out the champagne. Too many on both
sides of the divide are only too keen to continue
the struggle, and the NATO mission, as presently
constructed, has neither the mandate nor the

S/PV.4359

capacity to create sustainable peace. This is
Macedonia 2001, but it looks unnervingly like
Bosnia 1992.
“More is at stake here than the breakup of a
small, impoverished country, and all the human
misery that could go with it. Collapse in
Macedonia would likely delay achievement of a
stable, multi-ethnic Bosnia; damage prospects for
peacefully negotiating Kosovo’s final status;
jeopardize Serbia’s democratic transition; and
significantly damage NATO’s credibility in
Europe and beyond.” (The Wall Street Journal, 22
August 2001, p. A16)
Clearly, we therefore have some fairly hard
questions to raise about the Agreement and the impact
it is going to have on the situation in Kosovo. Four
questions came to my mind while reading it.
The first question is, having participated in at
least eight discussions on Kosovo, could we in the
Council in any way have anticipated this dimension of
the problem? As that dimension has clearly had a
significant impact on the situation in Kosovo in all our
discussions, why did we not anticipate it? It is an
interesting question for the Council to ask because,
from time to time, we issue statements and calls and
declarations saying that we should engage in
prevention of armed conflict. Why did we not succeed
in this case?
Of course, the second, related, question is, what
form of preventive action could the Council have taken
if it had indeed paid attention to all the signals coming
through indicating that trouble was brewing on the
border and that it would spill over into Kosovo?
The third question — and here I note of course
that the Council has welcomed NATO involvement in
Macedonia, which I frankly believe we should all
welcome — may perhaps be a theoretical, legal
question. Does the Council in any way need to
legitimize such action? Or is it our role just to take
note of it and welcome it without in any way either
endorsing it or rejecting it? What is the technical role
of the Council when regional organizations take a
leadership role on such difficult issues?
I also have a fourth question, which is perhaps the
most difficult. I think that, if all goes well and the
Agreement works and operation Essential Harvest
succeeds, we should commend NATO and welcome the

fact that a very dangerous situation has been prevented.
But if it does not work, who will pick up the pieces?
Will it be the Council that will have to pick up the
pieces and say, “Okay, it is now our responsibility to
look at the situation and see what we can do about it”?
If that is the case, how do we arrange for the passing of
the baton, and for who does it and when?
I realize that these are not easy questions. I am
not so sure whether it is fair to ask the UnderSecretary-General to answer them. But we think that
these are the sorts of questions that the Council
certainly should have been considering during the past
few months, perhaps in an attempt to prevent from
happening the situation that we see today on the border
between Kosovo and Macedonia.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): We are grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
for his very comprehensive and useful briefing this
morning. We have noted the progress made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in preparations for the elections in
Kosovo and in finalizing the institutions of provisional
self-government.
However, we are concerned about the security
situation, in particular about reports that several
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK police members
were recently injured during riots following a car
accident in the north of Mitrovica. Such attacks on
United Nations personnel are serious, and they hamper
the work of those people who are dedicated to bringing
peace to the province. The population of Kosovo must
be made to understand that taking out their frustration
on KFOR and United Nations personnel will not help
solve their problem. The political leaders must do
everything possible to convince their partisans not to
resort to violence. We also deplore the murder of five
members of a Kosovo Albanian family near Pristina on
20 August 2001 and the attack on a Serb convoy, which
left three persons injured at the beginning of the month.
These violent acts negatively impact on the creation of
a safe environment for displaced persons and refugees
to return to Kosovo and undermine efforts to bring
peace and stability to the region. We equally deplore
attempts at political assassinations, as well as
continuing organized crime activities. We support
UNMIK efforts at curbing such acts, while stressing
that it is the responsibility of the Kosovars themselves
to create conditions conducive to a multi-ethnic
Kosovo.

15

S/PV.4359

With a large number of refugees in the province
and with the closure of the border at Blace, the work of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo is being
considerably hampered. We call on the Government of
Macedonia to make arrangements for the re-opening of
the route for easy access of supplies to United Nations
personnel in Kosovo and for the return of refugees in
Macedonia. We have noted KFOR’s seizure of
weapons, such as pistols, grenades, ammunition and
anti-personnel landmines. My delegation encourages
KFOR in its operations to cut down the supply lines of
the extremists. We also call on all those who have
contact with the extremists to persuade them to cease
violence and to participate in the UNMIK process to
build and guarantee an autonomous, safe and peaceful
Kosovo.
The talks between Mr. Hans Haekkerup and the
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Covic, on 15
August have reassured us of the support of the Serbian
side for the principle that there should be no security
and administrative structures parallel to those
administered by UNMIK. We also welcome the
positive attitude of Belgrade regarding the registration
of Serb community voters for the forthcoming Kosovowide elections. It is crucial that all communities
register to be counted as residents of Kosovo and have
a chance to vote and be represented in the Kosovo
Assembly. We support the need for an enhanced public
campaign to encourage voter registration and the
eventual participation of the Kosovars in the election
on 17 November.
We also note that the issue of Kosovo Albanian
detainees in Serbian prisons was discussed during the
meeting. We hope that the Serbian authorities will soon
hand over those detained to UNMIK so that these cases
can be reviewed as appropriate by UNMIK. These
measures should help build confidence between the
communities. With the collaboration of the Serbian
Ministry of Justice, UNMIK should be able to further
improve the judicial process and enhance the trust of
the people in the judicial system of Kosovo.
My delegation encourages the Serbian authorities
to continue dialogue and cooperation with UNMIK on
the security arrangements in anticipation of the
November elections. Such cooperation is essential to
ensuring the wide and safe participation of all the
communities in the elections, which should hopefully
lead to a multi-ethnic Government and should
contribute to lasting peace in the region.

16

Mr. Corr (Ireland): My delegation too very much
appreciates today’s briefing from the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guéhenno,
and the opportunity provided by this meeting to review
recent developments, particularly in the light of the
forthcoming Kosovo-wide elections.
The Permanent Representative of Belgium will
later deliver a statement on behalf of the European
Union. As Ireland subscribes fully to the views
expressed therein, I will limit myself to a few brief
comments, especially in the context of the election and
security.
Mr. Guéhenno’s briefing shows that preparations
for the elections are proceeding at pace. My delegation
commends the hard work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, and of
everyone else involved in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in that
regard and in implementing other aspects of resolution
1244 (1999). The elections on 17 November clearly
represent a unique opportunity for the people of
Kosovo, and, along with others here today, we very
much urge all citizens to participate fully in the
political process. As has been said before in the
Council, all communities must realize that the only
possible future for Kosovo is as a multi-ethnic society
based on respect for minority rights and human rights.
The Kosovar Albanians must respect the rights of
minorities, and those minorities accept, in that context,
the challenge of participation.
We note with satisfaction the support of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for the registration of
Serbs in Kosovo. We welcome efforts undertaken by
the Serb parties in that regard, and we hope that the
difficulties over certification that we have heard will be
resolved soon. The number of Kosovo Serbs that have
registered to vote is, as has been said, disappointing.
Ireland very much hopes that they will register in
larger numbers and urges them to do so, and we urge
their leaders to continue to show full support for such
participation. Kosovar parties and civic leaders must do
everything possible to encourage a positive climate for
Serb participation. As part of such a climate, terrorist
activity must cease, and all ethnic Albanian
representatives must clearly distance themselves from
violence. Further early and quantifiable progress in the
security area must also be achieved.

S/PV.4359

In that regard, my delegation welcomes, as others
have today, the recent detention by KFOR of a number
of suspected terrorists trying to cross illegally into
Kosovo. We also welcome the establishment of the
police and justice pillar and the information provided
today by the Under-Secretary-General about detention
facilities, witness protection programmes, and so on.
Ireland welcomes the intensification of relations
between UNMIK and Belgrade and, in particular, the
recent progress achieved regarding missing persons.
Further cooperation by Serbs and by ethnic Albanians
on this extremely sensitive issue will help to create a
favourable climate for change. We appreciate the
information given by Mr. Guéhenno about
developments relating to the points raised by President
Kostunica during the Security Council mission’s visit
to the region in June, and we hope that further progress
can be achieved. We believe that UNMIK should liaise
ever more closely with the administration in Belgrade,
including in relation to refugee returns, and we hope
that further meetings, such as those recently held
between Mr. Haekkerup and Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic, will be held. Ireland hopes that, in
order to facilitate such liaison, the guidelines for the
entry of officials from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into Kosovo will be used pragmatically and
flexibly.
The Council has already issued a presidential
statement, which welcomed the signing of the
Framework Agreement in Skopje on 13 August. We
hope that the Agreement will prove to be the basis for a
stable political settlement. Ireland urges the parties to
implement all aspects of the agreement in good faith
and to honour all of their commitments. We call on
KFOR to continue its efforts to further strengthen
controls along the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and to contain cross-border
activities by extremist groups.
Mr. Strømmen (Norway): I would like to thank
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Guéhenno, for his briefing, and to
reiterate Norway’s support for the efforts of United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to implement
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework for Kosovo.
We are pleased to note that some progress has
been achieved, including in the areas of confidence-

building for minorities and of the small-scale return of
refugees. We welcome the successful return of a first
group of Kosovo Serbs in the municipality of Istok. We
look forward to the implementation of further returns.
However, much more remains to be done.
My Government is concerned about the low level
of voter registration among Kosovo Serbs. Intensified
efforts are clearly needed by all parties involved to
achieve elections that are perceived as legitimate and
representative for all communities in Kosovo.
We welcome recent statements by Yugoslav and
Serb leaders encouraging Kosovo Serbs to register as
voters in the November provincial elections. For its
part, the international community should facilitate this
progress by refraining from measures and actions that
unduly impinge upon Belgrade’s authority and
influence among Kosovo Serbs. Convincing the
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities of the advantages of
voter registration seems hard enough. Convincing them
that they have something to gain from participating in
elections is even harder. The effort must be made. We
welcome the ongoing discussion on post-election
structures and talks, including consultations with
representatives of all ethnic communities.
The democratic authorities in Belgrade are
working systematically and with determination to settle
the accounts of the country’s near past and bring
Yugoslavia back to normal international cooperation.
The extradition of Mr. Milosevic to The Hague is an
important step. Serbian authorities are pursuing
investigations of cases of suspected war crimes against
civilians in Kosovo. Serbian perpetrators are being
prosecuted. The engagement of Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic as Yugoslav coordinator for Kosovo is
encouraging. We believe that UNMIK should avail
itself fully of this opportunity for constructive and
practical cooperation with the authorities in Belgrade.
The international community should acknowledge
that Yugoslavia has truly entered a post-Milosevic era.
Increased cooperation with the democratic forces in
Belgrade will not only improve the possibilities for
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) in a sustainable
manner in Kosovo, but also contribute to the
consolidation of the authorities in Belgrade against less
reform-oriented circles of Serbia. The way in which
resolution 1244 (1999) is implemented will have clear
implications for the whole region. Norway welcomes
the Framework Agreement signed on 13 August by

17

S/PV.4359

President Trajkovski and the heads of the four main
political parties in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. The Agreement represents a vital first step
in creating conditions for peace and stability in that
country. The international community must stand
united in giving firm and clear support to the
Framework Agreement.
We express our full support for the engagement of
the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in this process. Operation
Essential Harvest is a prerequisite for successful
implementation of the agreement. It is essential that the
ceasefire be observed. Norway strongly condemns all
acts of political violence. Such acts can only jeopardize
the continuation of the political process.
It is also important to recognize that confidence
and trust between the Albanian and Slav communities
in Macedonia is almost non-existent. Considerable
efforts must be made to address this situation. The onus
for action rests primarily with Macedonian authorities
and political leaders from the Albanian and Slav
Macedonian communities. However, the international
community can and should be supportive.
Lastly, I would like to underline the merits of
maintaining a regional perspective in the Security
Council dealings with Kosovo rather than a Kosovo
perspective on dealing with the Balkans. This implies
that we must carefully consider the potential impact
that the arrangements for Kosovo might have on
neighbouring States and on regional stability.
Mr. Touré (Mali) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to join previous speakers in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, for the very full
update about the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Despite the complex and many difficulties facing
UNMIK in implementing Council resolution 1244
(1999), we must recognize that outstanding progress
has been made in establishing democratic and multiethnic institutions in Kosovo. My statement will cover
a number of main points.
Regarding the political situation, on 26 July, my
delegation expressed firm support for Mr. Haekkerup
and the whole UNMIK team for having promulgated
the Constitutional Framework for provisional selfgovernment in Kosovo and for having announced the
date of elections. On that same day, we said we agreed

18

that the Constitutional Framework and the
announcement of the date of elections were definitely
decisive steps towards a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. Today, we note with great interest that notable
progress has been made in the preparations for the
elections to be held on 17 November.
Because those elections are an essential
framework to combat intransigent extremism and
ethnic intolerance, my delegation encourages all the
people of Kosovo to participate in them in large
numbers. We believe that the unreserved participation
of all communities is crucial to the success of the
elections. That is why my delegation will give
unstinting support to UNMIK initiatives to draw up
inclusive electoral rolls conducive to the free
participation of all ethnic groups in the electoral
process.
Participation by all communities, in particular by
the Serbian minority, is a major concern for my
delegation. Efforts taken by UNMIK, the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the international community to encourage
Serb political figures to join the ongoing democratic
process in Kosovo are to be welcomed and encouraged.
We welcome the positive attitude adopted by Belgrade
towards the registration of voters for the upcoming
elections, particularly the registration of Serbs. In order
to encourage this process, adequate security measures
should be taken to encourage all refugees, in particular,
those from the Serb minority, to return home and
participate actively in the elections, and to build a
multi-ethnic democratic society in Kosovo.
Turning to the Constitutional Framework, it
should be stressed that its implementation is of crucial
importance to my delegation, because it will enable the
people of Kosovo to administer their daily lives by
encouraging the moderates to advance the political
process, while marginalizing the extremists. That is
why my delegation reiterates its appeal to all of the
inhabitants of Kosovo to participate actively in the
structures that have been set in place and in the future
Government of the territory.
Turning to security issues, my delegation remains
concerned at the persistence of ethnic and political
violence and of organized crime in Kosovo. The 21
August 2001 murder of five members of the Hajra
family near Glogovac was eloquent evidence of this
mindless violence. There is no doubt that this violence
against the minorities of the province is the greatest

S/PV.4359

obstacle to the establishment of peace, democracy and
prosperity by the international community in Kosovo.
We strongly condemn this mindless violence, which,
unfortunately, is also the biggest obstacle to the return
of refugees and displaced persons.

commitment to implement resolution 1244 (1999). The
international community should continue to support
UNMIK at this crucial stage of its commitment to
Kosovo in order to attain peace, security and
sustainable development.

The establishment by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of pillar I and the enactment
of laws that punish organized crime, illegal arms
possession and terrorism are useful measures, which
have considerably improved the security conditions in
Kosovo.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

Because they have proved to be effective, my
delegation also supports the specific steps taken by
UNMIK and KFOR to monitor the administrative
borders of Kosovo, in particular the border with the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. All useful
steps should be taken to prevent Kosovo from
becoming a rear base for Albanian rebels of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). We encourage the
Macedonian authorities and KLA leaders to comply
strictly with their commitments undertaken under the
auspices of the European Union. We hope that, after
the weapons are collected, the international community
will do everything possible to create the best possible
conditions for lasting peace to be established in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Turning now to the economy, in order to put an
end to the disastrous state of the economy and the
resulting high unemployment in Kosovo, the
adjustment measures taken by UNMIK should be
encouraged and continued. Convinced that economic
development is a major element in bringing about
stabilization, my delegation recommends the
mobilization by the international community of
additional funding for economic recovery programmes
at the village level.
Furthermore, the question of missing persons and
detainees — which remains one of the main obstacles
to reconciliation — is a major concern of my
delegation. We support the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo and the parties concerned in implementing
decisions taken with regard to this fundamental
question.
Finally, my delegation, while recognizing the
magnitude of the job to be done by UNMIK, pays
tribute to Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his leadership of
UNMIK and to the entire local and international staff
of UNMIK and KFOR for their determination and

I wish to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno for his comprehensive presentation
on recent events in Kosovo and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. With regard to what he said, in
the first place we support the constructive dialogue
held between Mr. Haekkerup and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic.
As we have pointed out on different occasions,
the success of the political process of implementing the
Constitutional Framework, and of Kosovo’s future in
general, depends on cooperative relations with
Belgrade. This is why we are gratified to hear that the
degree of understanding between the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Yugoslav Government is constantly improving,
and we hope this will contribute to the search for
solutions to matters such as security, missing and
detained persons, and the return of refugees.
As for electoral participation, the low figures
only 10 days before the closing of the rolls are
alarming. We would all like the recent appeal made by
the Belgrade authorities to stimulate the Serb Kosovo
population to be heeded. These comments should be
made repeatedly and even more emphatically in the
days to come.
In this connection, we would like Mr. Guéhenno
to give us additional information about the voter
registration process, in particular as regards what is
being done to register displaced persons and refugees
as well as what has been done thus far to stimulate
participation in these categories.
Another interesting topic is the situation in
prisons. Last month, Mr. Guéhenno mentioned the
material conditions in prisons as a result of the number
of persons being arrested on a daily basis as compared
to the capacity of penal institutions. We would like to
know what UNMIK is doing to cope with this situation
and whether, in his opinion, there is anything the

19

S/PV.4359

Council could do to prevent the problem from spinning
out of control.
The last element we would like to highlight
concerns the situation in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia in relation to Kosovo. The Government
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has sent
several letters to the Secretary-General making serious
accusations about the work being carried out by
UNMIK and KFOR to put an end to assistance being
provided to the National Liberation Army.
We would like to know what specific actions are
being carried out jointly by UNMIK and KFOR to
investigate thoroughly the accusations and allegations
against members of the Kosovo Protection Corps. The
international community must not allow all the
achievements made in Kosovo through the work of
UNMIK and KFOR to be jeopardized by these facts.
That is why concrete acts must be employed to respond
to these allegations.
Finally, in connection with what has been said
about sanctions, it is clear that the Council must be
prepared to consider without delay lifting the sanctions.
In my opinion, this is the best way to recognize the fact
that the sanctions must end as soon as the
circumstances that justified their imposition have
ceased to exist.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia — and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association countries that are members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and
Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.
Each meeting of the Security Council brings us
closer to the crucial deadline of the elections in Kosovo
next November. We welcome the regularity of these
open debates, which give us the opportunity to take
stock of current and future developments in the region.
In this connection, I should like to thank Mr. Guéhenno

20

for his excellent briefing. This meeting also gives me
an opportunity to confirm once again the European
Union’s support for the efforts made by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, to implement
resolution 1244 (1999).
We attach particular importance to recent
developments in Kosovo because they are decisive
steps towards a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.
We have warmly welcomed the publication of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional SelfGovernment. Now, for it to become a reality, it is
essential that all the communities participate in the
elections next November as well as in the Kosovo
transitional institutions that will emerge from the
elections.
In this connection, we welcome the support
offered by Belgrade for the registration of the Serbian
electors in Kosovo. We are also glad that several
political parties have already registered for the ballot.
We hope that the parties which have begun the
procedure — the Serb parties in particular — will carry
it to conclusion so that all the communities are
represented on the electoral rolls. The Union notes with
satisfaction that the process is moving forward, but, as
Mr. Guéhenno has just pointed out, more progress is
needed. We hope that Belgrade will actively encourage
the Serb community to participate in the elections. The
European Union is indeed convinced that all
communities should take part in the elections in order
to ensure a multi-ethnic future for Kosovo.
In general, relations between Belgrade and
UNMIK have developed very positively over the last
few weeks. We have often expressed how important we
consider these relations to be, and we welcome the fact
that Deputy Prime Minister Covic and Mr. Haekkerup
are meeting now, and we hope that that collaboration
will intensify in the future.
The European Union is well aware of the
problems that persist in Kosovo, particularly as regards
security, missing persons and the return of refugees and
displaced persons, as well as regarding organized
crime. In this respect, we are taking the concerns of the
various communities very seriously. We welcome the
measures or initiatives already taken, and we
encourage UNMIK and the other players involved to
continue their efforts in these areas.

S/PV.4359

An encouraging sign for the whole region was
sent to us by the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia with the signing of the Framework
Agreement by President Trajkovski and the leaders of
the four major political parties. We hope that
Parliament will consider it with attention with the aim
of approving it as soon as possible. The Union urges all
the parties faithfully to abide by the agreement and to
take all the measures needed for its speedy and full
implementation. It is essential that everyone observe
the ceasefire scrupulously from now on. The success of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization operation
“Essential Harvest”, as well as the whole peace
process, depends on this. We remain confident, despite
the uncertainty of the situation.
In this context, the frontier between Kosovo and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remains
extremely sensitive, as others have noted this morning.
We encourage the Kosovo Force to continue to devote
the greatest attention to it.
The European Union will pursue its efforts to
promote stability, democratic development and
prosperity in the region, in close collaboration with all
the parties. In following up on the commitments
entered into at the Zagreb summit, the countries of the
region have made encouraging progress along the path
of democracy, peaceful coexistence and regional
cooperation. We are certain that these efforts will
ensure peace and stability for all the communities of
the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. I invite him to make his statement.
Mr. Sahovic (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia):
Before I address the issues that are the subject of our
debate today, let me express my satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council
deliberations for this month. I also take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Guéhenno for his, as usual,
very interesting and in-depth briefing and analysis.
We are all aware of the important and sensitive
political phase that is quickly approaching, since there
are just two and a half months before the scheduled
elections in Kosovo and Metohija on 17 November. A
number of issues deserve our collective attention and
were mentioned in the briefing we just received and in
subsequent statements by the members of the Council

and other colleagues. So allow me, therefore, to make a
few comments.
First and foremost, since our last debate here my
Government has intensified its efforts to promote direct
and prompt communication with the international
presence in Kosovo and Metohija. With this in mind,
the Governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Serbia have established a
coordinating centre for Kosovo and Metohija, headed
by Mr. Nebojsa Covic, the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia. The Centre’s primary goal is to enhance
cooperation with the international community in
solving the common problems and achieving the shared
aims of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in the
province. It is hoped that this will also help to improve
the confidence of Kosovo Serbs in UNMIK and KFOR.
The results of the efforts are already visible.
Important meetings have been held between
Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Covic to discuss a number of
outstanding issues. Indeed, as Mr. Guéhenno stated,
some progress has already been made, and we certainly
hope for more.
Also with the objective of facilitating
communication and solving practical problems, just a
few days ago my Government adopted guidelines for
the transport of KFOR personnel and equipment
through Yugoslav territory. This is, of course, in our
opinion a temporary measure, pending the conclusion
of the status of forces agreement and the status of
mission agreement, in accordance with the established
United Nations practice for similar missions.
Unfortunately, in spite of all these efforts
unnecessary misunderstandings and incidents continue
to occur, such as the one that took place on 7 August
on the Federal Government premises at Gracanica.
Another step in the wrong direction was the
introduction of the guidelines of the Special
Representative providing for 96-hour notice by any
Yugoslav or Serbian official who wants to visit Kosovo
and Metohija. This measure will certainly not facilitate
our efforts to encourage the non-Albanian population
to register for the elections. If anything, it will
discourage them.
I want to reiterate that these misunderstandings
are really unnecessary, and I hope that we can avoid
their occurrence in the future through our mutual

21

S/PV.4359

contacts here, through the UNMIK office in Belgrade
and, of course, through the contacts between
Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Covic.
Speaking of registration, as has already been
mentioned here today, the highest Yugoslav and
Serbian officials have repeatedly called on the Kosovo
Serbs to register. Also, the Serbian Commissariat for
Refugees and Displaced Persons has signed a
memorandum of understanding with the International
Organization for Migration enabling registration
outside of Kosovo and Metohija, with the participation
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. So far, however, the response of potential
voters has not been enthusiastic, to say the least.
The reasons are many, I think. It is clear that the
basic preconditions for free and fair elections have not
yet been created and that UNMIK has to do much more
to ensure safety and liberty for all in Kosovo and
Metohija, regardless of ethnicity. Continued violent
attacks by armed Albanian extremists and terrorists —
not only against non-Albanians, but also against
Albanians and even UNMIK and KFOR personnel —
provide telling evidence that a proper atmosphere that
would allow important decisions to be taken regarding
the future of this southern Serbian province has not as
yet been created.
In this context, it is also important to note the
recent independent reports that shed some light on the
overall human rights and law and order situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, especially the reports of the
ombudsperson for Kosovo. These reports identify a
number of instances of clear incompatibility between
UNMIK regulations and practices and recognized
international standards. We are of the view that these
findings should be carefully analysed and that urgent
action should be taken to rectify the situation.
I am grateful to the Council members for
expressing readiness to lift the arms embargo that was
instituted by resolution 1160 (1998). This would be a
very important step in normalizing our relations with
the international community.
Allow me also to use this occasion to bring to the
Council’s attention the situation in the ground safety
zone in southern Serbia. So far the plan — which has
been supported by the Council — for the peaceful
resolution of the crisis in this area has been
implemented successfully. The training of a multiethnic police force is well under way. In addition, the

22

Yugoslav army and KFOR have concluded an
agreement providing for the full control of the zone by
the Yugoslav army and enhanced cooperation between
the army and the international security presence in
Kosovo and Metohija.
Finally, regarding the other issue of concern for
the region — an issue which is also closely related to
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija — let me
reiterate Yugoslavia’s strong support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Macedonia. In the past weeks and months Macedonia
has been on the brink of war due to unacceptable
terrorist activities of armed ethnic Albanian groups,
often supported and supplied from Kosovo and
Metohija. The recently signed Framework Agreement,
which Yugoslavia supports, and the deployment of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization contingent to carry
out the disarmament of armed ethnic groups raise
hopes that the existing problems will be resolved
through the reforms and processes agreed upon by the
political factions in the country.
We continue to firmly believe that the use of
violence and terrorism in pursuit of political goals must
not be allowed. For their part, UNMIK and KFOR have
clear responsibility to prevent any future actions to
destabilize Macedonia emanating from the area under
their control and administration.
In conclusion, let me once again emphasize that
we rely on the Security Council to ensure the full
implementation of its resolution 1244 (1999), to which
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is committed. We
also think that it is high time for the region —
supported by the international community, including
the Security Council — to intensify discussions on how
to embark on the road towards lasting stability in our
part of the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): Thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council. At the
same time, I would like to express my appreciation for

S/PV.4359

the introductory remarks and evaluations made by
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno. Allow me also to
join those who associated themselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Belgium on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.
It is of vital importance for the Republic of
Macedonia, as an immediate neighbour of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, to have a stable and
transparent northern border, including with Kosovo.
The Macedonian Government therefore gives full
support to the efforts and measures undertaken in
Kosovo by the authorities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to consolidate the
situation by building a multi-ethnic society,
strengthening the rule of law and building democratic
institutions, which are prerequisites for the success of
this complex mission of regional importance.
The Republic of Macedonia welcomes the
strengthening of cooperation between UNMIK and the
authorities in Belgrade to address issues of mutual
concern, including conditions for fair participation by
Serbs in the forthcoming Kosovo-wide elections. The
success of the elections, in our view, will be an
important step towards resolving the future status of
Kosovo, taking fully into account the regional aspect of
this issue and its implications for the other countries of
the region. In that context, we consider indispensable
the dialogue among the democratically elected
representatives of Kosovo’s self-government, the
Serbian and Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities, and those of Montenegro.
Within the context of today’s debate on Kosovo,
allow me to make some comments regarding the
situation in my country, the Republic of Macedonia.
The signing of the Framework Agreement by political
leaders under the auspices of President Trajkovski was
welcomed by the Security Council as a significant step
towards a peaceful outcome of the political and
security crisis. In addition to that, the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Annan, in his letter of response to the
Macedonian leadership, underlined the readiness of the
United Nations to offer its full support and assistance
to implement the Framework Agreement in good faith.
In stressing the relevance of these messages, I
would like to draw the attention of the Council to some
aspects of the security dimension of the

implementation of the Framework Agreement that are
directly or indirectly related to the developments in
Kosovo.
The recent activities of UNMIK and KFOR
authorities in Kosovo aimed at strengthening control of
the border and minimizing the number of illegal border
crossings and of incursions by armed extremist groups
are certainly contributing to more efficient control of
infiltration and illegal traffic along the border zone
with Kosovo, as called for in resolution 1345 (2001).
However, for the security component of the Framework
Agreement to be fully effective, it is essential to ensure
a complete cessation of the activities of the ethnic
Albanian insurgency’s instigators and supporters from
Kosovo, including members of the Kosovo Protection
Corps (KPC).
We support the lifting of the arms embargo
imposed by resolution 1160 (1998), as mentioned today
in the debate, and we urge UNMIK and KFOR
authorities in Kosovo to undertake the necessary
measures against any possible abuse. In that regard, let
me reiterate the expectations of the President and the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia that
UNMIK and KFOR authorities will stop the infiltration
from Kosovo into the Republic of Macedonia of armed
terrorist groups and logistical support; and that they
will prevent all mobilization activities by former KPC
fighters, as well as their joining the ranks of the
National Liberation Army, as it is called today — or
whatever may be the name of tomorrow’s terrorist
organization.
This is also of particular importance for the
success of the operation being conducted by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Macedonia to
disarm ethnic Albanian armed groups and to ensure
their
complete,
voluntary
disbandment.
The
effectiveness of that operation should not be measured
solely by the quantity of arms collected, but also by the
creation of conditions for the cessation of hostilities
and the establishment of a lasting peaceful environment
for the implementation of the Framework Agreement.
In conclusion, let me recall that the Framework
Agreement is based, inter alia, on the principles that
the use of violence in pursuit of political aims is
rejected completely and unconditionally; that there are
no territorial solutions to ethnic issues; and that there
should be closer and more integrated relations with the
Euro-Atlantic community. Those values are common to

23

S/PV.4359

the whole region, including Kosovo. That is why we
have to join our efforts in pursuing their
implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Mr. Guéhenno to respond as he sees fit to the
comments and questions that have been raised.
Mr. Guéhenno: Several delegations have
expressed their concern with respect to the events
along the Macedonian border and their potential impact
on the situation in Kosovo. I would like to respond to
those concerns.
First, with regard to the situation on the border, I
am not in a position at this stage to give additional
information on the incidents mentioned by the
delegation of Ukraine. But I would like to inform the
Council that just yesterday no less than 35 Kosovo
Albanians were arrested for illegally crossing the
border into Kosovo. Over the last weekend, no less
than 96 Kosovo Albanians were similarly intercepted
while crossing the border. I think this shows the degree
to which the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is actively
patrolling the border to make sure that it does not
transform Kosovo into a safe haven for extremists as
the situation returns to normal in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
Secondly, a question was raised by the delegation
of Jamaica about the impact of border closures. Indeed,
the closure of the border does complicate significantly
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It also complicates
police rotations. At this stage, I do not think it has yet
directly affected the operations of the police. But I
think it affects them indirectly, in the sense that
increased economic hardship in Kosovo can certainly
only play into the hands of those extremists who do not
want Kosovo to return to normalcy.
More broadly, the representative of Singapore
raised the issue of the impact of the events in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on our whole
strategy in Kosovo. At this stage, I would just say that
this is a reminder that there will not be any lasting
solution in the Balkans that does not address the
regional dimension. That is true at the political level
because the principles that are established in one place
have validity in other places; we always have to take
into consideration the implications of what is decided
in one situation for other situations. That is true also in
the very practical sense that we know that organized

24

crime does not recognize borders or boundaries: there
have been links between organized crime and extremist
activities. Some kind of regional approach — in police
work, for instance — is certainly warranted.
As far as the role of the United Nations is
concerned vis-à-vis the situation in the former
Yugoslav
Republic
of
Macedonia,
other
organizations — the European Union, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) — have taken a leading role. The United
Nations has a supportive role to play and, as the
Secretary-General mentioned in the letter just cited by
the representative of Macedonia, we stand ready to
give our full support and to share whatever expertise
we have to help in the follow-up to what is now being
done by NATO in operation Essential Harvest. It is
clear that that operation sends a strong political signal.
It is also achieving, we hope, very practical results. But
beyond the political signal that is being sent, there will
certainly be a need for monitoring. There will be a
need for a return to normalcy. That requires time, and
we stand ready to give our support in any way that is
asked of us.
The representative of Colombia asked about the
registration process outside of Kosovo. I would like to
emphasize that much has been done to facilitate out-ofKosovo registration and voting. Agreements have been
reached with the International Organization for
Migration and with the OSCE, and between the OSCE
and the relevant authorities in Serbia and Montenegro,
which have allowed for the opening of registration
centres in both Serbia and Montenegro, primarily in
those areas where the displaced are concentrated. As
was noted by the representative of Yugoslavia, we
would like those practical measures to yield more
results. We still hope that they will, and that more
people will take advantage of the facility to register.
That is a political message that is being emphasized in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. There have been
articles in the press. There have been radio spots to
spread the word that the possibility to register exists,
and that those who can register should make good use
of that possibility. Additionally, to ensure the
transparency of the process, representatives of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
allowed to be present during the data-inputting process
in both Pristina and in Vienna to make sure that
everything is done in the most adequate way.

S/PV.4359

A question was also raised by the representative
of Colombia on detention facilities. As I mentioned in
my briefing, progress is already being made with the
so-called quick-build detention facility and with the
refurbishment of the larger facility of the Dubrava
prison. But it is clear that with the adoption of new
regulations, the legal ground upon which individuals
can be charged and detained will become broader and
there will probably be a need for greater detention
capacities. We are confident that with the strengthening
of the justice and police pillar, the issue of having
adequate detention facilities in Kosovo will be
addressed.

commander of the KPC to suspend immediately a KPC
member who is suspected of committing an offence.
That was the case, for example, following the issuing
of the United States executive order at the end of June.
If after that immediate suspension, the investigation
confirms the suspicion, the KPC member will receive a
dismissal order and will leave the KPC. I would
mention in that respect that besides yesterday’s case,
three other KPC members were dismissed — not
suspended: dismissed — in August. Others have been
suspended, and we are waiting for the conclusion of
those investigations to see whether they will be
dismissed.

The last question you raised, Mr. President, was
with respect to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). I
would like to mention here that UNMIK recently
adopted a KPC disciplinary code, and also that it relies
on cooperation with KFOR for reports on acts by KPC
members that would constitute criminal or serious civil
offences. Whenever evidence is found, the UNMIKKFOR Joint Executive Committee will direct the

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his clarifications and additional
explanations. There are no more speakers on the list.
The Security Council has thus completed the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

25
