"Toe Council intends to continue its work on the
Secretary-General's report as indicated in thi. President's
statement of29 October 1992."

the intemational financial institutions, other components
of the United Nations system and Member States, and to
report to the Security Council as early as possible.

THE QUESTION OF SOUTH AFRICA341

Decisions

and Mr. Manguezi Zitha under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

At its 3095th meeting, on 15 July 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Barbados, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Germany, Indonesia, Lesotho,
Malaysia, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Senegal,
South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, the
United Republic ofTanzania, Zaire and Zambia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled: "Toe
question of South Africa: letter dated 2 July 1992 from the
Chargé d'affaires a.i. ofthe Permanent Mission ofMadagascar
to the United N ations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/24232)".63

Resolution 765 (1992)

or 16 July 1992
The Security Council,
Recalüng its resolutions 392 (1976) of 19 June 1976, 473
(1980) of 13 June 1980, 554 (1984) of 17 August 1984 and 556
(1984) of 23 October 1984,
Gravely concerned by the escalating violence in South
Africa, which is causing a heavy loss of human life and by its
consequences for the peaceful negotiations aimed at creating a
democratic, non-racial and united South Africa,

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation, under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, to the Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid.

Concemed that the continuation of this situation would
seriously jeopardize peace and security in the region,

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Zimbabwe, 342 to extend an
invitation to Mr. Salim A. Salim, Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, under rule 39 ofthe provisional
rules of procedure.

Recallingthe Declaration on Apartheid and itsDes-tructive
Consequences in Southem Africa 346 adopted by consensus by
the General Assembly at its sixteenth special session, on 14
December 1989, which called for negotiations in South Africa
to take place in a climate free of violence,

At the same meeting, the Council further decided, at the
request of the representative of Zimbabwe contained in two
Ietters343 to extend invitations to Mr. Oarence Makwetu and
Mr. Nelson Mandela under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Emphasizing the responsibility of the South African
authorities to take ali necessary measures to stop the violence
immediately and protect the life and property of ali South
Africans,

At the same meeting, the Council decided, at the request
ofthe representative ofSouth Africa,344 to extend invitations to
Mr. Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, Mr. Lucas M. Mangope, Mr.
Oupa J. Gqozo, Mr. J. N. Reddy, Mr. E. Joosab, Mr. Kenneth
M. Andrew and Mr. E.E. Ngobeni under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Concemed at the break in the negotiating process and
determined to help the people of South Africa in their legitimate struggle for a non-racial, democratic society,

At its 3096th meeting, on 16 July 1992, the Council invited
the representatives of Greece, the Islamic Republic oflran and
ltaly to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

l. Condemns the escalating violence in South Africa and
in particular the massacre at Boipatong township on 17 June
1992, as well as subsequent incidents ofviolence, including the
shooting of unarmed protesters;

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request ofthe representative oflndia, 345 to extend invitations to
Mr. Bantu Holomisa, Mr. Essop Pahad, Mr. Philip Mahlangu

2. Strongly urges the South African authorities to take
immediate measures to bring an effective end to the ongoing
violence and to bring those responsible to justice;

Emphasizing a/so the need for all parties to cooperate in
combating violence and to exercise restraint,

104

3. Calls upon ali the parties to cooperate in combating
violence and to ensure the effective implementation of the
N ational Peaee Accord; 347

report of the Secretary-General on the question of South Africa
(S/24389)". 63

4. Invites the Secretary-General to appoint, as a matter
of urgency, a Special Representative for South Africa in order
to recommend, after, inter alia, discussion with the parties,
measures which would assist in bringing an effective end to the
violence and in creating conditions for negotiations leading
towards a peaeeful transition to a democratic, non-racial and
united South Africa, and to submit a report to the Security
Council as early as possible;

Resolution 772 (1992)
of 17 Augulll 1992

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 765 (1992) of 16 July 1992,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
7 August 1992 on the question of South Africa,350

5. Urges ali parties to cooperate with the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General in carrying out bis mandate,
and to remove the obstacles to the resumption of negotiations;

Determined to help the people of South Africa in their
legitimate struggle for a non-racial, democratic society,

6. Underlines, in this regard, the importanee of ali parties
cooperating in the resumption of the negotiating process as
speedily as possible;

Cognizantofthe expectations ofthe people ofSouth Africa
that the United Nations will assist with regard to the removal
of ali obstacles to the resumption ofthe process of negotiations,

7. Urges the intemational community to maintain the
existing measures imposed by the Council for the purpose of
bringing an early end to apartheid in South Africa;

Bearing in mind the areas of coneem relevant to the
question ofviolenee in South Africa, including the issues ofthe
hostels, dangerous weapons, the role of the security forces and
other armed formations, the investigation and prosecution of
criminal conduct, mass demonstrations and the conduct of
political parties,

8. Decides to remain seized of the matter until a democratic, non-racial and united South Africa is established.
Adopted unanimously at the 3()1)6th
meeting.

Also bearing in mind the need to strengthen and reinforee
the indigenous mechanisms set up under the National Peaee
Accord, 347 so as to enhance their capacity in the building of
peace, both in the present and in the future,

Decisions

Determined to assist the people of South Africa to end
violence, the continuation ofwhich would seriously jeopardize
peace and security in the region,

In a letter dated 17 July 1992,348 addressed to the President

ofthe Security Council for the attention ofthe members ofthe
Council, the Secretary-General referred to paragraph 4 of
resolution 765 (1992) of 16 July 1992 by which the Council had
invited him to appoint, as matter of urgency, a Special Representative for South Africa in order to recommend after, ínter
alía, discussion with the parties, measures which would assist in
bringing an effective end to the violenee and in creating
conditions fornegotiations leading towards a peaceful transition
to a democratic, non-racial and united South Africa, and to
submit a report to the Security Council as early as possible. The
Secretary-General informed the Council that having completed
the necessary consultations, he intended to appoint Mr. Cyrus
Vanee as Special Representative for South Africa.

Underlining, in this regard, the importanee of ali parties
cooperating in the resumption of the negotiating process as
speedily as possible,
l. Welcomes with appreciation the report ofthe SecretaryGeneral of 7 August 1992 on the question of South Africa;350

2. Expresses its appreciation to all relevant parties in
South Africa for the cooperation they extended to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South Africa;

In a letter dated 20 July 1992, 349 the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

3. Calls upon the South African Govemment and ali
parties in South Africa to implement urgently the relevant
recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

"1 have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 17 July 1992348 coneerning the appointment of Mr.
Cyrus Vanee as your Special Representative for South
Africa has been brought to the attention of the members
of the Council. They welcome your decision."

4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to deploy, as a
matter of urgency, United Nations observers in South Africa,
in such a manner and in such numbers as he determines
necessary to address effectively the areas of coneem noted in
bis report, in coordination with the structures set up under the
National Peace Accord; 347

At its 3107th meeting, on 17 August 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled "Toe question of South Africa:
105
