Ill
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DU BUREAU
104 (S-1 ). Audition de I'Agence iuive pour
la Palestine

104 (S-1 ). Hearing for the Jewish Agency
for Palestine

L'Assemblee generale

The General Assembly
Resolves:
1. That the First Committee grant a hearing
to the Jewish Agency for Palestine on the question before the Committee;
2. To send to that same Committee for its
decision those other communications of a similar
character from the Palestinian population which
have been received by the special session of the
General Assembly or may later be submitted
to it.
Seventy-fifth plenary meeting,
5 May 1947.

Decide:
1. Que la Premiere Commission entendra
l' Agence juive pour la Palestine sur la question
soumise a l' examen de la Commission;
2. De remettre a la decision de ladite Commission toutes autres communications de meme
nature emanant de la population de Palestine,
deja re~ues par l' ~mblee generale au cours
de la presente ses&on extraordinaire, ou qui
pourraient, par la suite, lui etre presentees.
Soixante-quin;:,ieme seance pleniere,
le 5 mai 1947.

105 (S-1>. Hearing for the Arab Higher
Committee
The General Assembly
Affirms:
That the decision of the First Committee to
grant a hearing to the Arab Higher Committee
gives a correct interpretation of the Assembly's
intention.
Seventy-sixth plenary meeting,
7 May 1947.

105 (S-1 ). Audition du Haut Comite arabe
L' Assemblee generale

Affirme:
Que la decision de la Premierc Commission
donnant au Haut Comite arabe !'occasion de sc
faire entendre interprete fidelement !'intention
de l' Assemblee.
Soixante-sei;:,ieme seance pleniere,
le 7 mai 1947.

IV
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA PREMIERE COMMISSION
106 (S-1 ). Special Committee on Palestine
Whereas the General Assembly of the United
Nations has been called into special session for
the purpose of constituting and instructing a
special committee to prepare for consideration
at the next regular session of the Assembly a
report on the question of Palestine,

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. A Special Committee be created for the
above-mentioned purpose consisting of the representatives of Australia, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Guatemala, India, Iran, Netherlands,
Peru, Sweden, Uruguay and Yugoslavia;

2. The Special Committee shall have the
widest powers to ascertain and record facts, fl.Ild
to investigate all questions and issues relevant to
the problem of Palestine;
3. The Special Committee shall determine its
own procedure;

106 (S-1>. Commission speciale pour la
Palestine
Considerant que l' Asscmblee generale des
Nations Unies a ete convoquee en session
extraordinaire afin de proceder a la constitution
et a la definition du mandat d'unc commission
speciale chargee de preparer et de soumettrc
a l'examen de la prochainc se~on ordinaire de
l' Assemblee generale un rapport sur la question
de la Palestine,
L' Assemblee generale
Decide ce qui suit:
1. Une Commission spcciale est creee a cct
effet; elle est composee des represcntants de
l' Australic, du Canada, de la Tchecoslovaquic,
du Guatemala, de l'Inde, de l'lran, des PaysBas, du Perou, de la Suede, de !'Uruguay et de
la Yougoslavie;
2. La Commission speciale disposera des pouvoirs les plus etendu§_ en vue de s'assurer des
faits et de les enregistrer, ainsi que d'cnqueter
sur toutes les questions et tous Jes problemcs
relatifs a la question palestinienne;
3. La Commi~ion speciale fix.era sa proprc
procedure;
6

4. The Special Committee shall conduct investigations in Palestine and wherever it may
deem useful, receive and examine written or
oral testimony, whichever it may consider appropriate in each case, from the mandatory Power,
from representatives of the population of Palestine, from Governments and from such organizations and individuals as it may deem necessary;
5. The Special Committee shall give most
careful consideration to the religious interests in
Palestine of Islam, Judaism and Christianity;
6. The Special Committee shall prepare a report to the General Assembly and shall submit
such proposals as it may consider appropriate
for the solution of the problem of Palestine;
7. The Special Committee's report shall be
communicated to the Secretary-General not later
than 1 September 194 7, in order that it may be
circulated to the Members of the United Nations
in time for consideration by the second regular
session of the General Assembly;

4. La Commission speciale procedera a des
enquetes en Palestine et dans tous les endroits
ou elle le jugera utile, recevra et examinera les
temoignages, ecrits OU oraux, selon qu'elle le
jugera convenable clans chaque cas, emanant de
la Puissance mandataire, des representants de
la population de la Palestine, de Gouvernements
et de toutes autres organisations et personnes,
si elle le juge necessaire;
5. La Commission spedale examinera avec
le plus grand soin les interets religieux de l'islam,
du judaisme et de la chretiente en Palestine;
6. La_ Commission speciale preparera un rapport a l' Assemblee generale et soumettra les propositions qu'elle considfrera appropriees a la
solution du probleme palestinien;
7. Le rapport de la Commission speciale sera
communique au Secretaire general au plus tard
le 1er septembre 194 7, afin qu'on puisse le
distribuer aux Membres des Nations Unies a
temps pour qu'il soit examine lors de la deuxieme
session ordinaire de l' Assemblee generale;

The General Assembly
B. Requests the Secretary-General to enter
into suitable arrangements with the proper authorities of any State in whose territory the
Special Committee may wish to sit or to travel,
to provide neGessary facilities, and to assign
appropriate staff to the Special Committee;
9. Authorizes the Secretary-General to reimburse travel and subsistence expenses of a representative and an alternate representative from
each Government represented on the Special
Committee on such basis and in such form as he
may determine most appropriate in the circumstances.
Seventy-ninth plenary meeting,
15 May 1947.

L'Assemblee generale
8. Invite le Secretaire general a prendre les
dispositions necessaires pour demander aux autorites competentes de tous les Etats ou la Commission speciale desirera sieger OU voyager de
mettre a sa disposition Jes facilites necessaires et
le personnel approprie;
9. Autorise le Secretaire general a rembourser
les frais de voyage et de subsistance d'un representant et d'un suppleant pour chaque Gouvernement reprcsente a la Commission speciale
sur la base et de la maniere qu'il jugera les plus
appropriees clans la circonstance.

107 (5-1 ). Threat or use of force

107 (S-1). Recours
la force ou
la
menace
L'Assemblee generate,
En attendant qu'elle statue sur le rapport de
la Commission speciale pour la Palestine, invite
tous les Gouvernements et tous Ies peuples, et
particulierement les habitants de la Palestine, a
s'abstenir du recours a la force ou a la menace,
ainsi qu'a toute forme d'action qui serait de
nature a creer une atmosphere pouvant compromettre une solution rapide de la question de
Palestine.
Soixante-dix-neuvieme seance pleniere,
le 15 mai 1947.

The Genera/, Assembly
Calls upon all Governments and peoples, and
particularly upon the inhabitants of Palestine, to
refrain, pendin~ action by the General Assembly
on the report of the Special Committee on Palestine, from the threat or use of force or any other
action which might create an atmosphere prejudicial to an early settlement of the question of
Palestine.
Seventy-ninth plenary meeting,
15 May 1947.

Soixante-dix-neuvieme seance pleniere,
15 mai 1947.

a

7

a

A/310 - May 1973 - 200
