A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/102
26 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 150
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/53/631)]
53/102.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fiftieth session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fiftieth session,1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development of international law and its
codification as a means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,2
Emphasizing also the role of the International Law Commission in the fulfilment of the objectives of the
United Nations Decade of International Law,
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including
topics that might be submitted to the International Law Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the
Sixth Committee and the Commission further to enhance their contribution to the progressive development of
international law and its codification,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (A/53/10
and Corr.1).
2

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

99-76231

/...

A/RES/53/102
Page 2

Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which, given their new or renewed
interest for the international community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Stressing the usefulness of structuring the debate on the report of the International Law Commission in the
Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main
topics dealt with in the report,
Wishing to enhance further the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a body of governmental
representatives and the International Law Commission as a body of independent legal experts, with a view to
improving the dialogue between the two organs,
Noting the holding of a split session of the International Law Commission in 1998,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fiftieth session,1 and
expresses its appreciation to the Commission for the work accomplished at that session, in particular the
completion of the first reading of the draft articles on the prevention part of the topic “International liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law”;
2. Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of
having their views on all the specific issues identified in chapter III of its report, and invites them to submit
comments and observations in writing by 1 January 2000 on the draft articles on international liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law (prevention of transboundary
damage from hazardous activities);
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments and observations of Governments, whether in
writing or expressed orally in debates in the General Assembly, the International Law Commission should
continue its work on the topics in its current programme;
4. Welcomes the valuable work done by the International Law Commission on the topic “International
liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law”, and requests the
Commission, while continuing its work on prevention, to examine other issues arising out of the topic, taking into
account comments made by Governments, either in writing or in the Sixth Committee, and to submit its
recommendations on the future work to be done on these issues to the Sixth Committee;
5. Invites Governments to submit the most relevant national legislation, decisions of domestic courts and
State practice relevant to diplomatic protection in order to assist the International Law Commission in its future
work on the topic “Diplomatic protection”;
6. Takes note of the consideration by the International Law Commission of its long-term programme of
work, 3 and encourages the Commission to proceed with the selection of new topics for its next quinquennium;

3

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum
(A/53/10 and Corr.1), chap. X, sect. C.
/...

A/RES/53/102
Page 3

7. Welcomes with appreciation the steps taken by the International Law Commission in relation to its
internal matters, as contained in paragraphs 543 and 544 of its report, and encourages it to continue enhancing
its efficiency and productivity, taking into consideration the discussion held by the General Assembly at its fiftythird session;
8. Endorses the decision by the International Law Commission on the duration of its session in 1999, as
presented in paragraph 562 of its report;
9. Takes note of paragraphs 562 and 563 of the report of the International Law Commission regarding
the holding of split sessions as of 2000, requests the Commission to examine the advantages and disadvantages
of such split sessions, and decides to return to this matter at its fifty-fourth session;
10. Stresses the desirability of enhancing dialogue between the International Law Commission and the
Sixth Committee, and in this context requests the Commission to submit any recommendations to that effect;
11. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special attention to indicating in its
annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on which expressions of views by Governments, either in the
Sixth Committee or in written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
12. Also requests the International Law Commission to continue the implementation of article 16,
paragraph (e), and article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between
the Commission and other bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such
cooperation, and invites the Commission to provide the Sixth Committee with updated information in this regard
at the fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly;
13. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts concerned with international
law may assist Governments in considering whether to make comments and observations on drafts submitted by
the International Law Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
14. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the role of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal
Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the summary records and other documentation of the International
Law Commission;
15. Takes note of the inclusion of information about the work of the International Law Commission in its
Web site;4
16. Once again expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be held in conjunction with the sessions
of the International Law Commission and that an increasing number of participants from developing countries
will be given the opportunity to attend those seminars, appeals to States that can do so to make the voluntary
contributions that are urgently needed for the holding of the seminars, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the seminars with adequate services, including interpretation, as required;

4

The Internet address is as follows: http://www.un.org/law/ilc/index.htm.
/...

A/RES/53/102
Page 4

17. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the fifty-third session of the General Assembly, together
with such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral statements, and to prepare
and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following established practice;
18. Notes with satisfaction the fiftieth anniversary of the International Law Commission, which was
fittingly commemorated by a seminar held at Geneva on 21 and 22 April 1998 and by other events;
19. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law Commission at the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly commence on 25 October 1999.
83rd plenary meeting
8 December 1998
