242

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization 38 and of the Working Group
on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, 39
Taking note also of the progress made in the Special
Committee and in the Working Group in the elaboration of
the draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement of
international disputes,
Taking into account the opinions expressed during the
examination at its thirty-sixth session of the question of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
l. Calls again upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the principle that States shall settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security and justice are
not endangered;
2. Considers that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for
States and that, to this end, the efforts for examining and
further developing the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes between States and the means of consolidating its
full observance by all States in their international relations
should be continued;
3. Considers also that the elaboration, as soon as possible, of a declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful settlement of international disputes is likely to enhance
the observance of the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes and to contribute to the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations in preventing conflicts and settling
them peacefully;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization to finalize the draft Manila declaration on
the peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view
to its consideration and adoption by the General Assembly,
and to submit it to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
5. Refers to the Special Committee the report of its
Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, as
well as the views expressed at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly on the contents of the declaration;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/111.

Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses

The Gereral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/139 of 19 December 1978
relating to the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its thirtieth session, 40 in particular section
II of the resolution,
Recalling also its resolution 35/161 of 15 December 1980,
entitled "Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses",
Reaffirming its appreciation of the high quality of the
work done by the International Law Commission in elaborating a series of draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,

Bearing in mind the importance of facilitating international trade and development of economic co-operation
among all States on the basis of equality, mutual advantage
and non-discrimination in the establishment of the new
international economic order,
Having considered the item entitled ''Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses", including the report of the Secretary-General 41 and the analytical
compilation of comments and observations from Governments, organs of the United Nations which have competence
in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations, 42 submitted pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of
General Assembly resolution 35/161,
Taking note of the comments and observations submitted,
in particular those relating to outstanding issues,
Aware of the fact that more replies from States and interested intergovernmental agencies are needed,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States, relevant organs of the United
Nations, such as the regional commissions and the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, as well
as interested intergovernmental organizations, to submit or
bring up to date, not later than 30 June 1983, any written
comments and observations which they deem appropriate
on chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth session, in particular on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses
adopted by the International Law Commission;
(b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on which
the International Law Commission was unable to take a
decision;
and also requests States to comment on the recommendation
of the International Law Commission that those draft articles
should be recommended to Member States with a view to
the conclusion of a convention on the subject;
2. Decides to consider the substance of the draft articles
on most-favoured-nation clauses, together with any amendments thereto, at its thirty-eighth session with a view to
taking a decision thereon;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled •'Consideration of the
draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses" and to consider it as a matter of priority.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/112.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making process

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important
primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration of
multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive development of international law and its codification, forms
an important part of the work of the United Nations and of
the international community in general,
Recalling its resolution 35/ 162 of 15 December 1980, in
which it invited Governments and international organizations to submit their observations on the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session, 43 as well as their comments on any other
aspect of the subject.

38

lbid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/36/33).
A/C.6/36/L.19.
40
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. JO (A/33/IO).
39

41
A/36/145.
" A/36/146.
" A/35/312 and Corr. I.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Aware of the heavy burden which active involvement in
the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Convinced that the most rational use should be made of
the finite resources available for the elaboration of multilateral treaties,
Taking into account statements made at the current session during the debate on this item in the Sixth Committee, 44
I. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth43 and
thirty-sixth45 sessions, including the replies and observations made by Governments and international organizations
on the review of the multilateral treaty-making process;46
2. Decides, in the light of statements made on this item
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly, to establish at the thirty-seventh session a working group of the
Sixth Committee;
(a) To consider the questions raised in annex I of the
report of the Secretary-General to the General Assei:nbly at
its thirty-sixth session45 and any other relevant matenal submitted by Governments and international organizations;
(b) To assess the methods of multilateral treaty-making
used in the United Nations and in conferences convened
under its auspices to determine whether the current methods
of multilateral treaty-making are as efficient, economical
and effective as they could be to meet the needs of the
Member States;
(c) To make recommendations on the basis of the abovementioned assessment;
3. Invites Governments and international organizations
to submit by 30 June 1982 their observations on the reports
submitted by the Secretary-General, taking into account the
specific questions contained in annex I of the report submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session,
as well as their comments on any other aspect of the subject,
as they consider desirable;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report containing the observations and comments received pursuant to
paragraph 3 above;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare documentation containing the material and information listed
in annex II of the report of the Secretary-General to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, in the form of
a provisional version of a volume in the Legislative Series,
as well as a topical analysis of the observations and replies
received, in time for use by the working group referred to
in paragraph 2 above;
6. Funher requests the Secretary-General to prepare
and publish as soon as possible new editions of the Handbook of Final Clauses41 and the Summary of the Practice
of the Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral
Agreements, 48 taking into account relevant new developments and practices in that respect;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Review of the
multilateral treaty-making process''.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Sixth
Committee, 54th-57th, 63rd and 64th meetings; and ibid., Sixth Committee,
Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
., N36/553.
""N36/553/Add. I and 2.
•1

STILEG/6.
.. STILEG/7.

36/113.

243

United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in respect of State Property, Archives
and Debts

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter II of the repo~ of t~e lnt~rnational Law Commission on the work of its th1rty-th1rd
session49 which contains final draft articles and commentaries on succession of States in respect of State property,
archives and debts,
Noting that the International Law Commission at its first
session in 1949 listed succession of States and Governments
among the topics of international law selected for codification, that at its fourteenth session in 1962, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 1686 (XVI) of 18 December
1961, it included the topic on its priority list and that at its
fifteenth session in 1963 the Commission endorsed the objective of preparing draft articles on the topic,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1765 (XVII) of 20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November 1963, 2045
(XX) of 8 December 1965, 2 I 67 (XXI) of 5 December
1966, 2272 (XXII) of 1 December 1967, 2400 (XXIII) of
11 December 1968 and 250 l (XXIV) of 12 November 1969,
the General Assembly recommended that the International
Law Commission should continue the work of codification
and progressive development of succession of States a~d
Governments, taking into account the views expressed m
the General Assembly and the comments submitted by Governments with appropriate reference to the views of States
which have achieved independence since the Second World
War,
Recalling further that, by its resolution 3496 (XXX) of
15 December 1975, the General Assembly decided to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries to consider the International Law Commission's draft articles on succession
of States in respect of treaties and to embody the results of
its work in an international convention and such other instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Noting also that the Vienna Convention on Succession
of States in respect of Treaties 50 was adopted on 23 August
1978,
Noting further that, subsequent to the adoption of General
Assembly resolutions 2634 (XXV) of 12 November 1970,
2780 (XXVI) of 3 December 1971, 2926 (XXVII) of 28
November 1972, 3071 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
3315 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3495 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, 31/97 of 15 December 1976 and 32/151
of 19 December 1977, the International Law Commission,
pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 33/139 of 19
December 1978, 34/141 of 17 December 1979 and 35/163
of 15 December 1980, completed at its thirty-third session
its draft articles on succession of States in respect of State
property, archives and debts, 51
Recalling that, as stated in paragraph 86 of the report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its thirtythird session, the Commission decided to recommend that
the General Assembly should convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries to study the Commission's draft
articles on succession of States in respect of State property,
archives and debts and to conclude a convention on the
subject,

49
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. JO (N36/IO and Corr.I).
,o Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in Respect of Treaties, vol. III. Documents of the Conference (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.Y.10), p. 185.
" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Sup·
plement No. JO (N36110 and Corr. I), chap. II, sect. D .
