1522nd

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Tuesday, 23 May 1967,
at 3 p.m.

Official Records
FIFTH SPECIAL SESSION

deliberations by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space and by the First Committee. However,
the need for and desirability of postponement of this
Conference by approximately one year was brought up
at the first meeting in February of this year of the
panel of experts, which was set up by General As­
sembly resolution 2221 (XXI) to discharge certain
necessary tasks in connexion with the preparation
and conduct of the Conference.

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 9:
Question of the postponement to 1968 of the
United Nations Conference on the Explora­
tion and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space . . . .

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the fifth
special session of the General Assembly
(concluded):
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee. ...

9

Agenda item 7:
Question of South West Africa (continued) ...

13

Adjournment of the session.

13

NEW YORK

5. The panel of experts, after careful deliberation
under the Chairmanship of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai,
recommended to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space that it consider the suggestion that
the postponement of the Conference by a period of
one year might allow for a better preparation of the
Conference.
6. The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
considered the recommendation of the panel of experts
at its meeting on 13 February 1967, and unanimously
agreed to recommend to the General Assembly the
postponement of the United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by
approximately one year.

President: M r . A b d u l R a h m a n P A Z H W A K
(Afghanistan).
AGENDA ITEM 9
Question of the postponement to 1968 of the United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space

7. Now, the General Assembly has to take a decision
on the postponement of the Conference to 1968. My
delegation would commend to the General Assembly
the acceptance of this unanimous decision of the Com­
mittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the
approval of the draft resolution, which has been tabled
by my delegation, together with twenty-two other
delegations, to postpone the United Nations Con­
ference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space from the planned date of September 1967 to
14-27 August 1968.

1. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now consider
agenda item 9, entitled "Question of the postponement
to 1968 of the United Nations Conference on the Ex­
ploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space". In this
connexion a draft resolution has been submitted by
twenty-three Members [A/L.518 and Add.1-2], and the
Secretary-General has prepared a note on financial
implications [A/6645]. I give the floor to the repre­
sentative of India, who wishes to introduce the draft
resolution.

8. My delegation wouldurge the participants, particu­
larly the countries which by virtue of their experience,
have most to contribute to the deliberations of the
Conference, to take the postponement of the proposed
Conference in terms of the additional time available
to them for fuller and better participation in the
Conference. We also hope that this postponement will
provide an opportunity for better preparation for a
conference of such great importance and magnitude,
thereby improving the results of the Conference for all
participants. We would, therefore, request all Member
States to redouble their efforts and start preparing for
the Conference in right earnest to ensure the maximum
benefit to the participating countries.

2. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): I should like, first
of all, to express on behalf of my delegation our sin­
cere sympathies to the United States and Soviet
delegations on the accidents which involved the deaths
of outstanding and brave astronauts. Those astronauts
sacrificed their lives in their pioneering activities so
that humanity might benefit from the new discoveries
made in outer space.
3. My delegation has the honour to move draft reso­
lution A/L.518 and Add.1-2 on the question of the
postponement of the United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
The resolution would have the General Assembly
decide that the Conference should now be held in
Vienna from 14 to 27 August 1968, dates which are
convenient to the host country.

9. The Conference would examine the practical bene­
fits to be derived from space research and explora­
tion on the basis of technical and scientific achieve­
ments and the extent to which non-space countries,
especially the developing countries, may enjoy these
benefits, particularly in terms of education and de­

4. The General Assembly, by resolution 2221 (XXI),
had unanimously decided to hold this Conference in
September 1967. That was the result of extensive

1

A/PV.1522

2

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

velopment, as well as the examination of the opportu­
nities available to non-space Powers for international
co-operation in space activities. It is the view of my
delegation that the proposed Conference will be of use
to all participating countries, irrespective of the size
of their outer space programmes or the effectiveness
of the research conducted by them. History has
demonstrated that the real social and economic fruits
of technology go to those who apply them through
understanding. Therefore, a significant number of
citizens of every developing country must understand
the ways of modern science and of the technology
that flows from it.
10. India, as one of the developing countries deeply
interested in the results of the peaceful exploration
of outer space and in an examination of the opportuni­
ties available to non-space Powers for international
co-operation in space activities, has been looking
forward to participating in the proposed Conference.
The Indian delegation would appeal to all Member
States, in view of the significance and importance
this Conference will have on the development of
science and technology, to participate as effectively
as possible in the proposed Conference.
11. The United Nations has made efforts for meeting
the challenges posed by the great advances made in
this field in a short time, for harmonizing the in­
terests of the countries concerned and also for pro­
viding opportunities to all countries to benefit from
the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space. The
proposed Conference is a notable effort in this direc­
tion by the United Nations. The Conference would be
unique in its history. My delegation is confident that
the developing countries are looking forward to the
tremendous opportunities the Conference would afford
them.
12. Mr. ADAMS (United States of America): The
United States was a co-sponsor of the draft resolution
setting the dates for the United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. We
see this conference as an opportunity—one opportunity
among many, but a very important one—for the coun­
tries with major space programmes to share some of
their experience with other nations. The United States
proposes just that. We plan to share our knowledge,
and to make a contribution commensurate with our
experience. We have already given much thought to
this conference, with emphasis on the benefits which
the developing countries may expect from the rapid
development of space technology,
13. If we are able to hold to a firm date for this
conference, and continue from today with energetic
preparations for it, the outer space conference should
be one of the most successful the United Nations has
ever sponsored. Through this conference, we will be
able to work to give concrete effect to Article 1 of
the outer space Treaty [resolution 2222 (XXI)], which
provides that: "The exploration and use of outer
space ... shall be carried out for the benefit and in
the interests of all countries".
14. Neither inertia nor political problems must be
allowed to hamper this conference. Allow me to put on
record again something of the history of the planning
for this event.

15. When a 1967 space conference was first proposed
in 1964,y the United States had two reservations. We
recalled the history of a similar event which had been
planned for the early sixties, but which was never held.
And second, we recalled that a great many space con­
ferences and symposia are already being held by the
various organs of international scientific and engineer­
ing communities. Many of these conferences enjoythe
support of United Nations agencies. We saw no need
for the United Nations to provide a forum which would
only duplicate what already is being done.
16. I have spelled out these reservations so that it
will be clear why they were overcome when the United
States delegation to the conference working group saw
the subject matter desired by the developing nations
and the non-space Powers. While where is no need for
another scientific meeting, there is indeed justifica­
tion for a conference focused on practical benefits
and co-operation. Although meetings on this subject
are not unknown, only the United Nations could assure
the interest and the broad participation necessary to
give the conference results wide circulation in the
developing countries. Our reservation as to the use­
fulness of a conference vanished when practical bene­
fits and co-operation emerged as its themes.
17. There have been inordinate delays and political
problems involved in the conference planning, but this
is a problem we are prepared to accept, up to a point,
in order to achieve something genuinely valuable. And
I wish to emphasize that the United States believes
that it can make a significant contribution to this
conference.
18. Although the space conference will not take place
until August 1968, the development of space tech­
nology has not been slowed. Indeed, it accelerates.
Each new launching strengthens man's knowledge and
capabilities. We are pleased by the large number of
nations participating in the development of space
technology and equipping themselves to utilize its
benefits. We welcome wider and more effective
participation.
Mr. Solomon (Trinidadand Tobago), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
19. We are building on a recent but firmly established
base of experience in discussing the practical benefits
of space. Probably the most advanced progress has
been achieved in the field of satellite communications.
The experimentation of many nations contributed to the
testing of these satellites. A global communications
system now exists. Four operational satellites give
us a communications link which spans both the
Atlantic and the Pacific.
20. But communications satellites are still in their
infancy. We are working to assure the development
of the technology needed for better communication.
The space conference will provide a useful oppor­
tunity for reporting on the state of the art and on
future prospects.
21. Weather satellites have also moved from ex­
perimental to operational assignments. Research
continues on special sensors and cameras, even while
JL/ See Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session,
Annexes, annex No« 10, document A/5785, para. 13, G,

1522nd meeting — 23 May 1967
working satellites are in orbit. In 1966, the United
States launched one research and three operational
weather satellites. Two more satellites were orbited
in 1967 to collect and relay meteorological data to
earth.
22. The United States has invited weather observers
throughout the world to equip themselves with the
automatic picture transmission sets we developed
to receive the pictures of cloud cover transmitted
by these satellites. More than thirty countries, in­
cluding Canada, Chile, Hungary, Poland, Kenya,
Pakistan, India, Australia and Japan, have acquired
or constructed these inexpensive and easily as­
sembled sets.
23. At its conference last month, the World Meteoro­
logical Organization approved the first phase of the
world weather watch, in which meteorological satel­
lites and automatic picture transmission sets will be
used in a world-wide weather-forecasting network.
We expect that these receiving sets will become
standard equipment in all countries within the next
few years.
24. Automatic picture transmission sets can also
be used to receive weather information transmitted
from one country to another via satellite. Stations on
the Pacific shores of Asia, Australia, and North
America now participate in a weather communications
experiment using the first of a series of five applica­
tions technology satellites launched by the United
States. Processed weather data—including charts,
tabulations, and satellite photographs—pass from a
central broadcasting point to all receiving stations
located within the satellite's area of coverage.
25. The better weather forecasts made possible by
space technology have an immense value to - all
nations, developed or developing. Advance warning of
natural disasters is one important example. And be­
cause of the importance of agriculture to their
economies, this new technology should be of particular
value to the developing countries.
26. The value of satellites for more precise mapping
of the feat ^es of the earth has already been demon­
strated. GlOS-I, the United States satellite orbited
in November 1965, serves more than twenty stations
located around the world. PAGEOS, launched almost
a year ago, is being used to develop a unified global
geodetic control reference system. Twenty-one coun­
tries participate in this study.
27. The increasing volume of air and marine traffic
and the prospective development of supersonic air­
craft has added new pressure on our present means
of navigation and of communication between ships,
planes, and ground control stations.
28. The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space is forming a working group to undertake a spe­
cial study of the need, feasibility, and implementation
of a navigation-services satellite system. Studies of
this question within our own Government lead us to
believe we can contribute significantly to the work of
this group.
29. The United States is also working to determine
if instruments on space craft can survey the natural
resources of our earth more cheaply and more easily

3

than surveys on the ground or by aircraft. Using air­
craft, we are experimenting with equipment and tech­
niques over selected sites in the United States. While
this work is still in its early stages, we expect that
satellites will eventually be used for such practical
applications as finding and measuring geological re­
sources, locating fishing grounds, surveying fresh
water supplies, and controlling sedimentation and
pollution of harbours and rivers. These resourcesurvey techniques suggest important contributions
to man's ability to cope with his environment and to
use the bounty of the earth for all mankind. The con­
tinuing development of space programmes and of
operational systems to put technology to practical
use has led to growing interest in the education and
training needed to share in the benefits of this
technology.
30. The United States has often reported to the United
Nations on the extensive opportunities for practical
education and training offered to scientists and tech­
nicians from other lands by our National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. As part of joint inter­
national projects, almost 400 scientists and techni­
cians from nineteen countries and from the European
Space Research Organisation have been trained at
NASA centres in payload engineering, radar, meteor­
ology and launch-range operations. In our view, this is
the best sort of training. It is related to specific
projects and gives the nationals of co-operating coun­
tries an opportunity to "learn by doing" in support
of objectives defined by their own countries. But there
is also a place for more general training, and last
year alone 115 scientists from twenty-eight countries
carried out post-doctoral research programmes at
NASA centres. In addition, fifty-three NASA inter­
national fellows from abroad studied at American
universities during 1966 under the co-sponsorship
of their national space agencies.
31. We also conduct extensive programmes in space
education within our own country. We believe it is
important for teachers, students and the public to
understand space science and its related technologies.
These programmes include teacher-education insti­
tutes, adult education and a programme of instruc­
tional materials for elementary and secondary school
courses in space-related subjects.
32. We look forward to the United Nations space
conference as an opportunity to share our experience
in space education with others. The practical benefits
of space depend upon education. It is not necessary for
all nations to invest in the extremely expensive tech­
nology required to develop satellites for weather ob­
servation, navigation, communications, resource sur­
veys or other purposes. Nor is it necessary for each
nation to expend its own resources on the launch facili­
ties to put those satellites into orbit. And in many
cases the equipment needed by each nation to receive
satellite information, such as our automatic picture
transmission set to receive weather data, will cost
very little and can be easily obtained.
33. But world-wide use of space technology will also
require people in every country with the specialized
training to determine what information their countries
need—and then to put this information to use. For
example, after we receive picture of cloud cover from

4

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

a satellite, a meteorologist must translate the picture
into a forecast. Technicians must determine the ef­
fects of the weather outlook on water supplies, on
construction projects, perhaps on the timing of the
local harvest. The men and women who do this work
need not be experts in electronics or inertial guid­
ance. But they will need practical training and back­
ground in their fields. We hope that the space con­
ference will define the opportunities which are ahead—
and help the people of our earth to realize those
opportunities.
34. The second theme of the United Nations space and
conference is international co-operation in the explor­
ation of space. We in the United States take special
pride in what we have done to promote international
co-operation in the peaceful uses of space. Well over
half of the Members of this Assembly have joined
with us in some form of mutually rewarding co­
operation. Joint projects have ranged from groundbased studies with NASA satellites to actual pro­
grammes of space flight.
35. I have already mentioned several projects in
which other countries have joined with us in the prac­
tical uses of satellites. In addition, we have co­
operated with a number of countries in joint projects
of space exploration.
36. Just last month Italy, using a booster contributed
by the United States, launched the San Marco research
satellite into orbit from a platform at sea off the
coast of Kenya. On 5 May, NASA launched the third
in a series of United Kingdom satellites. This brings
to eight the number of satellites launched success­
fully in co-operative international projects. Within
the next ten days, we expect to launch the first of a
series of satellites for the European Space Research
Organization.
37. Co-operation in space research, moreover, is
not limited to countries with the resources to engage
in relatively expensive satellite projects. Nineteen
countries have co-operated with us in launching almost
300 sounding rockets, largely for such practical pur­
poses as the study of local ionspheric and meteoro­
logical conditions. One of the most exciting and signi­
ficant developments in this field is the Inter-American
Experimental Meteorological Rocket Network. This
network, which at present includes Argentina, Brazil,
and the United States, began active operations in 1966
with fifty-three meteorological rocket launchings.
38. The United States also regularly invites members
of the international scientific community to prepare
scientific experiments for installation on United States
satellites. Eighteen foreign experiments have thusfar
been selected for orbital flights, and another thirteen
are under consideration. In addition, we have accepted
proposals from twenty-seven foreign scientists for
more than thirty experiments on the lunar materials
which will be brought back by returning astronauts.
39. I have attempted to give our views on the impor­
tance of the United Nations space conference. My re­
marks should make clear why we have joined in cosponsoring the pending resolution, which will set a
firm date for this conference. We believe that genuine
international co-operation opens the way to a full
realization of the potential of space exploration. It

enables all who are willing to play an active role—
whether large or small—to share in the adventure of
confronting the rigorous challenge of this new environ­
ment. The rewards lie not only in the search for
knowledge and the satisfaction of achievement, but also
in practical benefits for all countries here on earth,
including the developing countries as well as those
already developed.
40. We in the United States have had experience with
both co-operation and the practical benefits of space
technology. We welcome the opportunity to discuss
what we have learned. The new technology is here.
Further benefits are already in prospect. There are
no technical obstacles to co-opeiation. Delay in hold­
ing the conference could only defer full investigation
of those prospects by the countries of the world for
whose benefit the conference was called.
41. We would have preferred that this conference be
held on the originally scheduled date of September
1967. When it became too late to make adequate prepa­
rations for this date, we suggested May 1968. This too
has not worked out, and we have agreed on August 1968,
which appears to be the best date for some other Mem­
bers. Even now, the time for preparation of abstracts
is short. The scientific community must know with
certainty what the target date is, and we must know
that that date will not shift.
42. The United States will contribute to the United
Nations conference on the exploration and peaceful
uses of outer space on the scale that other States
have a right to expect from our major space pro­
gramme. In return, we ask for an under standing which
seems to us eminently fair: that other Members will
remain firmly committed and that the conference will
stay on schedule regardless of other contingencies.
We are prepared to begin work at once. The subject
matter is urgent.
43. Mr. WALDHEIM (Austria): The General Asbly, at its twenty-first session, adopted a number of
constructive recommendations aimed at bringing about
more intensive international co-operation in the field
of outer space. The most important element of the
relevent resolutions lies, in the opinion of my dele­
gation, in the recognition of the fact that the activities
of outer space research and of its practical applica­
tions are essentially of global concern and that they
require to an ever increasing degree the co-operation
of all nations. This belief found its expression in the
unanimous recommendation to hold a United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space.
44. My delegation has in the past repeatedly stressed
the necessity and advantages of broad international
co-operation in the field of outer space. We have on
many occasions expressed our conviction that it would
be in the interest of all countries, and of the non-space
Powers in particular, for knowledge and understanding
of the achievements of space science and technology
to be more widely disseminated and for the applications
of space technology to be actively promoted.
45. My Government is therefore convinced that the
decision taken by the twenty-first session of the
General Assembly to hold a United Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

1522nd meeting — 23 May 1967
represents a decisive step towards fuller and more
extensive co-operation in the field of outer space.
46. That Conference as conceived in resolution 2221
(XXI) has indeed an important task to fulfil. It is to
examine the practical benefits of space programmes
on the basis of scientific and technical achievements
and the opportunities available to non-space Powers
for international co-operation in space activities, thus
ensuring that outer space research and space tech­
nology do not become monopolies of the scientifically
and technically advanced countries.
47. The purpose of the Conference is to further co­
operation in the application of space technology in such
fields as biology, medicine, communications, meteoro­
logy and navigation, and it should give an impetus to
the establishment of programmes for the education and
training of specialists in order to assist the non-space
Powers, and in particular the developing countries, in
the peaceful uses of outer space.
48. These objectives are of particular importance
with regard to the great prospects which are opening
up before mankind in the fields of communications,
meteorology and navigation. There can be no doubt
that the use of satellites for these purposes would
greatly improve intercontinental and transoceanic
communications by telephone and television and offer
hitherto unknown possibilities for data and facsimile
transmission. It would provide the developing coun­
tries with new opportunities to broaden the standard
of education and training, and thus their standard of
living. An improved weather forecast system would be
of interest not only to the highly industrialized coun­
tries having growing problems in the management of
water resources, but in particular to all those coun­
tries with a predominantly agricultural economy. It
has also become obvious that the growing transport
and traffic by sea and air requires improved naviga­
tional methods which would ultimately be in the in­
terest of every one of us.
49. Apart from these practical goals designed to make
all countries benefit from the spin-off of outer space
research and technology, a number of other reasons
exist why mo holding of this Conference is timely and
appropriate.
50. Smaller countries which do not have the human
and material resources for developing an independent
space programme have made, and are still making,
important scientific contributions in the field of outer
space. Those countries, if given an adequate oppor­
tunity, could not only help to advance the theoretical
understanding of the universe and the technological
conquest of outer space, but could, within the frame­
work of organized international co-operation, play a
role commensurate with their interests and capacities.
51. The applications of outer space research, in
particular in the fields of communications, meteoro­
logy and navigation, can be used to the full extent
only if deployed on a world-wide scale. A broad
understanding of those opportunities will undoubtedly
prepare the ground for the elaboration and adoption
of international programmes in those fields.
52. Finally, and this is a factor which should not be
underestimated, broad international co-operation in
outer space research and its manifold practical appli­

5

cations could help to overcome the still existing mis­
trust with regard to the potential applications of outer
space technology and could thus strengthen our com­
mon endeavour to reserve outer space for peaceful
purposes only.
53. The Austrian Government is therefore convinced
that the decision to hold a United Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
will not only be to the benefit of the non-space Powers,
and in particular the developing countries, but ulti­
mately also to the advantage of the space Powers. We
consider that decision as a step in the right direction,
and Austria is proud to act as the host country to this
important conference.
54. In this connexion, I should like to thank all dele­
gations for their support in convening this conference
in the Austrian capital, and I should like to assure
the Members of this Organization that my Government
will not only assume the obligations set out in resolu­
tion 2116 (XX), but in addition will spare no effort in
order to contribute to the success of the Conference.
55. The representative of India, in introducing the
draft resolution contained in document A/L.518 and
Add.1-2, in which a new and definite date is suggested
for the United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, stressed the im­
portance which the non-space Powers, and in particu­
lar the developing countries, attach to this Conference.
I should like to pay a tribute to the delegation of India,
which has already been entrusted with an important
role in the preparation of the Conference, as well as
to the delegation of the United Arab Republic, for their
initiative and constructive efforts in this respect. I
also wish to thank the space Powers—which during the
past months have again achieved remarkable results
in the exploration of outer space, but which also suf­
fered the tragic loss of brave astronauts, whose death
was deeply mourned by the whole international com­
munity—for their spirit of co-operation which enabled
us to submit to this Assembly the concrete proposal
for the Conference contained in document A/L.518
and Add.1-2. As a sponsor of that draft resolution,
my delegation trusts that it will find the unanimous
support of this Assembly.
56. Mr. FEDERENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet Union
was one of the countries which actively supported and
upheld the idea, put forward by the representatives of
several countries in the United Nations Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, of holding, under the
auspices of the United Nations, a large-scale inter­
national conference on the exploration and use of outer
space.
57. In February of this year, at the meeting of the
panel of experts for the preparation of that Conference,
the Soviet experts and those of some other countries
put forward a number of considerations in the light of
which it would be advisable to postpone the Conference,
originally scheduled for September 1967, by approxi­
mately one year. The Committee on Outer Space de­
cided that the exact date of the Conference would be
agreed upon in consultation with Member States and
the Austrian Government, which had kindly agreed to
the holding of the Conference at Vienna, taking into

6

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

consideration the interest of the developing countries
in other international conferences during 1968.
58. As a result of the consultations, in the course of
which the various considerations put forward by ex­
perts and the views expressed by the members of the
United Nations Committee on Outer Space were taken
into account, it was decided that the Conference on
Outer Space should be held from 14to27 August 1968.
59. We hope that the General Assembly, in considering
the question of the international Conference on Outer
Space, will take all the circumstances into account,
particularly the interests of scientific and technical
progress in the field of exploration and exploitation of
outer space for the benefit of all peoples. The position
of the Soviet Union on this matter isbased on the con­
viction that the first international Conference on Outer
Space will be of great importance. Soviet scholars and
scientific organizations therefore hope that the Con­
ference will be very carefully prepared and will be of
the utmost value to all the participants.
60. We feel sure that the United Nations Conference
on Outer Space will lead to further progress in the ex­
ploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes
and will be of great scientific and practical benefit to
all its participants. We take the view, as we did when
we spoke in favour of holding the Conference, that the
latter will constitute a step forward in the expansion
of the programme of outer space research throughout
the world and will contribute to the further develop­
ment of international co-operation.
61. In our view, the Conference will enable scientists
of many countries to take stock of an important stage
of outer space research, to exchange experiences
gained in the field of outer space science and tech­
nology from the beginning of the space age, and to
consider the prospects for future work in that field.
62. The Conference will be of undeniable importance
for the developing countries, which can gain both
scientific knowledge and practical benefit from it and
thus accelerate their economic, scientific and technical
development on the basis of scientific and technical
advances in the field of space research.
63. We believe that the Conference will make possible
an objective analysis and evaluation of the opportuni­
ties for associating the developing countries to a
greater extent with existing space research pro­
grammes and for enabling those countries to take
advantage of space technology for meteorological,
communications, navigational and other practical
purposes.
64. The Soviet Union regards its successes in the
study of outer space not as something accomplished
by the Soviet people alone but as the achievement of
all mankind, and it is prepared to share the scientific
knowledge so obtained with the scientists and experts
of other countries, especially those of the developing
States, which are rightly showing interest in the pos­
sibilities of the practical application of scientific and
technical achievements in space to their own countries'
requirements in economic and cultural development.
65. Adoption by the General Assembly of the recom­
mendation made by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (A/6639, annex) that a new date

should be fixed for the conference on outer space will
give the scientists and experts of all the participating
countries the time needed to make the required prepa­
rations, bearing in mind the taks which are to be dealt
with in that important scientific and technical form.
66. The scientific organizations of the Soviet Union,
in their desire to further the progress of science in
space research, will, of course, take the necessary
steps to ensure the success of the United Nations
Conference on Outer Space.
67. In conclusion, may I convey to the distinguished
representative of India our appreciation of the con­
dolences which he expressed in this forum in con­
nexion with the death of the Soviet cosmonaut Komarov,
the pilot of the space craft Soyuz.
68. Mr. SCHUURMANS (Belgium) (translated from
French): The astounding feats of the astronauts who
are endeavouring to conquer outer space and the planets
must inevitably bring to mind the valour and daring of
those explorers of four centuries ago whose exploits
were immortalized by Jose-Maria de Heredia in one
of his most famous sonnets.
69. Like their illustrious predecessors, the mariners
of outer space intend to push back ever further the
boundaries of the universe accessible to man. But this
ambitious enterprise, too, has unfortunately claimed
some lives. Four names are already inscribed on the
roll of martyrs of this new science; they come from
the two nations which have thus far made decisive
contributions to its progress.
70. The heroic deaths of these men plunge us all into
a common grief, for beyond their national allegiance
they belong to the entire human race, to which a treaty
recently concluded in this very hall [resolution 2222
(XXI), Annex] has assigned outer space, as a pledge
of its peaceful development for the good of all the
peoples of the earth.
71. In expressing from this rostrum our deep emo­
tion at their tragic death, we can also say that there
is no better tribute that we could pay to their memory
than to undertake to continue the task to which they
dedicated themselves and for which they willingly laid
down their young lives.
72. Thus far, our attention has been focused on the
achievements in space which we have been privileged
to witness, and on the no less magnificent plans which
are to be carried out in the years to come.
73. The placing in orbit of earth satellites has be­
come almost a routine operation; sending a man into
outer space is no longer considered a sensational
event; the manoeuvre known as the "space rendezvous"
has been carried out a number of times; and after
veritable flying laboratories have been landed on the
moon, there is no doubt in anyone's mind that before
long the first human beings will walk on that planet.
74. In the meantime, other aspects have been ne­
glected and almost overlooked. I refer to the concrete
results and practical advantages of the experiments,
without which these costly undertakings, whose number
increases daily, would have no point or justification.
75. In an article which appeared in the March 1966
issue of the magazine Industrie entitled "Belgium and

1522nd meeting — 23 May 1967
Space Research", a compatriot of mine, Mr. Joseph
Heymans, Director of Belgospace, drew attention to
this. Speaking of earth satellites, he wrote:
"Why have 500 of them been launched, why are
several now being launched every week? It is be­
cause, as has happened with the motor car, the air­
plane and television, once a new instrument has been
invented and perfected we find it increa singly useful."
76. Everyone will agree that the exploitation of outer
space should not remain the monopoly of those great
Powers which thus far alone possess the resources
essential for such gigantic programmes.
77. The United Nations itself has been concerned to
discover the'means whereby the whole of mankind can
benefit from the uses to which these prodigious ex­
periments may be put: indeed, that was the theme
chosen for the "Conference which the United Nations
had decided, by a unanimous vote of the General As­
sembly [resolution 2221 (XXI)], to hold in September
1967 and which the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space has now recommended to be postponed
for a year or so.
78. When the matter was discussed in the Committee,
the Belgian delegation expressed its great regret at
that procedure. Today, we are happy that an agreement
seems to have been reached to set 14 August 1968 as
the opening date of this important international meet­
ing. We believe that we now have the assurance that
this new date will be adhered to.
79. The Belgian delegation would be pleased if this
additional delay were put to good use in making care­
ful preparations for the Conference and in particular
in seeing to it that the recommendations regarding its
terms of reference, its objectives, its provisional
agenda and its organization are scrupulously carried
out.
80. It is in this spirit and for these reasons that we
support the draft resolution now before the Assembly
[A/L.518 and Add.l and 2],
81. Mr. McKEOWN (Australia): Over the past year
or two the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, through its working group of the whole, has
been actively engaged in preparing an outline for an
international conference on the Exploration and Peace­
ful Uses of Outer Space. Notwithstanding some diffi­
culties which have been encountered, not least in ad­
hering to a final date for the holding of the conference,
my delegation is pleased that these efforts have borne
fruit and that we are preparing for a conference which
should make a constructive contribution to inter­
national understanding of the prospects and possibili­
ties offered to many countries by the discoveries of
the last decade of space research. It is in this spirit
of support for an initiative which offers to bring bene­
fits to many countries that the Australian delegation
has been happy to join as a sponsor of the draft reso­
lution in document A/L.518 and Add.1-2.
82. We are all aware that the United Nations con­
ference programme over the next year or two is a
very full one and delegations are entitled to ask what
useful purpose will be served by yet another inter­
national conference, particularly one devoted to a field
in which a comparatively small number of countries is

7

able to play a really leading role. Indeed, it was ques­
tions of this sort which occupied the attention of my
delegation when the proposal for the conference was
first considered in the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space. However, as the planning for the
conference proceeded and as the working group of the
Committee, in which we were happy to participate, was
able to formulate proposals covering the objectives to
be attained by the conference, we have been persuaded
that such a conference would indeed make a contribu­
tion to international understanding of the actual and
potential benefits to many countries resulting from
the space age. It was to this aspect that the report of
the working group on the international space conference
directed itself, when it recommended that the ob­
jectives of the conference should be:
(1) An examination of the practical benefits to be de­
rived from space researchand exploration on the basis
of technical and scientific achievements and the extent
to which non-space Powers, especially the developing
countries, may enjoy these benefits, particularly in
terms of education and development;
(2) An examination of the opportunities available to
non-space Powers for international co-operation and
space activities, taking into account the extent to
which the United Nations may play a role.
83. My delegation believes that it is precisely this
emphasis on the extent to which the middle and the
smaller countries, those that are not major space
Powers and indeed may have no space programmes
of their own, that should be the keynote of the pro­
posed conference. With so many scientific specializa­
tions in space science and with the help of the volumi­
nous literature on the subject, we do not believe that a
large-scale conference devoted to publicizing the ex­
ploits of the space age is what is now required. Indeed,
if the public opinion in all countries has been focused
on any single subject over the last decade, it has been
on the achievements and, in the last few months, re­
grettably also on the hazards of the exploration of
space.
84. Yet we do not need a United Nations conference
to tell us about the achievements of the space age.
What is perhaps not quite so well publicized is the
extent to which space technology has applications in
so many directions of practical concern not only to
the major space Powers but also to the smaller
countries. The enormous progress made in the tech­
nology of communications satellites and the participa­
tion of the majority of the countries represented in
this General Assembly in the benefits of this revolu­
tion in communications is but one example of that
progress.
85. As a country which cannot itself hope to mount a
large independent space programme, Australia is
fully alive to the need for smaller countries to seek,
through international co-operative arrangements, to
play a role in this rapidly expanding field of technology.
Australia has sought through a variety of bilateral
and multilateral programmes to share in these de­
velopments. Applications of existing knowledge are
already proving of potential benefit to countries in
fields as diverse as whether forecasting and communi­
cations. In the future, one may venture to predict that
no country, whatever its stage of development, will

8

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

be able to ignore or will wish to ignore the benefits
which advances pioneered by space technology will
be able to bring to their peoples. A conference on
outer space which would bring together eminent people
from many countries and from many disciplines asso­
ciated with space technology may well help to advance
this process.
86. My delegation regrets that it was not possible for
all delegations to adhere to the original date in 1967 for
the holding of the conference on outer space. For our
part, we would have been as happy to accept the original
date as we are now happy to accept a postponement to
a date in 1968 which should ensure that all countries
will have an adequate opportunity to prepare for the
conference.
87. We welcome the fact that the draft resolution in
document A/L.518 and Add.1-2 reaffirms the terms of
reference and objectives of the conference which were
already laid down in resolution 2221 (XXI). We are
pleased that the Austrian Government has been able to
make facilities available in Vienna for the new date.
We hope that, following our adoption of the new date
for the conference, the panel of experts will renew
its work with renewed vigour. In pursuing its work,
we hope that the panel may now be assured that the
date we have set for the conference will be firmly ad­
hered to. We are confident that, with the good will of
all, we shall have a successful conference which will
further the objectives of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space in acting as a focus for inter­
national co-operation in a field which symbolizes the
spirit of our age.
88. Mr. COX (Canada): In participating in the deliber­
ations of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space and its working group of the whole, it has been
Canada's belief that the United Nations conference on
the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space will
fill a certain void. The accomplishments of the major
space Powers have inspired all Member States, but
these extraterrestrial achievements have often seemed
somewhat remote from the practical problems and
struggles of the developing world. By emphasizing the
practical benefits of space programmes in meeting
the immediate needs of the developing countries, the
conference should serve to remove this sense of re­
moteness and to make abundantly clear to non-space
Powers the opportunities available in applying the
technological advances of space research to the press­
ing problems of development. In the anticipation that
the postponement of the conference until August of
1968 will enable these objectives to be realized more
effectively, Canada is pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution [A/L.518 and Add.1-2] which has just been
introduced by the representative of India.
89. In the perspective of past technological break­
throughs, it is obvious that the practical applications
of space research will contribute to the transforma­
tion of our earthbound lives in the years to come. The
wide spectrum of fields covered in the agenda of the
conference, approved unanimously in resolution 2221
(XXI), provides an indication of the future impact of
space research in solving practical problems.
90. Addressing the Canadian Association of Broad­
casters on 19 April of this year, the Prime Minister
of Canada dealt with one application of space research

which is included in the agenda of the conference,
namely, the recent development of communications
satellites. Mr. Pearson said:
"It is my Government's belief that the economic,
cultural, social, scientific and historical impact of
the introduction of communication by satellite will
be as important in our next century as the develop­
ment of railways, air travel, broadcasting and tele­
phone communication has been over the last one
hundred years. The telegraph cable, the radio, the
telephone cable and the microwave relay each enor­
mously extended the range of men's views and
thought. The cost of sending a message using these
technicalities, however, always varies more or less
proportionately with the distance travelled. In com­
munications through the use of satellites, the cost
is likely to be almost independent of distance."
91. From Mr. Pearson's remarks, it is clear that the
practical application of space research in the area of
communications satellites has potential benefits for all
Member States; and, viewed in a broader context, it is
not too presumptuous to hope that it may provide the
diplomat with a more responsive instrument. This is
one more important field to be discussed at the con­
ference to which my Government attaches importance.
92. The success of the conference will depend to a
large extent on the efforts of the scientists of partici­
pating States who will be called upon to prepare mean­
ingful abstracts and papers. I pledge the support of my
Government to the Secretary-General, to the panel of
experts charged with the preparation of the conference,
and to the host State of Austria in co-operating to
produce a conference which will entirely fulfil the
expectations of Member States.
93. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I wish to avail myself of this
opportunity to make a few brief remarks concerning
the United Nations conference on the exploration and
peaceful uses of outer space.
94. since the conference is an important United
Nations enterprise, my delegation, together with many
other delegations which took part in the work of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Sapce,
feels that it should be placed firmly on the solid basis
on which all the activities of the Organization must be
grounded; that is, on a deep spirit of co-operation and
with the common purpose of attaining practical results.
95. We do not lack experience in this regard in the
organization of scientific conferences. I am convinced
that among other examples, the recent United Nations
Conference on the Applications of Science and Tech­
nology could set a good pattern for a Vienna conference
on outer space. The Committee has already shown a
very promising orientation in this direction, and I wish,
therefore, to express the appreciation of my delegation
for the work done and the recommendations put forward
by the Committee to the effect that the main objectives
of the conference should be: (a) the study of practical
benefits to be derived from space exploration and of the
extent to which non-space Powers, particularly the
developing countries, may receive these benefits;
(b) the study of the opportunities available to nonspace Powers for international co-operation in space
activities.

1522nd meeting — 23 May 1967
96. Let me stress that, in our opinion, the conference
should endeavour to produce results useful both for the
countries already carrying out programmes of re­
search in outer space and for the developing countries
with little or no experience in the field. On the basis of
these guidelines and aiming fundamentally at an ef­
fective development of international co-operation and
mutual exchange of information, the complex work of
organization and the expenses the United Nations will
incur for the conference will be, in our view, fully
justified.
97. I wish to assure all my fellow representatives
that my country has followed and will continue to
follow with keen interest and a spirit of co-operation
the organization by the United Nations of the Vienna
conference. Italy has begun in recent years to develop
a certain amount of activity, both national and inter­
national, in outer space. The Italian National Council
of Scientific Research is at present conducting numer­
ous experiments, chiefly in astrophysics, and the
Italian Government is devoting increasing amounts to
the financing of programmes for launching and oper­
ating satellites and for expanding the Italian space
research centres and the Italian space telecommuni­
cation stations. A comprehensive report on the Italian
space activities and achievements has recently been
transmitted to the Secretariat of the United Nations.
98. With your permission, I should like to single out,
among those achievements, the San Marco launching
of a satellite by an Italian crew, from a platform at
sea off the coast of Kenya. That, I believe, is a good
example of international co-operation in thisnewfield
of human venture and fully consistent with the provi­
sions of the space treaty. It was in fact a first experi­
ment in the launching of satellites carried out in the
framework of the activities of an international body—
the European Space Vehicle Launcher Development
Organisation [ELDO], It was, from the technical point
of view, an interesting experiment on account of its
novelty, as the satellites were launched from an arti­
ficial platform built on the sea, and it was a very
promising example of co-operation with a developing
country, inasmuch as the scientific laboratories placed
on the platform could avail themselves of the services
and facilities of the Mombasa relay station. I believe
that this is the best evidence we can give of the spirit
and purpose guiding us in our outer space operations.
Let me add that my country is also taking part in the
carrying out of space programmes established by
international agencies such as ELDO, the European
Space Research Organisation, the International Tele­
communications Satellite Consortium and the Con­
ference europeennes telecommunications par satel­
lites. I hope that these short references will indicate
that Italy is greatly interested in the practical work
of the United Nations Conference and is willing to
contribute fully to its success.
99. Allow me to conclude with a comment on the date
suggested for the Conference. My delegation, which
has from the beginning been in favour of a longer term,
believes that the time now afforded will meet the main
requirements. In fact the nature and purposes of the
conference and the complexity of the subjects that will
be dealt with require very careful preparation of the
conference and a clear and effective definition of its

9

programme. The time that the Assembly will give the
Secretariat will, I think, not fall short of the need. We
are confident that, with the effective co-operation of
Austria, the host country, the services responsible for
the organization of the conference will now be better
enabled to cope with all the problems it entails. The
experience of other international agencies in this field
is precious and significant: we know that some of the
most important international scientific associations
customarily plan their conferences and establish the
programmes relating to them years in advance. Let
us hope that the fourteen months ahead of us will prove
very fruitful for the preparation of the conference.
100. For the reasons I have mentioned, my delegation
is very happy to associate itself with the other spon­
sors of draft resolution A/L.518 and Add.1-2 relating
to the United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which has been
unanimously recommended by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. We are grateful to the
representative of India for introducing this draft reso­
lution, and we hope that the response of the General
Assembly will be equally unanimous.
101. The PRESIDENT: That concludes the list of
speakers on the draft resolution. The Assembly will
now proceed to take a decision. In the absence of a re­
quest for a vote, may I take it that the Assembly adopts
the draft resolution contained in document A/L.518
and Add.1-2?
The draft resolution was adopted without objection.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the fifth special
session of the General Assembly (concluded):*
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee

102. The PRESIDENT: A revised text of the report of
the Credentials Committee, containing a rewording of
paragraphs 15 and 20, has just been circulated [A/6655/
Rev.l], I request Mr. Waldheim of Austria, Chairman
of the Credentials Committee, to present the report of
that Committee to the Assembly.
103. Mr. WALDHEIM (Austria): The report of the
Credentials Committee to the fifth special session of
the General Assembly, contained in the document to
which you have just referred, Mr. President, contains
a number of elements on which I should like to make
some brief comments.
104. The delegations to this Assembly will have noted
that the credentials submitted by a number of delega­
tions are not in conformity with rule 27 of the rules of
procedure. The credentials of some representatives,
although emanating from the proper authorities, were
submitted in the form of cablegrams and thus did not
conform with the established practice, according to
which they should be drawn up in the form of written
documents bearing the signatures of the issuing
authorities.
105. In the report of the Credentials Committee it
is further stated that, in a number of instances, the
names of representatives were communicated to the
Secretary-General in notes verbales or letters ema­
*Resumed from the 1502nd meeting.

10

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

nating from the permanent representatives or the
permanent missions to the United Nations, but no
credentials for those representatives had yet been
submitted to the Secretary-General.
106. In the circumstances the Credentials Committee
decided, as an exceptional measure, pending the re­
ceipt of the proper credentials, to accept instead the
communications received by the Secretary-General
and to request the latter to inform the Credentials
Committee of the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly of the status of those credentials. The
Credentials Committee has, in addition, stressed the
necessity for all Member States to comply with the
requirements of rule 27 of the rules of procedure,
which provides inter alia that credentials of repre­
sentatives shall be submitted to the Secretary-General
if possible not less than one week before the date
fixed for the opening of the session.
107. The delegations will have further noted that
some members of the Credentials Committee ex­
pressed reservations as to the validity of certain
credentials. These reservations have been recorded
in the report of the Credentials Committee. In this
connexion, I wish to inform the Assembly—and this
has already been done by the President—that the re­
vised text of the report has just been distributed. The
revision relates to some drafting changes which in no
way alter the substance of the report or the recom­
mendations of the Credentials Committee.
108. Finally, the Committee adopted the resolution
contained in document A/6655/Rev.l, para. 23. As a
result of this resolution, the fifth special session of the
General Assembly has before it the recommendation
to approve the report of the Credentials Committee.
109. Mr. PLAKA (Albania) (translated from French):
The Credentials Committee, which has just submitted
its report [A/6655/Rev.1] to the present session of
the General Assembly for approval, has once again
accepted the credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek
clique, which represents no one, thus leaving this
band of renegades in occupancy of the seat of the
People's Republic of China in the United Nations. The
Albanian delegation strongly protests against this
illegal decision, which is a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter and of the General Assem­
bly's rules of procedure, and which is but one more
of the pernicious acts of the United States imperialists
that do serious harm to the prestige and authority of
the United Nations.
110. The Chinese people, by their triumphant revo­
lution eighteen years ago, proclaimed the People's
Republic of China, which is one and indivisible. The
fact that the Chinese province of Taiwan is at present
under the military occupation of the United States of
America in no way changes its legal status as unde­
niably an integral part of the People's Republic of
China and does not justify the absurd attempt to have
700 million Chinese represented here by a clique of
traitors who have been driven from the country and
have sold out to the United States imperialists. The
Government of the People's Republic of China is the
only lawful Government of China and is alone entitled
to represent the Chinese people in international rela­
tions, in the United Nations and in all international
organizations. The puppet clique of Chiang Kai-shek

has therefore no place in the United Nations and must
be expelled.
111. People's China, which has made remarkable
progress in both internal and external affairs, is
resolutely defending the sacred struggle of the world's
peoples for national and social liberation and is waging
an unremitting fight against colonialism and im­
perialism, headed by United States imperialism. It is
a great Power, without which no important inter­
national problem can be solved. The denial of the
lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the
United Nations—a direct consequence of the manipula­
tion of the United Nations by the United States—is
harmful only to the Organization, its prestige and its
ability to discharge its duties in promoting inter­
national peace and security, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. We have
emphasized here on many occasions, that as long as
the United States continues to exercise its nefarious
influence on the United Nations, the latter will be
unable to make any contribution to the settlement
of important international problems relating to peace
and the liberation of oppressed peoples and will there­
fore continue to decline until it is no more.
112. For the reasons I have just given, and also for
those we stated at the last session, my delegation will
abstain in the vote on the recommendation of the
Credentials Committee [A/6655/Rev.l, para. 23],
113. Mr. TOMOROWICZ (Poland): The position of
my delegation regarding the report of the Credentials
Committee is as follows. First, in our opinion, the
so-called credentials of the usurpers who claim to
represent China in this Assembly can by no means
be recognized as valid, despite the suggestion in the
report. The prolonged absence of People's China from
our midst not only prevents a settlement of urgent
international problems, but also impairs the interests
and the effectiveness of the United Nations.
114. Secondly, since the racist Government of the
South African Republic represents only a small
minority of its population and maintains the reins of
colonial oppression based on an inhuman policy of
apartheid, the documents presented by the representa­
tives of that country also cannot be recognized.
115. For those reasons, the Polish delegation is un­
able to support the report of the Credentials Commit­
tee [A/6655/Rev.1] and will abstain,
116. Mr. ACHKAR (Guinea) (translatedfrom French):
My delegation is a member of the Credentials Com­
mittee for the fifth special session of the General
Assembly. In that capacity it has vigorously stated
the well-known position of the Republic of Guinea
regarding the two delegations which we consider to
be illegally present here: the delegations of Taiwan
and of South Africa.
117. The first of these does not and cannot represent
the great Chinese people, but rather a regime that
has taken refuge in an island under the protection of
the United States fleet and cannot possibly claim to
have set up any sort of Chinese Government. Conse­
quently, we have entered express reservations regard­
ing its credentials, and we consider that this delegation
is illegal.

1522nd meeting — 23 May 1967
118. As to the representatives of the colonial minority
racist apartheid rfegime in Pretoria, we have likewise
repeated that this delegation represents a minority of
oppressors and certainly not the country which we
know as South Africa. We have entered express reser­
vations with regard to this delegation also.
119. I have therefore come to this rostrum in order
to reiterate our reservations in the strongest possible
terms. We trust that the true representatives of the
countries now represented by usurpers will soon be
joining us.
120. Mr. KUTAKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): The USSR delega­
tion wishes to make the following comments with
regard to the recommendations submitted by the Cre­
dentials Committee to the General Assembly.
121. My delegation, like the delegations of many other
Member States, does not regard as valid the creden­
tials of Chiang Kai-shek's men who have arrogated
to themselves the title of representatives of China in
the United Nations. The credentials they have sub­
mitted do not meet the requirements of rule 27 of the
General Assembly's rules of procedure.
122. The Soviet Union's position on this matter, a
position based on principle, has been stated repeatedly
in the United Nations and all Member States are
familiar with it.
123. We adhere to the principle that only the Govern­
ment of the People's Republic of China can represent
China in the United Nations.
124. For this reason, the USSR delegation submitted
a draft resolution in the Credentials Committee to
the effect that the credentials of persons who style
themselves representatives of the Republic of China
should be deemed invalid.
125. As to the credentials of the representatives of
the Pretoria regime, my delegation fully associates
itself with the reservations made by the representa­
tives of African States in the Credentials Committee
and at the present meeting of the General Assembly.
126. Members of the United Nations are well aware
that the overwhelming majority of the population of the
Republic of South Africa—the true masters of the
country—continue to suffer colonial oppression, racial
discrimination and naked terror at the hands of the
Pretoria authorities.
127. The shameful policy of apartheid, which denies
to the indigenous population all human rights and free­
doms , has been repeatedly condemned by the United
Nations, which has rightly called for an immediate end
to it.
128. However, these appeals have gone unheeded.
Worse still, the South African racists have been ex­
tending their system of colonial oppression to other
peoples, in particular the long-suffering people of
South West Africa, which they continue to oppress in
disregard of United Nations resolutions.
129. As we all know, the refusal of the Pretoria
regime to comply with United Nations resolutions was
the reason for the convening of this special session of
the General Assembly.

11

130. My delegation shares the view expressed by
many States that the Pretoria regime, which tramples
underfoot the fundamental rights of many millions of
the country's population, cannot be said to represent
that population.
131. Since the considerations it put forward were not
taken into account by the Credentials Committee and
were not reflected in its decisions, my delegation is
unable to support the Committee's recommendation
and will abstain in the vote.
132. Mr. ANWARZAI (Afghanistan): The Government
of Afghanistan has always maintained that the only
lawful representative of China is the Government of
the People's Republic of China and that,consequently,
it is the only legitimate party entitled to occupy the
seat of China at the United Nations. Accordingly, any
credentials which come from sources other than the
Government of the People's Republic of China cannot
be recognized by my delegation as being valid. It is
with this reservation that my delegation will vote for
the report of the Credentials Committee [A/6655/
Rev.l],
133. Mr. CHAMMAS (Lebanon): Regarding the report
of the Credentials Committee, my delegation, on behalf
of the Arab States, members of the Arab League, and
pursuant to a decision taken by the Arab League on the
subject, wishes to put on record their reservations,
as well as its own, and to state that we do not recog­
nize the State of Israel, a racist State built on the blood
of and on threats to a gallant people, the Palestine
people.
134. Mr. DIACONESCU (Romania) (translated from
French): Romania's position on the question of the
representation of China in the United Nations has been
stated on more than one occasion in this Assembly.
Like a number of other countries, Romania has proved
time and again that the only Government which is en­
titled to represent China in the United Nations is the
Government of the People's Republic of China, In view
of the fact that the credentials of Chiang Kai-shek's
representatives were not issued by the lawful Govern­
ment which represents the Chinese people, they are
not in accordance with the provisions of rule 27 of
the General Assembly's rules of procedure and should
consequently be regarded as null and void. The
Romanian delegation denies that the credentials pre­
sented to the Secretary-General by an authority which
arbitrarily and illegally claims to represent China in
the United Nations have any validity.
135. My delegation fully shares the reservations ex­
pressed by a number of delegations regarding the
credentials presented by the Pretoria regime.
136. For these reasons my delegation will abstain
in the vote on the Credentials Committee's report
[A/6655/Rev.l] as a whole.
137. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): With reference to the
draft resolution recommended by the Credentials
Committee [A/6655/Rev.l, para. 23], the delegation of
Pakistan wishes to place on record three reservations.
138. First, we do not recognize the credentials pre­
sented by those who style themselves as the repre­
sentatives of China in the United Nations. We maintain
that the Government of the People's Republic of China

12

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

is the only authority entitled to represent the Chinese
people in the United Nations and elsewhere in the world.
139. Secondly, we do not recognize the credentials
presented by the delegation of South Africa, repre­
senting as it does a racist minority regime which has
imposed its rule by force on the majority of the people
in South Africa. Moreover, that regime consistently
violates United Nations resolutions and continues to
foster its inhuman policies in the face of universal
opposition.
140. Thirdly, Pakistan does not recognize the cre­
dentials presented by the representatives of the socalled State of Israel.
141. U MAUNG MAUNG GALE (Burma): For reasons
which have been explained on a number of occasions,
the delegation of Burma would like to reserve its
position in so far as the credentials for the repre­
sentation of China are concerned. With this reserva­
tion, my delegation will vote for the report of the
Credentials Committee [A/6655/Rev.l] which is be­
fore us.
142. Mr. LIU (China): If the representative of Albania
alone had spoken as he did I would have remained
silent, for he is only the mouthpiece of Mao Tse-tung.
But I was somewhat surprised that other delegations
found it necessary to reiterate at this closing of our
session the positions which are already widely
known in respect of the so-called question of China's
representation.
143. I would not for a moment impose on this As­
sembly any lengthy reply to some of the statements
that have been made, I do want to point out that only
five months have passed since the Assembly pro­
nounced itself on this question in a clear and unequivo­
cal manner.
144. In the months that followed, if any lesson is to
be drawn from the turmoil and chaos that have been
taking place throughout the length and breadth of the
Chinese mainland, it is that the Chinese Communist
regime is totally unfit to speak for the Chinese people
in the international community. The only Government
that can truly articulate the wishes and aspirations of
the Chinese people is the Government of the Republic
of China, which my delegation has the honour to
represent.
145. The PRESIDENT:Sincetherearenootherrepresentatives who wish to explain their vote before the
voting, the Assembly will now vote on the draft reso­
lution recommended by the Credentials Committee.
[A/6655/Rev.l, para. 23].
The draft resolution was adopted by 89 votes to
none, with 17 abstentions.
146. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those repre­
sentatives who have asked to speak in explanation of
their vote after the voting.
147. Mr. SHAH (Nepal): Despite the affirmative vote
of my delegation on the report of the Credentials Com­
mittee, I wish to make it clear that my delegation has
a very serious reservation with regard to the creden­
tials of the so-called representatives of China. It is
the view of my delegation that those representatives,
accredited as they are by a group of self-exiled anti-

national elements which manage to maintain an ap­
pearance of a so-called government at the instigation
and with the support of aforeignPower,cannot, in law
and in fact, represent the people of China.
148. The Central People's Government of the People's
Republic of China alone represents the Chinese people,
and that Government alone is entitled to represent those
800 million people in the United Nations and elsewhere.
149. Therefore, I should like the record to show that
our vote in favour of this report does not affect the
position of my delegation as set forth above on the
question of the proper representation of China in the
United Nations.
150. By refusing to restore the legitimate rights of
the People's Republic of China, the General Assembly
has long been taking the shadow for the substance.
By consistently goading the Assembly into this delu­
sion, certain major and interested Powers have been
perpetuating a great disservice to the cause of peace.
That is a great misfortune, and I think that this mis­
fortune assumes a greater proportion in the presentday world situation.
151. Mr. MISHRA (India): I wish to say a few words
to explain our vote, which we recorded a few minutes
ago. Our vote in favour of the adoption of the report
of the Credentials Committee does not derogate from
our well-known position regarding the right of the
People's Republic of China to be represented in the
United Nations.
152. Mr. BOTHA (South Africa): In explaining my
delegation's vote, I do not intend to reply to the state­
ments regarding my Government which were made this
afternoon, except to reject them in their entirety. The
South African delegation has previously recorded its
arguments on the validity of its credentials, and it is
not necessary to repeat them today.
153. The South African delegation voted for the adop­
tion of the report of the Credentials Committee. This
does not, of course, imply concurrence with the views
expressed by individual members of that Committee
as contained in the report.
154. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French):
The delegation of Algeria would like to express some
reservations with regard to the recommendations
which have just been introduced by the Chairman of
the Credentials Committee.
155. First of all, in no case does the Algerian dele­
gation recognize the right of the representative of
Taiwan to represent the lawful Government of the
great People's Republic of China, and considers that
its seat in the United Nations, and in all other inter­
national organizations, continues to be illegally
occupied.
156. Furthermore, no matter whattnerepresentative
of South Africa may say, neither can the fascist
Pretoria regime possibly represent the people of South
Africa, who continue to groan under the yoke laid on
them by their racist exploiters, supported by inter­
national imperialism.
157. Our attitude with regard to the artificially main­
tained pseudo-State known as Israel is well known in

1522nd meeting — 23 May 1967
this Assembly and has been brilliantly set forth on our
behalf by the representative of Lebanon.
158. Mr. EPERVRIER (France) (translated from
French): With reference to the examination of the
Credentials Committee's report, the French delega­
tion wishes to remind the Assembly that, while it did
not object to the adoption of the report, it continues
nevertheless to believe that only the People's Republic
of China is entitled to occupy the seat of China in the
United Nations.

13

163. The PRESIDENT: It is clearly understood that
the matters to which I have referred are the only
matters pending at this special session, and that the
plenary meeting to be held on 6 June will be devoted
exclusively to them.
164. I hope that the Secretary-General and the various
groups involved will succeed by that time in their
efforts to bring to a fruitful result the tasks entrusted
to them by the General Assembly resolution.

Mr. Pazhwak (Afghanistan) resumed the Chair.
Adjournment of the session
AGENDA ITEM 7
Question of South West Africa (continued)

159. The PRESIDENT: There is one matter which
requires a decision of the General Assembly in ac­
cordance with resolution 2248 (S-V) adopted by the
Assembly at its 1518th plenary meeting, on the ques­
tion of South West Africa. Section II, paragraph 1 of
the resolution provides that a United Nations Council
for South West Africa, consisting of eleven Member
States, should be elected during this session. A request
for more time has been made by those Members who
are still engaged in consultations on the question of
the membership of the United Nations Council for South
West Africa, I was informed of this request during my
absence this afternoon from the Assembly Hall, and I
have consulted with the representatives of various
groups from the entire membership. As a result of
these consultations, I shall give the Assembly my im­
pression of the understanding which the membership
has reached on this question.
160. Section II, paragraph 3, of the resolution adopted
by the Assembly provides that
"the Council shall entrust such executive and ad­
ministrative tasks as it deems necessary to a
United Nations Commissioner for South West
Africa,.. , who shall be appointed during this ses­
sion by the General Assembly on the nomination of
the Secretary-General".
161. In view of the situation in the Middle East which
has made it necessary for the Secretary-General to
leave for Cairo at short notice, the Secretary-General
has informed me that he has not been able to under­
take all the consultations he deems necessary prior to
nominating the United Nations Commissioner for South
West Africa. He has requested that he be given until
Tuesday, 6 June, to submit the nomination to the As­
sembly. In those circumstances, and in modification of
the decision taken by the Assembly at its 1517th
plenary meeting regarding the closing of this session,
I propose that, after completing its work today, the
Assembly adjourn until the afternoon of Tuesday,
6 June, when it will take up the election of members
of the United Nations Council for South West Africa
and the appointment of the United Nations Commis­
sioner for South West Africa.
162. As I have already indicated, that is my impres­
sion of the understanding which generally prevails
among the membership of the Assembly. If I am cor­
rect, and if there is no objection, I shall take it that
e Assembly agrees to the proposal.
It was so decided.

165. The PRESIDENT: We have now completed for
the time being the business of this special session of
the General Assembly. This is therefore the appro­
priate moment for me to express in a very few words
my deep sense of gratitude both for the honour and
confidence bestowed on me by the entire membership
and for the unfailing co-operation and understanding
extended to me throughout this session by every one
of our Members.
166. Our agenda, although a short one, has comprised
issues of the greatest complexity and urgency. Indeed,
it is in the nature of a special session to be seized of
problems of such wide concern that the membership
decides it necessary to convene in order to consider
them outside the pattern of the Assembly's regular
annual sessions.
167. I believe it would be true to say that the com­
plexity of the issues we have considered over the past
month has been matched only by the striking degree
of co-operation and the frankness of the exchange of
views which marked the negotiations during this ses­
sion. The measure of agreement which has resulted
from these formal and informal negotiations is the
fruit of extremely intensive and painstaking thought
and discussion. It is very clear, irrespective of the
particular positions, that the General Assembly has
taken a most important decision on the question of
South West Africa, a decision which carries forward
in a deliberate and logical step the decision reached
by the General Assembly at its twenty-first regular
session. I hope that the United Nations Council for
South West Africa, which this Assembly has estab­
lished in order to administer South West Africa until
independence, will fulfil its task—when it is able,
through the co-operation of all Members, to start its
work—in the interests solely of the peoples of South
West Africa. Certainly, there is an obligation placed
upon all Members, irrespective of the particular posi­
tion they may themselves have taken previously, to
implement United Nations resolutions. In this con­
nexion, it is appropriate to recall here the very pro­
found and binding nature of the commitment of this
General Assembly as a whole to the granting of inde­
pendence to colonial peoples and territories.
168. The item on our agenda entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping opera­
tions in all their aspects" has also been the subject of
very intensive negotiation in a spirit of realism and
understanding. That has made it possible for the Spe­
cial Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to pre­
sent the General Assembly with a constructive report
which reflects the achievement of a certain measure

14

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

of progress and holds promise of further advance on
this major issue.
169. It is satisfying to be able to report that, also
on the third item on our agenda, the question of the
postponement to 1968 of the United Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, a
consensus has been reached and a date acceptable to
all Members has been established.
170. 1 trust Members will bear with me if I recall at
this juncture my statement at the beginning of the
twenty-first regular session of the General Assembly
that we cannot expect immediate overnight solutions to
long-standing problems. Yet history proves thatwhile
there are some major problems which time alone can
solve, there are others which should not be allowed
to linger untended for lack of decisiveness or a sense
of urgency. I hope it may be said of this session that
it has sought and found a constructive balance between
a sense of urgency and of history which will enable
the Assembly at its next regular session to make fur­
ther and rapid progress in resolving the issues we have
considered here.
171. 1 am sure that each one of us recognizes that
this session adjourns at a time when the international
situation remains as critical as ever and peace is
gravely imperilled. The situation in Viet-Nam has not
changed in the past weeks, and we see no sign of
improved chances of peace. To this must be added
the very general concern felt by all regarding condi­
tions in the Middle East. Asa world body, the United

Litho in U.N.

Nations cannot remain aloof from matters of peace
and war. This is particularly true of situations in
which the United Nations has been very closely in­
volved and for which it has a direct responsibility.
172. I feel sure that I am expressing the views of all
Members in wishing full success to the peace-keeping
efforts of the United Nations as a body and of the
Secretary-General personally. I am certain that this
General Assembly in its entirety shares the hope that
there will be no further worsening of the situations
threatening peace around the world and that the many
efforts being made to achieve peaceful solutions will
prove successful.
173. On the part of all speakers in our debtates here,
there has been a very notable and, if I may say so, a
very wise and far-sighted restraint in the comments
made on the dangers to peace which are in the fore­
front of all our minds. At a time when calm and
responsible efforts are being made in the hope of
lessening the atmosphere of high tension, it is indeed
wise for everyone within the General Assembly, as
well as elsewhere, to refrain from any word or action
which could possibly aggravate the present situation
and thereby diminish the prospects of a peaceful
solution.
174. In accordance with the decision of the General
Assembly, I declare that the fifth special session is
adjourned until the afternoon of Tuesday, 6 June.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

77005—October 1970-2,300
