General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

132

14 December 1979, reached ahead of schedule the target
of one thousand volunteers in service;
2. Notes the activities of the programme in the fields
of youth and domestic development service;
3. Considers that the programme is a valuable instrument of multilateral technical co-operation in response to
the needs of the developing countries, in particular the least
developed and newly independent countries;
4. Reiterates its appeal to Governments, organizations
and individuals to contribute or to increase their contributions to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Volunteers so as to enable the programme to overcome the
financial constraints affecting it, and requests the Executive
Co-ordinator to explore ways of ensuring increased resources and to make proposals thereon to the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

36/199.

Operational activities for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35156 of 5 December I 980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling further its resolutions 33/201 of 29 January
1979 and 35/81 of 5 December 1980 on a comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development.
Recalling its resolutions 2688 (XXV) of 11 December
1970 on the capacity of the United Nations development
system and 3405 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 on new
dimensions in technical co-operation,
Having noted with deep concern the outcome of the 1981
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, held on 3 and 4 November 1981,
Having examined the annual report for I 981 of the Director-General for Development and International Economic
Co-operation on operational activities for development of
the United Nations system, 164
Reiterating that a substantial part of world resources,
material as well as human, continues to be diverted to armaments with detrimental effect on international security and
on efforts to achieve the new international economic order,
including operational activities for development of the
United Nations system, and calling upon Governments to
take effective measures in the field of real disarmament that
would increase the possibilities of allocation of resources
now being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, especially development of developing countries,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the annual report for
1981 of the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation on operational activities
for development of the United Nations system, and takes
note of the areas identified by the Director-General in which
further progress can be made;
2. Reaffirms that the operational activities for development of the United Nations system should contribute effectively to the implementation of the International
164

A/36/478 and Corr. I. annex

Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, which should provide the framework within
which those activities should be planned and conducted;
3. Expresses its deep concern that over-all voluntary
contributions from Governments and other sources to the
funds and programmes that are included in the United Nations pledging conferences for development activities have
been stagnating and falling short in many cases of targets
which have been set by the relevant intergovernmental bodies, with serious consequences for the organizations concerned with respect to their capacity to maintain the level
of their operational programmes in support of the growing
needs of developing countries for multilateral concessional
assistance through the United Nations system;
4. Strongly reiterates the need for a substantial and real
increase in the flow of resources for operational activities
on an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured basis
and, in this context. urges all countries, particularly those
developed countries whose over-all performance is not commensurate with their capacity, to increase rapidly and substantially their contributions to the system's operational
activities for development:
5. Invites all countries to inform the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session of the steps they have taken or
intend to take in response to the present resolution and other
relevant resolutions of the Assembly, taking into account
targets which have been set by the relevant intergovernmental bodies;
6. Decides to review and appraise on a regular basis the
mobilization of resources for operational activities for development, taking into account targets which have been set
by the relevant intergovernmental bodies and, for this purpose. requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation to include in his annual report to the General Assembly a compilation of information provided by Governments, in accordance with
paragraph 5 above, and other relevant information, together
with his comments and recommendations;
7. Expresses its deep concern at the slow progress towards placing the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system engaged in operational activities for
development on a more stable financial basis and, in this
context, urges all countries that are able to do so to indicate,
while making their pledges, their probable contributions for
a multiyear period, taking into account the need to ensure
increased resources in real terms on an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured basis:
8. Reiterates its invitation to the governing bodies of
the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, as appropriate, ,o consider new and specific
ways and means of mobilizing increased resources for operational activities for development on an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured basis and requests the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation to take into account the outcome of
these considerations in the preparation of his report to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session;
9. Welcomes paragraph 4 of decision 81/16 of 27 June
1981 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, 16 ·' in which the Council urged the
Administrator to reduce the size of the administrative budget
of the Programme, and urges all the governing bodies of
the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system engaged in operational activities for development,
as a general guideline. to seek to minimize the administrative
and overhead costs with a view to increasing the proportion
of resources available to meet the assistance requirements
of developing countries:

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Invites all organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system engaged in operational activities for
development to adopt appropriate measures leading to a
greater use of the capacities of developing countries in local
or regional procurement of material and equipment, in training and in services, in facilitating the increased use of local
contractors, and in the recruitment of training, technical and
managerial personnel, bearing in mind decision 81/28 of 30
June 1981 of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme; 163
11. Requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation to include in his reporc
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session recommendations on specific ways and means of increasing
the participation of developing countries in the execution
of programmes and projects of the operational activities for
development of the United Nations system, bearing in mind
paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of Assembly resolution 35/81;
12. Invites the governing bodies of the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system engaged
in operational activities to take the action requested in paragraphs 8, 9 and 11 of General Assembly resolution 35/81,
and invites the Secretary-General and the heads of those
organs, organizations and bodies to provide information on
the action taken by the governing bodies, and requests the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation to include that information, together
with his own recommendations, in his reports to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth sessions and,
in preparing the recommendations requested in paragraph
18 of that resolution, to take into account the responses
made by the above-mentioned governing bodies and the
comments made thereon by delegations during the thirtysixth session of the Assembly;
13. Welcomes the establishment by the SecretaryGeneral of the consultative process in pursuance of paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 34/213 of 19
December 1979, in which the Assembly called for consultations with Governments, through the resident co-ordinator, and for the participation of all organizations concerned
both at the country level and subsequently through the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination. calls upon the
executive heads of the relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to co-operate fully in
that process, and requests the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation to include
in his annual report information on the outcome of those
consultations;
14. Requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation to provide in his annual report comprehensive statistical information on operational activities for development of the United Nations
system on the same basis as that contained in the annual
report for I 981, and to include separately in his report information pertaining to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Special Economic Assistance Programmes and the Fund of
the United Nations Environment Programme, as well as
information relating to administrative. programme and other
support costs incurred by organizations engaged in operational activities for development.
103rd plenary meeting
/7 December /98/

36/200.

133

nomic Order, 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to
which contains the International Dewelopment Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade, 35/81 of
5 December 1980 on the comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development and 35/83 of 5 December 1980 on the United Nations Development Programme,
Reaffirming the unique and important contribution which
the United Nations Development Programme is making to
the development efforts of developing countries,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
twenty-eighth session 162 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1981/59 of 22 July 1981 on the report of the
Governing Council,
Concerned at the shortfall of voluntary contributions in
relation to the assumed over-all average annual growth of
resources,
Aware that, together with efforts to obtain additional voluntary contributions, steps are being taken to increase further the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the United
Nations Development Programme,
Noting that the Governing Council of the Programme has
decided to retain for the purposes of forward planning for
the third programming cycle, 1982-1986, an assumed overall average annual growth of resources of at least 14 per
cent,
Noting with appreciation the statement made before the
Second Committee on 24 September 1981 by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, 165
Reaffirming the validity of the consensus of 1970, as set
forth in the annex to its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its twenty-eighth session and the decisions
contained therein; 166
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/59;
3. Stresses that the realization of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade requires a renewed
emphasis upon technical co-operation and a significant increase in the resources provided for that purpose;
4. Endors1:s also decision 81/37 of 27 June 198 I of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme 166 on streamlining and rationalizing the work of the
Governing Council;
5. Commends the efforts made by the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme to increase
further the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the Programme, and encourages the Administrator to continue to
intensify those efforts, taking account, inter alia, of the
need to restrain administrative expenditures in order to maximize programme delivery in accordance with paragraph 4
of decision 81/ 16 of 27 June 1981 of the Governing Council
of the Programme; 166
6. Exp,:esses its appreciation to all Governments of both
developed and developing countries which, at the 1981
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities. announced contributions or their intention to contribute to the United Nations Development Programme for
1982. in particular those Governments which have consis-

United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of _a New International Eco-

"'' Official Records of the General Assemhh. Thirtv-suth Session. S,•cond Commirtee. 3rd meeting. para,. 19-24.
'"'' See Official Records o( the Economic and Social Council. /981.
Supplem,·nt No. II I E/1981 !h 1/Rev. 1). annex I
