United Nations

S/PV.6087

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6087th meeting
Thursday, 26 February 2009, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830
(2008) (S/2009/102)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-24991 (E)

*0924991*

S/PV.6087

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008)
(S/2009/102)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/102, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1830 (2008).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of the

2

United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. I warmly
welcome him this morning and give him the floor.
Mr. De Mistura: I would like to thank the
Council for the opportunity to brief it at a crucial point
for Iraq in its empowerment to handle its own affairs.
Over the past few months, the eyes of the international
community have been turned towards a country
immersed in pre-electoral activity as Iraqis prepared to
cast their votes in the first governorate elections in four
years. This undoubtedly has been the most significant
political event of this reporting period.
The end of 2008 witnessed an acceleration of
electoral activities and increased preparedness by the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq, with
all aspects of the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) completely
geared for that period towards the electoral process.
Two months into 2009, Iraq has emerged
sovereign and is rising to expectations. It successfully
went through the first test by delivering the first fully
Iraqi-led and owned elections. On 31 January, as
planned, provincial elections were conducted in 14
governorates, with 42,000 polling stations, with a
striking lack of violence. That marks a remarkable
event in a country that has suffered through so much
conflict in recent years. It is a tribute to the growing
effectiveness of the Iraqi security forces and attests to
the increased stability in the country.
With the Independent High Electoral Commission
in the lead, Iraqis have demonstrated the capacity to
run their own elections in what has been a daunting
logistical and operational undertaking. Just look at the
figures: 7.5 million Iraqis turned out to cast ballots,
and 14,000 candidates, representing 400 political
entities, vied for 440 seats. I am glad to say that there
were 3,900 women among the 14,000 candidates.
These first polls which can have a direct impact
on the day-to-day lives of Iraqis can, in fact, make a
major difference with respect to the new local
representatives, because they are directly accountable
to their own voters: it was an open list. Furthermore,
they sought to rectify a problem we had in the past,
namely, the sectarian imbalance in local councils. This
time there was no boycott whatsoever by any
significant component of the Iraqi populace.
The Independent High Electoral Commission
should be commended for its highly professional

09-24991

S/PV.6087

efforts, both in the effective preparations in the lead-up
to the elections and during their ultimately smooth
conduct. Much should be attributed to the rigorous and
professional field structure in place. Resisting political
pressures, the Commission remained vigilant in
carrying through with the procedures, from polling day
to the announcement of final results three weeks later.

system. They need to prove they are capable of
promoting inclusive political dialogue, striking
compromises and working in coalitions. In this regard,
statements by a number of Iraqi political leaders,
indicating their willingness to play a part in this
process and to allow others to do so, are indeed very
encouraging.

With constant and intensive assistance from
UNAMI, the Iraqi Electoral Commission overcame
every hurdle, every time; met operational timelines;
came out of a rather complicated and contentious
parliamentary debate some time ago over critical
electoral legislation; regulated a complex formula for
the allocation of seats and the representation of
minorities and women; and concluded the adjudication
of formal complaints, of which there have been as
many as 2,000 to date.

Elections have undoubtedly been the flagship of
our mandate during this period, dominating our efforts
in recent months. The year 2009 foresees continued
electoral activities, with several possible electoral
events in the coming months. These could include
elections for the Kurdish National Assembly set for
this summer — where we have already been asked to
be involved — as well as possible sub-district
elections, culminating in the national parliamentary
elections towards the end of this year.

Following the release of provisional results on
5 February, final results were announced on
19 February, based on all valid ballots cast, including
special-needs votes and those of internally displaced
persons and, where appropriate, adjusted for
complaints. We are now looking at the possible final
certification of results, after the short appeals period,
before the second week of March. But we more or less
know where we are. After that the challenge will be the
formation of councils, and then the nomination of
governors.

UNAMI will continue to provide a significant
degree of technical assistance to the Independent High
Electoral Commission, as mandated by the Council and
as requested by the Government and political parties of
Iraq. It will also, as requested, support the
Government’s commitment to holding a census, which
is long overdue. But UNAMI assistance, with the
Council’s approval, will not stop there. It will adjust to
what Iraq requires at the next step of its transition.

While it remains up to Iraqis to interpret the
results of these elections, it is heartening how all this
moved along smoothly, including the fact — which I
must mention again, because it is something
noteworthy — that there were about 110 women among
the 440 new council members nominated.
The elections were recognized as credible and
transparent, both by an impressive domestic
observation effort of 490,000 local, national
observers — almost as many as the Iraqi army — and
413 international monitors from 25 entities,
coordinated by a European Union-sponsored adviser.
These elections should increase the confidence of
Iraqis in their own local institutions. I would like to say
mabrouk — congratulations — to the Iraqi
Ambassador, as we said to the Prime Minister the other
day: this was something that would have been a
challenge in any country.
But much will now depend on the elected leaders.
They need to work within their own selected electoral

09-24991

One of these requirements is, obviously, national
reconciliation. Iraq now needs to embrace this
opportunity, to rise above sectarian interests and to be
open to compromise and consensus. A country cannot
truly attain sovereignty or achieve a lasting peace
unless it instils confidence in its own institutions with
respect to the rule of law and a unifying constitution,
and unless it delivers basic needs. This implies a great
deal of effort, and it is in this next stage that UNAMI is
committed to fully support the Government of Iraq in
this exercise of its own sovereignty and its assumption
of accountability.
A particular concern, of which we are all aware,
remains the lingering potential for tensions between the
Arab and Kurdish sides in Iraq, which has had an
impact on almost every aspect of Iraq’s political life.
This has been the cause of the lack of real progress on
the vital oil law, revenue sharing and constitutional
review, as well of the potential for tensions, such as the
recent clashes in Khanaqin between the armed forces
of the central Government and of the Kurdish region.

3

S/PV.6087

As we work as an honest broker, we try to
promote a spirit of dialogue. UNAMI activities will see
a particular shift after this electoral period and an
emphasis on our initiative on the disputed internal
boundaries and work on Kirkuk, including through the
committee set up under article 23 of the provincial
elections law. That committee is tasked by the Council
of Representatives with finding a power-sharing
formula for the provincial elections in Kirkuk,
assessing property disputes and demographic issues.
Work in these areas, rightly a priority, is viewed
as a means to contributing to lowering these sorts of
tensions, in Kirkuk and elsewhere, and exploring new
solutions for some of these most pressing issues.
During my recent visit to Kirkuk this past December to
engage with the wider community on the ground, I,
frankly, detected a good momentum for Kirkukis to
explore locally generated options regarding the
administrative future of Kirkuk. I truly left encouraged
that Kirkukis have a growing understanding of
kefaya — enough that there is a need now to reach a
compromise acceptable to all communities living there.
Part of my trip was to discuss the work of the
article 23 committee, an important committee created
in connection with electoral law and a very good body
for introducing constructive proposals for finding a
formula for the future of this area. The article 23
committee has been criticized as getting off to a slow
start, so we conveyed to them the expectations and
willingness of the local community to wake up and
move on this, so that the committee could become
more active. We have since contributed to removing
some of the obstacles to its work. On 2 February, my
political deputy facilitated and accompanied the
committee’s first visit to Kirkuk where they finally
went and started working. We provided logistical,
transport, security and organizational support.
We also offered secretariat support and, in fact,
UNAMI has actively served as the de facto secretariat
of the committee. The committee has now begun
meeting, both in Bagdad and in Kirkuk. We have
further offered UNAMI assistance in areas of technical
expertise, and two consultants are just about to be
deployed. Mediation potential will be available in case
of disagreement.
UNAMI has been working in parallel on a
comprehensive review of the so-called disputed areas
in the governorates of Kirkuk, Salahaddin, Diyala and

4

Ninawa, in line with its Security Council mandate and
the consent given last year by the Iraqi leadership.
Members will recall that the first reports came out last
June. We have delayed submission of the remaining 11
reports, as we felt that we did not wish to take any
initiatives in the weeks leading up to the elections. This
was decided in consultation with the Prime Minister.
We remain in consultation with the Iraqi Government
and all concerned parties, to carefully determine the
appropriate timing and process for the finalization of
the whole package of analytical reports on these
internally disputed areas.
We hope and believe that this package of reports
will constitute probably the most in-depth and
comprehensive analysis so far presented on these areas.
They will examine different factors specific to the
areas, including socio-economic indices, the electoral
results of 2005 and 2009, injustices of past regimes,
administrative history, and the post-2003 situation on
the ground including demographics and security
conditions. All of these make up a series of indicators
that will be taken into consideration in these studies
and analysis. But the ultimate responsibility for making
any kind of decisions will continue to lie, first and
foremost, with the Government of Iraq, the parties
represented in the areas concerned, and the Kurdish
regional leadership.
At the same time, the Iraqi leadership should be
encouraged to advance on other fundamental issues on
which we know they are interested in following up.
These are at the core of tensions among the various
communities. These issues include federalism,
revenue-sharing and the sharing of Iraq’s considerable
resources, all within the framework of the
constitutional review. UNAMI is available and ready to
assist the Government in following up on these
matters.
UNAMI will also remain committed to
supporting the establishment of independent bodies,
the most significant development being the legislation
that has been passed providing for the creation of the
Independent Human Rights Commission in Iraq.
As for international partnership, the United
Nations will continue to assist the country in its
standing in the international community through the
International Compact for Iraq, Security Council
mandates and relations with its neighbours.

09-24991

S/PV.6087

On the regional front, recent months have seen
the opening of embassies by Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman,
the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, the Arab League and
Syria. This is a very hopeful sign of the strengthened
engagement with and within the region.
UNAMI will continue its involvement in this area
according to its mandate, including through
confidence-building bilateral initiatives and technical
assistance to a support mechanism for regional
cooperation based in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Iraq. We remain in frequent contact with regional
players and are committed to assisting Iraq’s efforts to
improve relations with its immediate neighbours. One
important example has been the important relationship
with Kuwait. We are hoping to be increasingly
involved in helping on a number of tracks, including,
for example, border maintenance, the question of
missing archives and missing Kuwaitis, as well as
compensation.
Most recently, we have pushed for a training
project to build the capacity of Iraq’s Ministry of
Human Rights in the area of exhumations in order to
address a pending issue, and we are facilitating the
transfer of a certain number of identified tapes from
Iraq to Kuwait, which will be witnessed by my friend
and very active colleague Ambassador Tarasov in the
coming days.
With regard to Iran, we welcome the announced
establishment of a joint committee among Iraq, Iran
and the United Nations to work with the Organization
on demining and drug-trafficking control along the
Iranian border. The committee is a tangible example of
how we can facilitate concrete cooperation with regard
to the border. We hope that it will soon become
operational and eventually link up with the Abadan
committee. We welcome the very constructive progress
being made in Iraq’s relations with Turkey, Jordan and,
recently, Syria.
Iraq continues to make progress towards
economic and social recovery. It needs to be
congratulated — again, mabrouk — on the reforms that
led to the recent cancellation of the Paris Club debt.
This proves that achievement of the benchmarks of the
Compact can yield immediate and positive results. It is
now critical to translate those gains into concrete
improvements in the lives of everyone in Iraq.
As Iraq assumes the full responsibilities of a
sovereign State, its citizens will — like those of

09-24991

countries throughout the world — look to their leaders
to provide better schools, jobs, electricity supplies and
health services. Elections have proved that that is the
platform on which they were overwhelmingly elected.
The Iraqi people will increasingly consider
improvements in those areas as the chief indicators of
recovery and restored trust.
Social services and a market economy must
recover from a quarter-century of hardship and
conflict. For example, nearly one third of Iraq’s young
people are still unemployed. Many Iraqi children still
attend schools with substandard classrooms, and safe
water reaches only 40 per cent of Iraqi homes. There is
a challenge. We know that the Iraqi Government is
determined to meet that challenge, and we should help
them.
Furthermore, low oil prices will make it even
more important to appropriately prioritize strategies for
development. Iraq’s 2009 budget, now before the
Council of Representatives, is 21 per cent lower than
originally planned. Its capital investment portion has
been cut by 38 per cent. This type of challenge is
obviously being faced throughout the world, but Iraq is
facing it in the context of a very delicate transitional
period. That requires that investments be directed
where they are most needed and can make the greatest
impact on recovery and on the lives of everyone in
Iraq.
These challenges can be met through a more
efficient and transparent public sector and a stronger
private sector. The United Nations will work with the
Government to improve performance in those areas as
required.
In the area of humanitarian assistance, where
needs are more acute, the United Nations will continue
to provide such assistance through the consolidated
appeal for Iraq and the subregion. However, the appeal
recognizes that the improvements in Iraq’s
humanitarian conditions have been substantial. Indeed,
that is why we have reduced our humanitarian
assistance: because Iraq has been taking many
humanitarian emergencies into its own hands. The
appeal also seeks to reduce the worst effects of poverty
and conflict and to promote conditions conducive to
the return of Iraq’s displaced persons and refugees.
The International Reconstruction Fund Facility
for Iraq, to which all members have contributed, will
be coming to a close by 31 December, which will be a

5

S/PV.6087

historic date. I remember when it was created as a trust
fund intended to keep Iraq alive. It has seen
$1.3 billion channelled through it since its inception.
As a result of the generous contributions of all
members, in particular Japan and the European
Union — to which we pay tribute — it has been an
invaluable tool for promoting coordinated strategic
assistance inside Iraq. I am also pleased to note that, at
the recent meeting on the Fund held in Naples on
18 February, both the Government of Iraq and the
donors welcomed the proposal by the Deputy Special
Representative for Humanitarian, Reconstruction and
Development Affairs that a post-Fund mechanism be
established — so that we do not lose a mechanism that
has been useful — to make the Compact a more
effective driver of Iraq’s internal development and
international partnership.
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
will also now review their own assistance frameworks
in Iraq in order to promote greater compliance with the
Paris Declaration, to align our work more closely with
the newly prioritized Compact and to increase their
presence in Baghdad to meet the challenges ahead. The
International Compact for Iraq, jointly chaired by the
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and our colleague and
friend Ambassador Gambari, could be the primary
vehicle for all such Iraq initiatives. Following the very
successful Stockholm conference, Prime Minister
Al-Maliki’s initiative to review and reprioritize the
Compact benchmarks has the potential to make the
Compact an effective driver of further follow-up in this
area.
In conclusion, we have grounds for optimism,
and in this Chamber it is good to feel that way
sometimes. I believe that all of us should be proud of
that fact — particularly the representative of Iraq, on
behalf of the Iraqi people. The Government of Iraq is
clearly signalling that it recognizes that this is the year
to demonstrate its ability to administer a State that
enjoys broad support and intends to deliver basic
services and security guarantees with the support of
credible and independent institutions.
Security has improved, and Iraq has asserted its
sovereignty; this is a year in which that has been
clearly seen. With more sovereignty comes more
responsibility — responsibility to each of Iraq’s
communities. This is the time to build on what has
been achieved since the recent provincial elections,
which were the first to have been fully led by Iraq.

6

After prolonged suffering, Iraqis have made some
substantially encouraging steps. It is now up to the
Iraqis themselves to heal the wounds of the past and
move ahead with a common vision. Trust among the
people will increase through concrete, commonly
shared steps, including a federal framework, the
distribution of wealth, a viable revenue sharing system,
the deft handling of Kirkuk and a formula for resolving
the issue of disputed internal boundaries.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the members
of the Security Council have consistently supported
UNAMI in being proactive and results-oriented. We
will continue those efforts. However, it is ultimately up
to Iraqi leaders to make sound choices, and the
international community should encourage and support
them in that regard.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
very comprehensive briefing on the good progress that
has been made during this period.
I now call on the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express our thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of France,
for his efforts during the month of January. Our great
appreciation goes to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
to the teams of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) in Iraq and New York for their
tireless work in assisting the Government and the
people of Iraq.
After reviewing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of UNAMI, contained in
document S/2009/102, my delegation would like to
make the following comments.
In the political and security areas, today the
people and the Government of Iraq are proud of their
achievement in having held provincial elections, which
took place in a democratic and stable security situation.
The elections provided a great opportunity for
competition among electoral blocs and political forces
and gave Iraqi citizens the freedom to select those they
considered most suitable to manage their provinces and
to provide the services they expect from the provincial
councils. The provincial councils will be given greater
powers and budgets than the outgoing councils,

09-24991

S/PV.6087

including the responsibility of playing a bigger role in
the advancement of the provinces’ building and
reconstruction and provision of services as defined by
the law of provincial assemblies.

provincial elections law, which confirms the process to
resolve the Kirkuk issue through constitutional and
political means in order to preserve the full rights of all
components of the province.

The
provincial
elections
witnessed
the
competition of 14,431 candidates, 3,912 of whom were
women, belonging to 401 lists and competing for 440
seats throughout 14 provinces. Participating in the
elections were more than 400 observers from the
United Nations and more than 800 independent
international observers, as well as observers
representing the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
European Union. The turnout of the elections, 51 per
cent, was very good compared to participation rates in
local elections in other countries.

The success of the provincial elections as an
important juncture in the political development of the
new Iraq has caused many to express their admiration
for the ability and potential the Iraqi people have
shown in the preparation, organization, management
and protection of their electoral process. The
Secretary-General paid tribute to the circumstances
surrounding the elections, saying they were
impressively free of violence. Similarly, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, said that the election process was well
organized by staff who all followed the same
procedures and that the Electoral Commission had
shown independence. He expressed his admiration for
the role of Iraqi security forces by saying that the
elections had proven that the Iraqi Government is
capable of generating security to ensure the electoral
process.

The provincial elections that took place at the end
of January are considered to be a turning point in Iraq’s
progress in the pursuit of building a new democracy
because of the active participation of many Iraqis who
boycotted the provincial elections in 2005. For
example, the turnout in Ninawa was 60 per cent
compared with 14 per cent during the previous
elections, and Salah Ad Din province, which recorded
the highest participation rate at 65 per cent, had only
15 per cent participation in the 2005 elections. The
province of Anbar, where participation amounted to
less than 1 per cent in 2005, reported a turnout of
40 per cent.
The participation of Iraqis who boycotted the
elections in the past reflected a firm belief in elections
as key mechanisms of democracy, as opposed to the
use of violence to impose the will of one party on
others. The Government considers the success of the
elections to be an important development and a strong
push towards the promotion of reconciliation and
coexistence between the various components of the
Iraqi people.
In accordance with the provisions of article 23 of
the provincial elections law, the elections in Kirkuk
have been postponed and a parliamentary committee
formed to study options for power-sharing between the
components of Kirkuk and to research the issues of
conflict of ownership and demographic change. This
committee hopes its report, when submitted to the
Council of Representatives, will facilitate the process
for provincial elections in Kirkuk. The Iraqi political
forces agree on the substance of article 23 of the

09-24991

The main message that the Iraqi people want
conveyed to the world through the success of these
elections is the emphasis they place on building a
responsible democracy through the exercise of their
rights within the context of public administration, as
set forth in their Constitution, in order to strengthen the
democratic experience in the new Iraq.
The completion of the provincial elections in an
atmosphere almost completely free of any
manifestation of violence, as opposed to the more than
80 security incidents during the elections of 2005,
confirmed two basic facts. First, it demonstrated the
great development in the capabilities of Iraqi Security
Forces, which performed in a professional and
qualified manner, and the effective presence of which
was felt on the ground, making the elections the first
witness of their efficiency, but not the last. This
conclusion was also reached by the Secretary-General,
who states in his report that “[the] almost complete
absence of violence during the elections can to a large
extent be attributed to the growing effectiveness of the
Iraqi Security Forces” (S/2009/102, para. 20).
Secondly, the elections demonstrated the solid
gains made in Iraq’s security situation thanks to the
Government’s efforts to strengthen the political,
security and law enforcement fields — the pillars of

7

S/PV.6087

stability in the country. Anti-terrorism authorities in
Iraq oversaw the destruction of 51 terrorist networks in
2008, enhancing security gains achieved by the
ongoing commitment of the Government of my country
to support efforts towards national reconciliation and
political dialogue with the various parties involved in
the country’s political process.
The Governments of Iraq and the United States
have reached a new security agreement to organize the
future bilateral partnership between our independent
and sovereign nations which share the common goals
of protecting and promoting the interests of our two
countries and reinforcing Iraqi sovereignty and
independence.
The termination of the mandate of the
multinational force in Iraq is an important turning point
for Iraq and the end of an era for the United Nations
and for, above all, the countries contributing to the
force. The multinational force has contributed vital
support to the progress of building security and
stability in Iraq and towards our transition to a
sovereign, federal and united democracy.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Iraq, I wish to convey a very important message of
thanks to the men and women of the multinational
force in Iraq, who have courageously fought together
with us on the frontline, as well as to their
Governments.
The acceleration of improvement in the security
situation in Baghdad and other provinces has helped to
return life to normality in most areas. Displaced
families returning to their places of origin numbered
about 40,000 by the end of 2008, and one of the largest
camps for internally displaced persons, in the province
of Najaf, has been closed after the return to their places
of origin of 300 families that were living there. My
Government has been working tirelessly on the
restitution of property, pursuant to order 101, and on
assistance to returning displaced families, pursuant to
order 102, by providing the appropriate conditions for
their return to their livelihoods and their areas of
origin.
Continued efforts by the Iraqi Government, in
cooperation with international organizations and aid
agencies, to secure the full return of the Christian
families displaced by violence in some parts of Ninawa
province late last year have led to the return of 2,400
out of 2,500 displaced families, and the Iraqi

8

Government is still providing the remaining families
with necessary assistance.
As part of the Iraqi Government’s continuing
efforts to ensure the return of displaced Iraqis in
neighbouring countries, the Minister of Displacement
and Migration, Mr. Abdul Samad Rahman Sultan,
recently headed a ministerial delegation to Syria on the
first leg of a trip that included stops in Egypt and
Lebanon. The goal of the trip was to coordinate with
these countries in organizing the return of Iraqis
displaced onto their territory, and to explore with the
immigration ministers of Syria, Lebanon, and Egypt
the problems and constraints involved in the return of
Iraqi citizens in order to develop effective mechanisms
to overcome such problems and to contribute to the
return of all Iraqis to their places of origin. It is
important here to refer to the recent report issued by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which referred to the return of 220,000 Iraqis in 2008
and to the expected return of 500,000 Iraqis in 2009
due to the steady improvement of security in the
country.
The Government of Iraq, convinced of the need
to consolidate and strengthen the rights of the Iraqi
people through the establishment of independent
institutions dealing with the follow-up and monitoring
of human rights, ratified on 14 January 2009 a law
establishing a High Commission for Human Rights
under the provisions of article 61 of the Iraqi
Constitution. The Commission will strive to ensure the
protection and promotion of human rights in Iraq and
to protect the rights and freedoms set forth in the
Constitution, laws, treaties, and international
agreements ratified by Iraq.
My Government attaches particular importance to
the issue of human rights for Iraqi detainees in custody
pending criminal cases, as demonstrated by the
creation of places of detention appropriately equipped
to provide full legal immunities and procedures to
ensure a fair trial. On 22 February 2009, the central
Baghdad prison was opened to the press as part of the
Iraqi Government’s policy of ensuring the highest
degree of transparency in following up on the
conditions for detainees in Iraqi jails.
On the social and economic front, the tangible
improvement in Iraq’s political and security situation
has had a positive effect on the national development
strategy. A clear improvement has been recorded in

09-24991

S/PV.6087

Iraqi economic indicators during the past few months.
The rate of economic growth at the end of 2008 was
44.2 per cent. Inflation decreased from 16 per cent in
2007 to 12 per cent in the last quarter of 2008 as a
result of financial policies aimed at decreasing
inflation and improving the purchasing power of the
Iraqi dinar. Unemployment has also decreased, falling
from 17 per cent in 2008 to 15 per cent at the
beginning of 2009. These economic indicators reflect a
comprehensive improvement in the Iraqi economy.
Investment is a priority for the Iraqi
Government’s national financial and economic
policies. The Government has allocated $12 billion of
the national budget for investment activities for all
Iraqi ministries and has established a national
monitoring mechanism to encourage Iraqi ministries to
spend the allocated investment funds on their projects.
My Government, in the light of obligations under
the International Compact with Iraq, has signed a
number of bilateral agreements with Paris Club
countries by which those countries are to cancel nearly
$45 billion of our total national debt, which totals more
than $52 billion. A bilateral agreement and
memorandum of understanding have also recently been
signed with Greece and China, under which our debt to
those countries is reduced by 80 per cent.
The Iraqi Government has established a social
security network to support different social sectors,
including orphans, widows and the unemployed. The
Government has allocated 800 million dinar for this
purpose and increased the number of small loans to
120,000 for 2009 from 75,000 in 2008.
Within the framework of economic policies
aimed at reconstructing the Iraqi industrial sector, the
Government has allocated an investment budget of up
to $697 million to the Ministry of Industry for the
rebuilding many of its ministerial institutions in an
effort to diversify sources of national income.
With regard to the oil industry, the Iraqi
Government has adopted new policies to reconstruct
and develop this field. According to the latest reports
issued by the Iraqi Oil Ministry, oil production
increased by 11 per cent in 2008 and daily production
increased from 1.85 million barrels to 2.28 million
barrels. The Iraqi Government has also joined the
international Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative to establish a monitoring mechanism for its
oil revenues and ways of spending them.

09-24991

In the area of basic services, the Iraqi
Government has reduced the proportion of the
population deprived of water and sewage systems to
10 per cent in urban areas and 30 per cent in rural
areas. The production of electricity has risen
significantly during the last three months, and the Iraqi
Government has allocated more than $3 billion to the
Ministry of Electricity to build new power stations.
In the framework of the Iraqi Government’s
efforts to support the educational process in the
country, the Ministry of Education has signed bilateral
cooperation protocols with support organizations such
as UNICEF and the Iraqi Ministry of Housing and
Reconstruction.
This
initiative
supports
the
Government’s national plan for the building of schools,
under which, so far, 291 schools have been constructed
and 374 restored to receive students in the current
school year.
At the regional and international levels, the Iraqi
Government continues its efforts to monitor and
coordinate the work of the committees on refugees,
energy and security within the framework adopted at
the meetings of the Foreign Ministers of the Expanded
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq held in Sharm
el-Sheikh and Istanbul. The Refugees Committee held
its meeting in Amman on 15 November 2008. The
Security Coordination Committee meeting was held in
Damascus on 22 and 23 November 2008. I would like
to stress my Government’s commitment to cooperating
fully with our neighbouring countries to reach
solutions to all issues of mutual interest.
The past few months have seen mutual visits
between a number of Iraqi and international officials.
This month, French President Nicolas Sarkozy and
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier paid
visits to Iraq. The President of Iraq, Jalal Talabani,
visited Kuwait to participate in the Arab Economic
Summit, and Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki visited
Iran and Turkey to develop mechanisms for bilateral
cooperation with both countries. It should also be noted
that the Iraqi-Kuwaiti joint committee is to hold a
meeting in Kuwait this month to sign an accord to
ensure a common vision for resolving the outstanding
issues between the two countries and, in mid-March of
next year, will hold a meeting at the ministerial level.
Following the first annual review of the
International Compact with Iraq held in Stockholm, the
Iraqi Government has taken many steps to enhance and

9

S/PV.6087

support policies to accomplish all requirements
through the Joint Monitoring Matrix of 2008, in which
the necessary steps to launch the administrative and
financial reform process were determined. In this
regard, my delegation would like to encourage all Arab
countries to help their brothers in Iraq by forgiving
Iraq’s debt and reducing its compensation obligations
imposed after the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, a crime
committed by the former dictatorial regime. My
Government welcomes the Kuwaiti Government’s
agreement to address the issue of compensation
through bilateral negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations Compensation Commission.
In the framework of positive cooperation with the
United Nations and our brothers in Kuwait, during
meetings of the technical subcommittee early next
month and in the presence of United Nations HighLevel Coordinator, Mr. Gennady Tarasov, my
Government will hand over a large number of audio
and video tapes to Kuwait as a gesture of goodwill and
in order to gather impetus for nations to terminate the
international mandate relating to this file.
In reference to the recommendation contained in
paragraph 72 of the report of the Secretary-General,
my Government strongly supports the process of
reviewing those Security Council resolutions
pertaining to Iraq subsequent to resolution 661 (1990)
and in accordance with the fifth operative paragraph of
resolution 1859 (2008). These reviews represent a key
step in support of the international community’s efforts
to normalize relations between Iraq and its neighbours
and contribute to security and stability in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude for UNAMI’s role in Iraq and
for Mr. De Mistura’s support, offered at the
Government’s request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for the report he has just given us of the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for the extremely valuable
information he has conveyed to us.

10

To begin with a very general observation, we are
encouraged by the positive developments in the
situation in Iraq, which were very well underscored in
the presentations we have just heard. We note in
particular the success of the democratic provincial
elections held on 31 January 2009, which represent a
first in Iraq’s political life. In a country facing internal
conflict and violence, the elections were eloquent
testimony to the capacity of the Iraqi forces to
guarantee the security of the people and a reassuring
omen for the upcoming legislative elections. The lack
of any major incident during the entire electoral period
is a clear indication that the Iraqis are gradually
reasserting control over their country and their future.
Another element to be taken into consideration in
the general easing of tensions is the conclusion on
27 November 2008 of the bilateral security agreement
between the United States and Iraq concerning the
progressive withdrawal of United States forces and the
transfer of authorities to the Iraqi Government.
With respect to the activities of UNAMI itself,
we are gratified to note that the Mission continues to
make an important contribution to national
reconstruction efforts in Iraq. In particular, the personal
involvement of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the outstanding role played by
UNAMI were decisive to the organization of
democratic, free and transparent elections and to the
improvement of the political and institutional
processes.
Another achievement to be attributed to UNAMI
is its technical assistance in settling the various internal
border disputes and in the search for consensus on the
status of Kirkuk. Equally deserving of praise are
UNAMI’s investment in a regional dialogue through
the strengthening of bilateral relations between Iraq
and its neighbours, as well as its ongoing constitutional
and legislative support in the context of the
development of Iraqi national institutions. We cannot
fail, either, to mention UNAMI’s commitment to
humanitarian assistance.
On the economic front, the International Compact
with Iraq is playing an ever more critical role within
the existing mechanisms for the reconstruction of Iraq.
In that regard, we welcome the United Nations
assistance strategy concluded between the Iraqi
Government and the Organization for the period 20082010, which fully satisfies expectations in that respect,

09-24991

S/PV.6087

as well as the cancellation of Iraq’s debt by the Paris
Club.
However, the United Nations and the entire
international community must extend further support to
the Iraqi Government, which now faces a budgetary
deficit due to the fall in oil prices, and assist it in
meeting the challenge of socio-economic development.
That aspect of development now appears to be more
critical than ever to Iraq, where the positive political
developments on the ground must be reflected in a
reduction of poverty and improved delivery of basic
social services. Furthermore, that improvement should
be extended to the field of human rights, which
remains at the heart of UNAMI’s concerns, although
the role of the Iraqi Government and of the
multinational force are also crucial in that regard.
We welcome the progress represented by the
enactment by the Council of Representatives on
16 November 2008 of the law establishing an
Independent High Commission for Human Rights, and
the commitment of the Iraqi authorities to work with
UNAMI to ensure the Commission’s proper
functioning.
With the reduced role of the multinational force,
which will lead to an enhanced role for UNAMI,
particularly with respect to security, it would be highly
advisable, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/102), to provide the Mission with a new
operational base endowed with a reliable logistical
infrastructure in order to strengthen its autonomy and
its capacity to discharge its mandate effectively and
fully. We are pleased to note that UNAMI is already at
work on that plan, and it is our hope that it will achieve
concrete results.
We urge the international community to continue
to support the Mission at this critical phase of its
operations. In conclusion, we fully support Iraq and
encourage it in its efforts to achieve national recovery
at every possible level.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
his detailed briefing today on the situation in Iraq and
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). My delegation thanks Mr. De Mistura
for his work and for his contribution and commitment
to the development of political dialogue and national
reconciliation in Iraq.

09-24991

We also thank Ambassador Hamid Al Bayati,
Permanent
Representative
of
Iraq,
for
his
comprehensive presentation on the recent progress
made by his country.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/102)
before the Security Council today is of special
importance, for two fundamental reasons.
First, it represents the first time that the Council
has been informed on the situation in Iraq since the
expiration of the mandate of the multinational force
and since the bilateral security agreement between the
United States and Iraq entered into force. Pursuant to
that agreement, the United States forces will be placed
under the authority of the Iraqi Government for the
remainder of their presence in the country. That
concrete fact is deeply symbolic for my country,
particularly given the conditions in which the war in
Iraq unfolded and the subsequent establishment of the
multinational force. The facts behind those
developments are well known, and Mexico has
expressed its views thereon on previous occasions. The
bilateral security agreement also represents a
tremendous achievement for the Government and
people of Iraq because, through it and with the help of
the provisions of resolution 1859 (2008), adopted in
December, Iraq will gradually recover its international
position as a sovereign and independent State.
Secondly, the Secretary-General’s report has been
submitted in the context of the provincial elections
held on 31 January. We thank the Independent High
Electoral Commission and the staff of UNAMI for
playing key roles in ensuring that the elections were
carried out in the optimal conditions. We were
particularly pleased to note that the electoral process
unfolded calmly and without major incident, as noted
by several national and international observers. Their
success demonstrates the commitment of the people of
Iraq to democracy.
The results of the elections, announced in early
February, represented a triumph for the people of Iraq
and for democracy as a whole. Iraqis have turned once
again to the ballot box to settle their political disputes,
thereby contributing to the process of national
reconciliation essential to the establishment of normal
living conditions for the majority of the people.
The successful implementation of the national
security plan for the elections undoubtedly favoured
voter participation, in particular among the Sunni

11

S/PV.6087

population, which refrained from participating in the
2005 provincial elections. This time, they were part of
the process. We hope that the results of the electoral
process will promote political dialogue between the
various players in Iraq and consolidate the national
reconciliation process. We also hope that this exercise
will lay the foundations for the preparation of national
elections in December 2009.
Despite the great and important progress to which
we have been witness in recent months, significant
challenges remain in Iraq that must be faced with the
support of the international community and the United
Nations. In the area of security, the situation on the
ground is fundamentally different to that of previous
years. However, we continue to receive numerous
reports of indiscriminate attacks against civilians, Iraqi
armed forces, foreign forces and United Nations
personnel. We are confident in the ability of the
Government and the armed forces of Iraq to continue
to deal with this major serious problem, with consistent
respect for human rights.
The continuing situation of insecurity has led in
recent years to continuous flows of internally displaced
persons and refugees, which undermines Iraq’s longterm development. We therefore welcome the report
that some 40,000 families repatriated to Iraq have been
registered to date. We invite the Iraqi authorities to
continue to work with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to pursue this
process, ensuring that the dignity of individuals is
respected at all times. We also welcome the adoption of
the law establishing an Independent High Commission
for Human Rights. We hope that the establishment of
the Commission, along with the commitments arising
from Iraq’s recent ratification of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, will lead to progress on
human rights, in particular with respect to the situation
of detainees, the administration of justice and women’s
rights.
Likewise, we are closely following the work on a
comprehensive rule of law strategy, under United
Nations auspices. We consider that only through
institution-building can long-term political and
economic success be guaranteed in Iraq.
I recognize the work of UNAMI in Iraq and the
important role it has played in establishing the
situation we now see on the ground. As international

12

financing for reconstruction and development
diminishes, the work of UNAMI becomes even more
relevant, in particular its strategies to support the fight
against poverty and initiatives towards the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals, its work to
protect ethnic and religious minorities and its efforts to
strengthen the education and health sectors. In
addition, UNAMI will have an invaluable opportunity
to continue to help the people and the Government of
Iraq through key initiatives such as the International
Compact for Iraq, the holding of local and national
elections, the national assistance strategy and the
establishment of the Independent High Commission for
Human Rights.
For Mexico, it is important that UNAMI, together
with other relevant actors, continue to give priority to
supporting the approximately 2.8 million internally
displaced persons. We therefore welcome the
establishment of the cooperation mechanism of the
2009 consolidated appeal, which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has promoted
with a view to helping the most vulnerable people
within the country, to supporting refugees in conditions
of security and dignity, and to promoting a regional
approach to guarantee the security of Iraqis. Likewise,
it is important that UNAMI continue its work in the
constitutional review process under way in Iraq. That
will help Iraq to consolidate the rule of law and
provide guarantees for Iraqis in the sphere of civil and
political rights.
In our view, we should continue to pay close
attention to UNAMI’s role as an intermediary in
resolving controversies on internal borders and the
status of Kirkuk, which are indispensable elements for
lasting peace in Iraq.
The meeting of the objectives I have just
described and the significant progress we have seen in
recent months in the light of a new international
situation indicate that 2009 holds a promising future
for Iraq. This should be consolidated with the support
of the United Nations and the international community.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his comprehensive briefing. We welcome
our brother, Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent
Representative of Iraq, and we thank him for his
valuable contribution to our discussion today.

09-24991

S/PV.6087

In our view a recent political development in Iraq
is of great importance: the holding of provincial
elections in January in 14 out of Iraq’s 18
governorates. This is reason for optimism, in particular
because of the high level of participation in the
elections, which is especially encouraging owing to the
participation of certain sectors and factions that had
boycotted the previous elections, held in 2005. We are
also gratified by the continued improvement in security
conditions, with a major decline in violence and the
absence of significant incidents on election day. This
further underscores the continuing improvement in the
capacity of Iraqi security forces and the decline in
sectarian sensitivities.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their efforts to support
the Independent High Electoral Commission during the
preparations for the elections held on 31 January, and
for their endeavours to resolve disputes with regard to
Iraq’s internal borders. We urge UNAMI and the
Special Representative to continue to play their neutral
role in building confidence among the parties
concerned, in encouraging dialogue and consultation
and in working together with the Iraqi Government to
achieve consensus among all parties concerned.
We stress the importance of continued dialogue
among Iraqi actors concerning federalism and
hydrocarbon regulation, which are two important
issues that must be resolved in order to bring about
long-term stability in Iraq. We look forward to the
discussions to be held before the parliamentary recess,
which will continue to follow up the round table hosted
by UNAMI with a view to identifying specific,
concrete and feasible solutions.
We congratulate our Iraqi brethren on the Paris
Club’s cancellation of Iraq’s debt in December 2008.
This is recognition of Iraqi efforts to attain the
internationally agreed development goals and of Iraq’s
ability to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
This augurs well for the country’s economic and social
development. We welcome the fact that the United
Nations and the World Bank established an Iraq
Partners Forum in November 2008 in order to
coordinate the strategies of donors and of the United
Nations for Iraq and to ensure the greatest possible
transparency and effectiveness.

09-24991

With respect to the humanitarian situation, we are
most satisfied with the continued return and
repatriation of Iraqi internally displaced persons and
refugees. Nearly 40,000 returnee families had been
registered in Iraq as of the end of 2008, which is a
great achievement, and one of Iraq’s largest camps for
internally displaced persons, in Najaf, was closed. But
we are still gravely concerned at the continued
presence of millions of Iraqi refugees outside the
country, in particular in neighbouring countries. We
hope that the Iraqi Government will attach priority to
their return and will bring about the appropriate
circumstances for that to take place. Moreover, we
would like to express our satisfaction at the decline in
the rate of cholera infection and we welcome the
deployment of an international field mission under the
leadership of the World Health Organization in the
affected provinces.
Despite the progress achieved in the humanitarian
field throughout 2008, the circumstances of the
vulnerable sectors of the Iraqi people and the internally
displaced persons are still a source of concern. Even
relief programmes have been delayed because of the
lack of funding and, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/102) notes, 1 million Iraqis still face
food insecurity and a further 6 million would be
exposed to food insecurity were it not for the social
security network, primarily the public distribution of
food rations.
We note the rise in the illiteracy level to 24 per
cent in southern Iraq and that the school drop-out rate
has reached 10 per cent, while the level of chronic
child malnutrition in the South has reached nearly 22
per cent. With regard to northern Iraq, it is still
suffering unstable and fluctuating power supplies,
which is a very important element in the living
conditions of the people. We support the United
Nations call for investment to be concentrated in those
areas where the weakest humanitarian and development
indicators have been registered, as well as those
affected by conflict-related violence and population
movements.
There has been concrete progress towards
ensuring the human rights of Iraqi citizens through the
enactment of a law establishing an Independent High
Commission for Human Rights, but we are still
concerned by the killings of some political candidates
and electoral workers and the displacement of nearly
2,400 families from their homeland in Mosul at the end

13

S/PV.6087

of 2008, as well as by killings of and other attacks on
journalists, teachers, parliamentarians, humanitarian
workers, judges and lawyers.
We are gravely concerned by the occupying
forces’ continued detention of more than 15,000
people, including 58 children, without arrest warrants
issued by Iraqi judges. I would like to underscore our
concern with regard to the general conditions of the
detainees under Iraqi custody, as noted in paragraph 47
of the Secretary-General’s report. Some have been
deprived of their freedom for months and years in
substandard conditions, without access to defence
counsel and without being formally charged with a
crime or brought before a judge.
We welcome the end of the mandate of the
multinational force in Iraq and the Iraqi Government’s
assumption of responsibility for security in the country.
We look forward to the full withdrawal of all
occupying forces from Iraq as soon as possible and the
reunification of the Iraqi people, and welcome the
emphasis on its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
would like to emphasize that the continued presence of
the occupying forces in any form could be a factor for
disunity and instability and would not contribute to
national reconciliation, which is considered to be an
indispensable condition for the stability, reconstruction
and economic growth of Iraq.
The situation in Iraq has changed since the
Security Council adopted resolution 661 (1990). It is
time for the Council to review that resolution and for
Iraq to recover the legal and international status that
prevailed before the adoption of that resolution and the
sanctions imposed on it in accordance with Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter. Here, we would like to
recall the request to the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on this matter in consultation with the Iraqi
Government in accordance with resolution 1859
(2008). We look forward to the issuance of that report
and to the Council’s subsequent adoption of measures
in that regard.
In conclusion, we would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the various
United Nations agencies working on Iraq’s
reconstruction. We call upon all States to support Iraq
in order to help its brotherly people.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to thank Special Representative De Mistura

14

for his important and informative briefing. We are also
grateful for the statement made by Ambassador Al
Bayati and the encouraging developments that he has
pointed to in his country. We commend the determined
and courageous work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We deeply appreciate the
Special Representative’s dedication to Iraq and its
people, in particular against the background of the
difficult circumstances he and his team continue to
encounter.
The support provided by UNAMI to the
Independent High Electoral Commission and the
Government of Iraq’s diligent preparation of the recent
provincial elections have clearly contributed to their
successful conduct. Above all, however, the people of
Iraq are to be congratulated on their active
participation in those elections. By turning out across
communitarian lines, the men and women of Iraq have
thus helped their country to take a significant step
towards the consolidation of democratization and
national reconciliation.
The security preparations by the Government of
Iraq provided voters with an environment in which
they were able to cast their votes with confidence and
in relative security. While we deplore some of the
grave incidents and acts of violence that took place in
the run-up to the elections, the day of the election itself
passed in a peaceful atmosphere.
We are confident that Iraqi leaders will seize the
momentum created by the elections to overcome
obstacles towards national reconciliation. In that
context, we welcome the fact that UNAMI has been
formally requested to continue to provide assistance to
the parliamentary committee dealing with issues of
power-sharing, property and demography regarding
Kirkuk. We strongly support the good offices of the
Special Representative in building confidence among
the parties with a view to achieving a sustainable
solution.
We encourage Iraq to make maximum use of the
support provided by UNAMI in the constitutional
review process, in particular as regards hydrocarbon
regulation. Let me add that progress in that area will
certainly also facilitate foreign investment in the
country.
The European Union and its member States
remain firmly committed to supporting Iraq in building
a secure, stable, democratic, unified and prosperous

09-24991

S/PV.6087

country where human rights can be enjoyed in a secure
environment by women and men alike.
We note the gradual improvement of the security
situation in recent months, but we must not lose sight
of the persistent security risk that average Iraqis
continue to face through indiscriminate attacks,
including by suicide bombers. The recent attack on
pilgrims en route to Karbala, with many women and
children amongst the dead, testifies to that ever-present
threat.
As others have said, there are still important
challenges in the area of human rights. As has also
been mentioned, the report highlights the situation of
detainees. It also pays particular attention to the
situation of women, children and persons belonging to
ethnic and religious minorities.
We hope that the return of a significant number of
Christian families to Mosul is an indication of their
growing confidence in their personal safety. There
must be no room for ethnic or sectarian violence.
Everyone must make every effort to ensure that events
like those of the fall of 2008 do not reoccur.
We welcome the commitment made by the Iraqi
Government to strengthen the protection of human
rights and the recent establishment of an Independent
High Commission for Human Rights, to which the
Special Representative referred. We hope that the High
Commission will soon become operational. We support
and commend the important work of UNAMI in the
area of human rights.
We welcome the priority that United Nations
agencies intend to place on countering violence against
women during the year 2009, improving the access of
women to justice and tackling the reform of
discriminatory penal codes. We encourage the Iraqi
leadership to seek to engage women in the rebuilding
of Iraqi society and to continue the efforts that have
already begun in that area.
We hope that the forensic capacity-building that
the UNAMI Human Rights Office has offered to the
Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights will help to advance
progress in clarifying the fate of Kuwaiti citizens who
have been missing since 1990, a point to which the
Ambassador also referred.
With regard to the situation of Iraqi refugees and
internally displaced persons, we hope that an
environment permitting their return in safety and

09-24991

dignity can be sustained and that the Government of
Iraq will actively continue to promote return
initiatives. We hope that the encouraging trend to
which the Ambassador has referred will continue.
Austria commends the humanitarian work of the
United Nations and — this is particularly important —
the continued solidarity of neighbouring countries,
especially Jordan and Syria, with those uprooted by
violence and conflict.
We welcome the intention of the United Nations
to devise a comprehensive rule of law strategy in
cooperation with other partners on the ground, as well
as efforts under way between Iraqi authorities, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna
to assess compliance with the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.
Together with our European Union partners, we
continue to support the training of Iraqi law
enforcement and security personnel in the framework
of the European Union Integrated Rule of Law
Mission, which has been extended until 30 June 2009.
Since its start in July 2005, approximately 2,000 Iraqi
criminal law experts have been trained in 87 courses.
Austria is happy to have been able to participate in
those important efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of Austria’s
wholehearted support for his work and the work of the
entire United Nations team in Iraq.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Can I begin
by
joining
colleagues
in
thanking
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
his briefing on the report (S/2009/102) of the
Secretary-General. I would also like to pay tribute to
the Permanent Representative of Iraq for the
remarkable progress that Iraq has made in recent
months, as set out in his statement.
The United Nations continues to play a vital role
in Iraq’s development as a stable and democratic
country that is increasingly in control of its own
destiny. On behalf of my Government, I would like to
thank the United Nations Iraq team for its work.
No country has taken up more of the Security
Council’s time and energy over the past 20 years than
Iraq. It is wonderful to see Iraq restored to a fully
respected position in the international community, and

15

S/PV.6087

for the Council to be able to deal with its few
remaining responsibilities in such an encouraging
atmosphere. Since we discussed the last report
(S/2008/688) of the Secretary-General, in November,
Iraq has passed two more important milestones. The
first was at midnight on 31 December 2008, when the
Government of Iraq took responsibility for maintaining
security throughout the country. That is a testament to
the progress that has been made by both the
Government and the Iraqi security forces over the past
almost six years. With violence at its lowest levels
since 2003, Iraq’s security situation continues to
improve.
The second milestone was the provincial
elections, about which Mr. De Mistura has reported in
detail. The Secretary-General has termed them the first
fully Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned elections. The electoral
legislation was Iraqi. The Independent High Electoral
Commission of Iraq, working with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), put in place the
processes and mechanisms to ensure a free and fair
ballot, and the Iraqi security forces provided
comprehensive security and ensured that there were no
significant security incidents on election day.
Significantly, the elections were both competitive and
inclusive. Voting was conducted in a relaxed
atmosphere and freedom of expression was widely
respected. The diverse representation in the new
provincial councils shows that democracy is taking
root in Iraq.
As the Secretary-General acknowledges in his
report, it is now important for Iraq’s political leaders to
prioritize national dialogue and reconciliation, finding
common ground on issues such as the hydrocarbons
legislation and the review of the Constitution. The
United Kingdom strongly supports UNAMI’s efforts
behind that process, in particular its work on disputed
internal boundaries and on the status of Kirkuk, which
the Special Representative reported on. We look
forward to the report on Kirkuk from the article 23
committee of Iraq’s Council of Representatives, which
we expect at the end of next month.
We also welcome the establishment of Iraq’s
Independent High Commission for Human Rights. We
encourage it to work with the Ministry of Human
Rights in helping to ensure that the rights of all Iraqis
are respected.

16

The United Nations is doing vital work across all
the policy sectors in Iraq, from supporting elections,
constitution and political development, the rule of law
and humanitarian assistance to economic development.
We are encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
intention to continue to expand the engagement and
presence of the United Nations throughout Iraq. We
also await with interest his report pursuant to
resolution 1859 (2008) on the Saddam-era resolutions.
We should look carefully at all the additional
obligations imposed on Iraq during the Saddam era,
with a predisposition to removing them so that Iraq can
achieve the international standing equal to that that it
held before the Council’s adoption of resolution 661
(1990).
I would like to conclude by outlining the further
evolution in the United Kingdom’s close relationship
with Iraq. The British Prime Minister announced on
18 December 2008 that British combat troops will
withdraw from Basra in the coming months. Our
current military tasks should be completed by 31 May,
allowing the majority of our forces to withdraw from
Iraq by the end of July. Our military drawdown reflects
the improvements in the security situation in Iraq. It
marks a change in the nature of our commitment to
Iraq as Iraq increasingly stands on its own feet. The
United Kingdom’s future relationship with Iraq will be
one of partnership and friendship across the board,
encompassing economic, commercial, cultural and
educational cooperation, as well as assistance with
security and defence.
The United Kingdom strongly believes that a
strong and stable Iraq that is at peace with its
neighbours and has taken its rightful place in the
international community will make a crucial
contribution to strategic stability and peace throughout
the Middle East.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I, too, would like to thank our friend Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, for his briefing to the Council. I
should also like to commend the courageous,
determined and effective efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in carrying out
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. I
also wish to thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for his detailed briefing on
developments in the situation.

09-24991

S/PV.6087

As he himself emphasized, there has been
significant progress in Iraq in recent months towards
the establishment of a secure, stable, democratic,
united and prosperous country where human rights are
respected. France congratulates the Government of Iraq
on its efforts in that regard. We reiterate our
willingness to continue and strengthen our contribution
to ensuring stability and prosperity in Iraq.
The holding of provincial elections on 31 January
2009 was an important step towards strengthening
democracy and reconciliation. As was the case, it is
important that the elections were well-organized and
conducted in an inclusive manner and in an overall
peaceful environment. This month, the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and the ministers for
foreign affairs of the European Union have welcomed
the holding of those elections.
The elections were, first and foremost, a triumph
for the people of Iraq, who have assumed full
ownership of the democratic process. France is very
pleased that the Iraqis are increasingly reassuming full
responsibility for their country’s affairs. The Iraqi
Government should also be congratulated on having
organized these elections. Finally, we welcome the key
role played by UNAMI, in support of the Independent
High Electoral Commission, in preparing the elections.
As noted by European Union Ministers for
Foreign Affairs on 23 February, it is important to take
advantage of the outcome of the elections to make
further progress on improving the living conditions of
the Iraqi people and on the process of national
reconciliation. This means continuing the positive
commitment of the Iraqi Government, of the entire
international community and of neighbouring States.
I would like to focus briefly on four important
areas in this regard. First of all, the disputed internal
boundaries are an issue, particularly with regard to
Kirkuk. This issue will be a focus of attention, as the
Secretary-General emphasized in his report. UNAMI
must continue to provide its expertise to the Iraqi
Government in order to make progress on this
question, as well as on the matter of constitutional
review. Success in this difficult task will depend in
large part on — and will be a gauge of — the
willingness of all actors to work towards a
compromise.
Secondly, reconstruction and economic growth
are also great challenges for the coming year. The Iraqi

09-24991

people expect concrete results. France has cancelled
€4 billion, or $5 billion, of Iraqi debt, and we are
prepared to contribute in all areas requested by the
Iraqi authorities.
Thirdly, UNAMI must also continue to support
the efforts of neighbouring countries to make progress
in the areas of energy, security, borders and refugees
and internally displaced persons. We also believe that
its assistance will be useful in supporting the regional
dialogue that should continue on issues such as
disappeared persons and property seized during the
Gulf war. Neighbouring States, of course, have a major
role to play in this respect, and we appreciate the
reference to these relationships that was made by the
Permanent Representative of Iraq.
Finally, efforts must also continue with regard to
respect for human rights, including with regard to the
situation of prisoners. As noted by the SecretaryGeneral, the creation of an Independent High
Commission for Human Rights is a positive first step.
The visit of the President of the French Republic
to Iraq on 10 February was a solemn indication of
France’s resolute support for democracy, for the
restoration of sovereignty and for reconstruction efforts
in Iraq. This visit followed two visits by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, in August
2007 and June 2008. These visits provided an
opportunity to clearly demonstrate the solidarity of
France. At the same time, we have cancelled debt and
have actively participated in the European Union
programme for training Iraqi civil servants under the
Union’s Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq.
Depending on the wishes of the Iraqi authorities, we
could deploy our efforts in all institutional and
economic areas.
More generally speaking, it is important that the
present positive cycle will enable Iraq to recover its
full sovereignty. In this respect, we would recall the
request made by the Security Council in resolution
1859 (2008) for the Secretary-General to prepare a
report after consultations with Iraq on the action
necessary to enable Iraq to recover international
standing equal to that which it held prior to the
adoption of resolution 661 (1990) of August 1990.
As was indicated by the French President in
Baghdad on 10 February, Iraq can count on the
friendship of France as we work with it towards its full
reintegration into the community of nations.

17

S/PV.6087

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda welcomes the
holding of this open debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the briefing
by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq and head of UNAMI.
We also welcome the briefing by the Permanent
Representative of Iraq.
From those briefings it is clear that significant
progress has been made. We welcome the successful
holding of provincial elections on 31 January. We note
with appreciation that those elections were more
representative and inclusive of the various political
sectors of Iraqi society. We encourage the Iraqi people
to build on these achievements, which create a more
stable and peaceful Iraq in which all the people of Iraq
can live in peace.
To that end, Uganda also commends the leading
role played by UNAMI in assisting and supporting the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq as
well as the earlier interim Government and transitional
National Assembly of Iraq.
We note from the report that a number of Iraqi
political leaders have indicated their willingness to
play a constructive role in national dialogue and
reconciliation as a way of ensuring sustainable and
lasting peace. In spite of progress made, there remain
key challenges. I would like to mention a few of them.
One challenge is to develop an effective security
sector, as well as civil and social services capacities. A
second is the delivery of reconstruction, development
and humanitarian assistance. A third is the protection
of human rights and national reconciliation as well as
judicial and legal reform, which are needed in order to
strengthen the rule of law in Iraq. The fourth is the
eradication of acts of terrorism and violence. Finally,
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
needs to be facilitated. On this last point, we are happy
to note the increasing returns of Iraqis to their country.
We note that despite these numerous socioeconomic challenges, the Government of Iraq
continues to make commendable efforts to meet
internationally agreed development targets, including
the Millennium Development Goals. In this regard, we
welcome the Paris Club’s cancellation of about 80 per
cent of Iraq’s debt, as well as the establishment of an
Iraq Partners Forum. There is no doubt that this will go
a long way in helping Iraq realize the targets set out in
the International Compact for Iraq.

18

Uganda welcomes the commitments made to the
Iraq Trust Fund, amounting to $1.36 billion as of
December 2008. We call upon the Government of Iraq
and international partners to ensure that the approved
projects
and
programmes
are
implemented
expeditiously while ensuring that they create an impact
in the reconstruction of Iraq and improve the standards
of living of the people of Iraq.
Finally, in spite of the economic challenges, there
is a need to ensure that public funding for
reconstruction and development activities is not unduly
reduced, as this would affect the recovery process.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura and the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al
Bayati, for their extensive briefings.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation for the excellent worked
carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). Their dedication and commitment
to help Iraq accomplish its goals are indeed most
commendable.
As a neighbour of Iraq, Turkey is particularly
interested in the promotion of stability and the
advancement of security in Iraq. We have equally good
relations with all segments of the Iraqi population, be
they Arabs, Kurds or Turkmens. Our only message is
one of good will and cooperation.
That is why we are happy to see that, after many
years of war, internal strife and destruction, Iraq is
finally striving towards a more sustainable
environment of security and stability. The Iraqi people
greatly deserve to enjoy peace and prosperity.
It was against that backdrop that we closely
followed the provincial elections held in late January,
including by sending observers from Turkey. Overall,
despite certain shortcomings, the elections served their
purpose quite successfully. They helped to bridge an
important gap in representation in Iraqi politics. They
also reinforced the democratic process in Iraq.
In short, Iraq has made a good start in 2009, a
year that, we believe, will be crucial in shaping its
future. Indeed, the provincial elections, as important as
they might be, are only a first step in the consolidation
of democracy and democratization in Iraq. There are
certain challenges that remain to be addressed, such as
reviewing the Constitution in a way that will unify

09-24991

S/PV.6087

Iraqis as a whole; settling the issues of the disputed
internal administrative boundaries and, in particular,
the status of Kirkuk in a way that will help preserve the
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq; peacefully
transferring security responsibilities to the Iraqi
Security Forces in a way that will not create a power
vacuum in the country after the withdrawal of the
multinational force; adopting the long-overdue
hydrocarbon resources law in a way that will create an
investment-friendly environment and help all Iraqis to
benefit fully from their country’s strategic energy
resources; and reaching an accord on income-sharing
arrangements in a way that will strengthen the sense of
Iraqi nationhood and union. These are all issues of
priority.
The parliamentary elections to be held at the end
of this year will be another important milestone in the
democratic evolution of Iraq. We hope that, by that
time, these priority issues will have been resolved in a
constructive and consensual manner, making it possible
for these achievements to be crowned with fair and free
elections.
I know that the wide array of issues to which I
have just referred present a most daunting task.
However, failure is not an option. In that regard, we
believe that a three-pronged process is best suited to
enabling us to attain our common objectives in Iraq.
The first aspect of this joint venture concerns the
responsibility of Iraqis themselves. By that, I mean the
obligation of all political parties in Iraq to work with
one another in good faith and cooperation with a view
to ensuring that the solutions to many of the
predicaments being faced will be found through
compromise rather than confrontation. We hope and
expect that the political representatives of the Iraqi
people will rise to the occasion and reconcile their
differences. The Iraqi people have already rewarded
those who have made the right promises; now it is time
to deliver.
The second set of responsibilities in this process
lies with the countries in the region. Indeed, those
countries, sharing the same geography, have a special
stake in seeing Iraq effectively tackle these challenges,
many of which have direct implications for the whole
region and beyond. We must all do whatever we can to
support the development and reconstruction of Iraq. We
are committed to further advancing the regional
cooperation to which we have contributed, including by

09-24991

initiating the Iraq neighbours forum seven years ago.
The forum is now operating in an extended format.
Indeed, Turkey has long provided an essential
lifeline for the flow of humanitarian and reconstruction
assistance to Iraq. Today, the volume of bilateral trade
is rapidly rising, along with all other aspects of our
economic cooperation. In particular, helping Iraq to tap
its vast energy resources and to export them to world
markets through reliable outlets, such as Turkey,
remains a priority for us.
In parallel, our political cooperation has also
reached an exemplary level. In that context, reciprocal
visits by the two Prime Ministers have created strong
momentum by further enhancing our bilateral relations,
as evidenced by the establishment of the high-level
strategic cooperation council. Our President will soon
reciprocate the official visit made by President
Talabani, which is expected to give a further boost to
our relations. Taking this opportunity, I am also
pleased to announce that, in addition to the one in
Mosul, our new Consulate General in Basra has
recently become operational.
We also attach great importance to cooperation
with Iraq in the fight against terrorism. As will be
recalled, the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) terrorist
organization has long used northern Iraq as a
springboard for its cross-border terrorist attacks against
targets in Turkey. The PKK’s presence in northern Iraq
also poses serious problems for and a threat to the
people of Iraq. Initially, we had our differences on how
to best tackle that problem. Today, however, we are
pleased to see both central and local Iraqi authorities
showing more signs of cooperation in countering that
scourge. Indeed, the trilateral mechanism recently set
up by Turkey, Iraq and the United States to coordinate
a joint response to that vicious terrorist organization
has made an encouraging start, and we now expect it to
yield more effective and tangible results in preventing
Iraqi territory from being used for such cross-border
terrorist activities.
The third and final set of responsibilities in
helping Iraq to achieve its goals rests with the
international community. Indeed, Iraq cannot be seen
as a merely regional issue, because the future course of
events there will have repercussions reaching far
beyond the region.
In that regard, the United Nations must continue
to play its important role of coordination and assistance

19

S/PV.6087

in the critical period ahead. In addition to the essential
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance being
provided by United Nations agencies, UNAMI’s
support for the constitutional review process — as well
as for the ongoing work concerning the disputed
internal administrative boundaries and the status of
Kirkuk — is of great importance.
With regard to Kirkuk in particular, Turkey
strongly supports UNAMI’s impartial and neutral role
in promoting dialogue among the parties concerned and
in helping to forge a consensus on that sensitive issue.
Kirkuk, which is a microcosm of the rich ethnic
diversity of Iraq, must not trigger new disputes and
conflicts in Iraq.

political momentum, which should be channelled into
the national reconciliation process and economic
development. Together with the major security gains
that Iraq experienced last year, the results should now
be collectively translated into lasting stability and
tangible improvements that will be felt in the daily
lives of ordinary Iraqis and will respond to the
expectations and confidence expressed when the Iraqi
people cast their votes. The atmosphere largely free of
violence during the election period can be seen as the
best testimony to the significant improvements in the
security situation achieved over the past year. The Iraqi
Government and the Iraqi Security Forces have
demonstrated increasing capabilities and the ability to
address security challenges.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm once again
our strong support for the democratic transformation
under way in Iraq. Obviously, we are still at an early
stage of this long journey, the pace and final
destination of which will be determined first and
foremost by the Iraqis themselves. However, given the
strategic importance of this whole endeavour, we must
all be generous in extending our support and
assistance. Turkey is more than ready and willing to do
its share.

The conclusion of the bilateral security
agreement that led to the ending of the mandate of the
multinational
forces
was
another
landmark
achievement. We understand that the coming months
will be testing and demanding for Iraqi forces. It is
imperative that extremists not be allowed to undermine
these gains or the public confidence hitherto achieved
by continuing with sporadic and indiscriminate
violence.

Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I should like to begin by
thanking
Mr.
Staffan
de
Mistura,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
his informative and comprehensive briefing and
express our appreciation for the ongoing effort and
commitment that he and his team are investing in
fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Hamid Al Bayati for his statement.

In the context of UNAMI’s operations, it is
important to ensure that the transfer of responsibilities
results in no security gap for its facilities and
personnel. As the Secretary-General’s recent visit has
unmistakably demonstrated, Iraq can count on the
continuous support of the United Nations and the
international community in this next crucial phase of
locking in the democratic, security and economic
progress made so far. We are glad to note that Iraq
remains high on the United Nations list of priorities.

Iraq is becoming a free and fully democratic
country. Croatia expresses its congratulations to the
Government and the people of Iraq on the successful
holding of provincial elections, the first Iraqi-led and
Iraqi-owned electoral process with the participation of
citizens from all its communities. I would also like to
pay tribute to UNAMI and its contribution to preparing
and carrying out the elections, including with regard to
the important issue of minority representation. In
addition, we salute the serious, extensive and
indispensable work done by Iraq’s Independent High
Electoral Commission.
The peaceful provincial elections marked a
crucial moment in the consolidation of Iraqi
democracy. We hope that they will help to create new

20

Croatia shares the conviction that the expansion
and the increased activity of UNAMI have proved to be
fully justified in view of the political and security gains
witnessed compared to the previous year. It has proved
to be a positive force in advancing national
reconciliation,
facilitating
political
consensus,
engaging on the issues of minority representation and
disputed internal boundaries, promoting regional
dialogue, offering substantial electoral assistance,
promoting human rights and supporting reconstruction
and development. The recent establishment of the
Independent High Commission for Human Rights, to
name one example, is a tangible measure of its
achievements.

09-24991

S/PV.6087

As Iraq focuses on advancing the political
process and socio-economic recovery, UNAMI has
rightly identified federalism and hydrocarbon
regulation as the priority issues to be addressed within
the constitutional review process as requirements for
long-term stability. Another priority challenge will be
the issue of disputed internal boundaries and the status
of Kirkuk.
On the recovery and development front, the
International Compact for Iraq remains the blueprint
for coherent international engagement. We are pleased
to note a deepening United Nations engagement on
humanitarian and development issues. Croatia
continues to believe that dialogue and constructive
engagement with Iraq’s neighbours remains a critical
component in the long-term stabilization of Iraq. We
are encouraged by the trend of the reopening of
embassies of regional countries in Baghdad and salute
UNAMI’s continued support for regional dialogue.
In closing, as the engagement of the United
Nations is expanding and deepening, let me reiterate
Croatia’s full and continued support for the
professional and committed efforts of Special
Representative De Mistura and his team in their
fulfilment of the mandate of UNAMI.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate. We also wish to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing. We
also wish to welcome the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Iraq.
Iraqi provincial elections were successfully
completed at the end of last month. That is a major
milestone in the Iraqi peace and reconstruction process,
and it is conducive to expanding the representativeness
and inclusiveness of the Iraqi political process. It
marks another significant step towards having Iraqis
govern Iraq.
China wishes to congratulate the people and the
Government of Iraq, and we appreciate the assistance
of United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in the electoral preparations. We hope that
the Iraqi leaders in the various parties will seize the
current positive momentum, put their national interest
above all else and continue to promote impartial, open
and inclusive dialogue so that the national

09-24991

reconciliation process can move steadily along the
track of peace.
The improvement in the Iraqi security situation is
encouraging. However, objectively speaking, the
overall Iraqi situation still includes multiple challenges
that do not make us overly optimistic. We welcome the
strengthening of the capacity of the Iraqi security
forces and we hope that the Iraqi security forces’
capacity-building will be accelerated so that they can
fully take over responsibility for the security of their
country.
To consolidate the progress achieved by Iraq in
the political and security fields, it is necessary to speed
up the economic recovery and reconstruction process.
We appeal to the international community to continue
to help Iraq in its reconstruction and development,
honour aid commitments and promote engagement
with Iraq under the framework of the International
Compact for Iraq. We encourage Iraq to expand its
cooperation with neighbouring countries and give
greater play to the role of mechanisms such as the
meetings of Foreign Ministers of neighbouring
countries.
Under the leadership of Mr. De Mistura, and
pursuant to Security Council mandates, UNAMI has
made good progress in promoting national dialogue
and reconciliation and in the areas of electoral
assistance,
regional
cooperation,
humanitarian
assistance and development and reconstruction. China
highly appreciates its efforts in this regard.
We support a continued major role for the United
Nations in the Iraqi political and reconstruction
process, for which the international community should
create an enabling environment. We trust that the Iraqi
Government and the other parties concerned will
honour their commitments in good faith and effectively
ensure the safety and security of UNAMI personnel.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to thank the
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Iraq
and the work of the United Nations in that country
(S/2009/102). I welcome the participation of
Ambassador Al Bayati of Iraq and thank him for his
statement.

21

S/PV.6087

During the reporting period, there have been
many significant positive developments in the political,
security and reconstruction fields in Iraq, including the
overall low levels of violence and criminality, the
improved capability of the Iraqi security forces, and
the continued return of internally displaced persons and
refugees. We are particularly heartened by the
successful holding of provincial elections on
31 January 2009 in 14 out of Iraq’s 18 governorates.
We share the hope that Iraqi leaders will grasp this
opportunity to build momentum towards national
dialogue and reconciliation.
We are also encouraged by the steadily increasing
international diplomatic presence in Iraq, particularly
of regional countries, and the Iraqi cabinet’s decision
to allocate $25 million towards the construction of the
UNAMI integrated headquarters in Baghdad, which we
consider to be another indication of the country’s
enhanced
self-confidence
and
strengthened
international status.
However, we remain concerned about the serious
challenges that Iraq continues to face. The rocket
attack against the United Nations facility in the
International Zone in November 2008, the disturbing
acts of violence in the weeks prior to the provincial
elections and the bloody attacks on Shia pilgrims in
early January and mid-February 2009 are indications of
a fragile situation. At the same time, the growing
unemployment rate, the widening imbalances in social
service delivery and the deteriorated living conditions
of the most vulnerable groups — the vast majority of
whom are women, children, refugees and internally
displaced persons — are causes for concern. This
situation may become even more serious in the context
of the international financial crisis and the fluctuations
in the price of oil.
Now that the governorate council elections have
been successfully organized, the months ahead will be
crucial for Iraq to consolidate the progress made and
lay solid foundations for long-term gains. To this end,
the quest for durable peace and security in Iraq should
be a nationally-led process, which requires a
harmonious combination of various parameters and
united efforts. Throughout this process, the promotion
of dialogue and national reconciliation across political,
ethnic and sectarian lines continues to play a defining
role. For progress in the security and political fields to
take root, economic and social reconstruction must
move ahead. We call on all parties in Iraq to put aside

22

their partisan interests and jointly take on a national
agenda towards the achievement of national unity,
development and prosperity.
We commend the efforts undertaken by United
Nations staff in assisting the Iraqi Government in
strengthening institutions for local governorates,
advancing political dialogue and confidence building,
resolving the status of Kirkuk and other disputed
internal boundaries, extending electoral assistance,
supporting the constitutional review process and
facilitating regional dialogue in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1770 (2007) and 1830
(2008). Together with the extension of UNAMI’s
provincial outreach and the establishment of permanent
presences in Iraq by other United Nations agencies,
these efforts contribute to the strengthening of the
United Nations role in the development of a stable,
secure and prosperous Iraq as enshrined in the United
Nations Iraq Assistance Strategy 2008-2010.
At the same time, Iraq’s constructive engagement
with regional countries and the international
community is critical to the country’s long-term
stabilization and reconstruction. We welcome Iraq’s
participation in such broad frameworks as the
International Compact with Iraq, the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq, the United
Nations Development Group Iraq Trust Fund, the Paris
Declaration principles, the expanded ministerial
meetings, as well as the regional working groups on
energy, refugees and security. We support and look
forward to contributing to the promotion of collective
efforts to assist Iraq in each of its respective phases of
development.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
and by thanking Special Representative De Mistura for
having introduced the report (S/2009/102). In addition,
we express our gratitude to all the staff of UNAMI who
are successfully carrying out their duties under the
extremely difficult conditions in Iraq today.
We are grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Iraq, Mr. Al Bayati, for his detailed account of the
achievements of the Government and people of Iraq
and of the difficult problems that they are currently
working to resolve.

09-24991

S/PV.6087

There is no doubt that progress is being made in
Iraq, but it is premature to give way to euphoria. We
share the views expressed in the report to the effect
that the situation in Iraq has recently been developing
in a positive direction. The situation has improved in
the security sphere. The Iraqi Security Forces have
been strengthened. The Al-Maliki Government has
consolidated its presence in the provinces.
It is gratifying that, in the assessment of UNAMI,
the provincial council elections of 31 January took
place without serious disruptions. In our view, the very
fact that it was possible to hold such competitive
elections must be hailed as a positive development. It
is important that a growing number of representatives
of Iraq’s various political, ethnic and religious groups
participated in the elections. The voting in the
governorates marks a substantive element of progress
in Iraq, specifically in terms of the overall political
process and the achievement of national accord, which
Russia has always promoted as a means of bringing
about a reliable and long-term political settlement in
Iraq. However, some problems did arise, including low
voter turnout, which, in Baghdad, reached barely 40
per cent. This speaks to the fact that virtually half of
the population has not yet taken civic ownership of key
issues in the life of the country and in the prospects for
the development of Iraq. Furthermore, important
segments of the Iraqi population, such as refugees and
displaced persons, were not able to participate and
remained beyond the margins of the electoral
campaign.
The report notes that the terrorist underground
continues to have substantial potential in Iraq. A
significant segment of Iraqi society rejects the presence
of foreign forces in the country, even when such forces
are governed by specific rules and limited in time by the
status-of-forces agreement. In that regard, we await the
popular referendum on the security agreement to be held
by 31 July 2009, which should formalize the attitude of
the Iraqis to such agreements once and for all.
Other major and potentially explosive problems
include those described in detail in the report: human
rights violations, violence perpetrated by national law
enforcement personnel and the situation in prisons and
detention centres. The failure to settle these problems
is creating fertile ground for new outbursts of strife
among various groups and for the activity of terrorists.
We believe that the Government of Iraq will be able to
overcome these existing difficulties by working in

09-24991

close cooperation with UNAMI. The establishment of
the Independent High Commission for Human Rights
was an important step to that end.
Several other questions must also be resolved,
including the delineation of the competencies between
the federal centre and the regions; the establishment of
autonomous regions, concerning which there is a lively
ongoing discussion in Iraqi society; the definition of
administrative borders, including of Kirkuk; and the
adoption into the Constitution of previously agreed
changes that expand the potential for participation in
managing the country by representatives of all of the
communities living there. Finalizing these complex
objectives, which will determine the future of Iraq,
requires compromises and, most important, genuine
dialogue that could yield the appropriate solutions to
achieve national harmony and to preserve unity and the
territorial integrity of Iraq. We wish the Government
and people of Iraq every success in doing so.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, and the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al Bayati,
for their statements.
Like previous speakers, we are happy to see that
the security environment has made it possible to carry
out a successful electoral process, marked by an
encouraging level of voter participation and by the
absence — or by only a very small number — of
incidents. In this respect, my delegation commends the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), in particular the work it undertook jointly
with the Independent High Electoral Commission to
ensure the participation of Iraqi citizens. This
undoubtedly constitutes the best of its recent
achievements. My delegation trusts in the success of
subsequent processes to broaden the legitimacy of the
Government, further promote reconciliation and
strengthen the legitimacy of institutions.
My delegation welcomes the improvement in the
economic situation. In this context, we believe that the
financial support that Iraq is receiving should be
provided in a framework that enables supervision of
internal investment and promotes private enterprise at
the local level. In this respect, we see the
implementation of the private sector development
programme under the recently signed United Nations
Iraq Assistance Strategy as a positive development.

23

S/PV.6087

Of course, we support the proposal contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/102) that
the support of the international community be
systematically focused on those areas in which
humanitarian and development indicators register the
greatest disadvantage. In our view, one area of priority
should be combating food insecurity in the southern
part of the country.
All efforts at reconciliation must be accompanied
by efforts to strengthen democratic institutions, of
which the system of the administration of justice is
without doubt a component of fundamental importance.
Capacity-building in the judicial sector is a priority
area that requires the support of an institutional
framework of cooperation with other institutions
competent in this area.
My delegation is concerned about the persistence
of human rights violations. Independent of their
statistical significance, we urge that the necessary
action be taken to reduce the number of so-called
honour crimes. We recognize the positive steps taken in
the field of human rights, in particular the
establishment of the Independent Commission, which
we hope will serve as an instrument for the protection
and promotion of such rights.
In conclusion, I congratulate Iraq on its progress
not only towards reconciliation and institutional
capacity-building, but also in normalizing its relations
with its neighbours; on the growing international
recognition of its efforts to normalize its national
situation; and on its efforts to improve the well-being
of the Iraqi people.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/102) and Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura and his staff for their exceptional service and
performance every day in Iraq.
I also want to thank Ambassador Al Bayati of
Iraq for his important remarks and to congratulate his
Government and the people of Iraq on the important
and positive progress that they have achieved of late.
With our shared strategic interests at stake,
thousands of brave Americans in harm’s way, and the
future of millions of Iraqis in the balance, Iraq remains
an issue of great importance to the United States, but
one on which the new Administration will steer a new
course. The American and coalition troops, the

24

international diplomatic corps, aid workers and the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), who are all focused on building a future of
peace, security and stability in Iraq, have performed
magnificently, and we salute their accomplishments
and sacrifices.
Iraqi and American interests alike will best be
served by the safe and responsible redeployment of
United States forces from Iraq, by support for Iraqis as
they assume full responsibility for their sovereign
nation, and by the encouragement of other nations to
join in helping to stabilize the region and to deploy a
broader array of tools to eliminate the ongoing threat
of Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorism.
With the end of the coalition’s mandate on
31 December, we marked a new beginning with Iraq as
a friend and a partner working to establish open and
democratic rule and to advance peace and cooperation
with its neighbours and the wider world. Even so, a
sovereign Iraq continues to look to the international
community for support in these areas, and we
encourage Member States to help Iraq to strengthen its
democratic institutions, bring its displaced citizens
back home, strengthen its democracy and respect for
the rule of law, and deepen its productive relations with
all of its neighbours even as it works to continue to
strengthen and build its economy.
The United States will never forget the enormous
price this institution paid in Iraq. We will always
honour the ultimate sacrifice made by Sergio Vieira de
Mello and his colleagues, who gave their lives in the
attempt to build a new Iraq and who dedicated
themselves throughout their careers to the fight for a
more peaceful, lawful and decent world.
We salute the critically important role that the
United Nations continues to play in Iraq. Under the
leadership of Special Representative De Mistura and at
the invitation of the Iraqi Government, UNAMI has
expanded and enhanced its presence in Iraq. Its work is
as far-ranging as it is important — advancing national
reconciliation, helping to resolve disputes over internal
boundaries, ensuring that Iraqi elections are free and
fair, and helping those, including refugees and the
internally displaced, whose lives have been upended by
the turmoil of war. On behalf of the United States, I am
proud to offer our full support to UNAMI’s work. The
United States is grateful to Special Representative

09-24991

S/PV.6087

De Mistura and his staff for their accomplishments and
resolve.

the capacities and conditions that will let those
uprooted by war return home in peace.

Let me spend a few moments on one development
in which UNAMI’s efforts have been particularly
helpful. Iraq, as we have just been discussing, recently
held provincial elections in which the nation’s voters
chose new councils in 14 of Iraq’s 18 provinces. That
free and peaceful vote, with its widely respected
legitimacy, was a heartening moment in the evolution
of Iraqi democracy. Voter participation was high,
candidates from all of Iraq’s major parties and
communities ran hard, and the elections were unmarred
by boycotts, significant violence or major disruptions.
The Independent High Electoral Commission rose to
the challenge here, and UNAMI played an important
supporting role, providing technical assistance and
advice rooted in long United Nations experience.

The United States will support Iraq’s continuing
development as a democratic country in which all
communities can join in shaping the political, social
and economic life of a nation that protects the human
and civil rights of all of its citizens — a nation that
lives in peace with its neighbours and the international
community. The United States will move responsibly
and safely to reduce our military presence in Iraq. Our
bilateral security agreement with Iraq will frame the
path ahead, and the process of redeploying our combat
troops will be conducted in consultation with the
Government of Iraq and with its support.

We
most
importantly
congratulate
the
Government and people of Iraq, who deserve the
greatest credit for this stirring demonstration of
peaceful political change. I was personally moved by
the sight of the Iraqi police officers who helped to
secure the polling places and to protect ordinary voters
determined to cast their ballots. We hope that, with the
help of UNAMI and the international community,
Iraqis will be similarly encouraged by the national
elections that are to be held later this year.
I would like to draw particular attention today to
an area in which more work and a greater sense of
urgency are required from all of us: the plight of
millions of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons, who constitute one of the largest refugee
populations in the world today. Iraqi refugees face
increasingly difficult circumstances in their host
countries: rising food prices, rents they can no longer
meet, and dwindling personal resources. All these
conditions have heightened the spectre of poverty and
despair.
Thus, even as we commend host countries for
their generosity, we urge the international community
to intensify its efforts to take in the desperate and the
vulnerable;
to
ensure
that
non-governmental
organizations, host countries and others can provide
dignified lives and sheltering havens to those already
in their care; to help the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF and the
World Food Programme to provide additional aid to the
needy; and to help the Government of Iraq to develop

09-24991

This carefully managed commitment to ending
the war in no way diminishes the United States longterm support for a sovereign, stable, democratic and
prosperous Iraq that is a force for peace in a turbulent
region. Indeed, we have already signed a broad
agreement with Iraq that sets out a long-term
programme for cooperation in fields ranging from
education to trade, technology and common efforts to
meet the energy challenges of the new century. The
United States and the Government of Iraq are already
working to establish a strong foundation for future
cooperation and an ongoing partnership that benefits
both of our free and sovereign peoples and the region.
Our approach to Iraq must indeed also be
understood in a larger regional context. The
responsible draw-down of United States forces in Iraq
will give us additional flexibility in Afghanistan. At the
same time, the United States will vigorously pursue a
comprehensive strategy in the Middle East. That
strategy will address the security needs of Israel and
the legitimate political and economic aspirations of the
Palestinian people. It will seek an end to Iran’s
ambition to acquire an illicit nuclear capacity and its
support for terrorism. It will aim to encourage both
Iran and Syria to become constructive regional actors,
and it will deepen our ties with our partners in the
region to pursue common efforts to secure a broad and
sustained peace.
This is a new course, but it is the right one for the
future of Iraq, for the stability of the region and,
ultimately, for our shared security and well-being.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity, as representative of Japan.

25

S/PV.6087

I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his very helpful report. Japan wholeheartedly supports
and backs the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I express profound
gratitude to all the staff of UNAMI, who work under
difficult conditions. We express our sincere
condolences to the families of staff members who have
lost their lives in a noble mission.
I would also like to congratulate Ambassador Al
Bayati on his very important statement and on the
progress that the Iraqi Government and people are
making.
Japan is pleased with the positive developments
during the reporting period, most notably the
successful governorate elections in January. Our
election observers who participated in the process
reported the high regard in which they held the
professional work of the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the generally smooth conduct of the
voting. I am grateful for the kind words regarding the
Japanese contribution.
Only a representative and inclusive electoral
process will carry the legitimacy necessary to gain the
support of the people. The result of the elections will
require political parties to work with each other to
select their officers. Japan hopes that the success of the
governorate elections augurs well for the future
democratic process. We hope for an even higher
turnout in the next stages — the national election and
the remaining governorate elections — with the
collaboration of the Independent High Electoral
Commission and UNAMI.
Improvement in security is vital to the
development of the country. The positive progress in
the security situation during the last quarter is
encouraging. We welcome the growing role of the Iraqi
security forces. I take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the United States, the United Kingdom
and other coalition countries that are providing security
support. However, there are still disturbing incidents,
and we condemn all acts of violence.
Together with security, we should concentrate on
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development to
improve the living standards of all the Iraqi people.
Japan has extended $1.6 billion in grant aid for
immediate needs in such areas as supply of electricity
and medical services. In addition to $6 billion in debt
relief measures, Japan has pledged additional support

26

of $3.5 billion for the rehabilitation of large-scale
infrastructure. Already, 12 strategically important
projects, for a total amount of $2.5 billion, have been
agreed. The remaining $1 billion will place more focus
on development in the central and western regions.
However, there are still significant challenges
that remain to be tackled by the Iraqi people. First and
foremost, Iraq needs to achieve economic growth and
improve basic social services, which must be available
to all the Iraqi people, including displaced persons.
This has become a real challenge with the sharp
decline of oil prices. While the international
community, including Japan, is ready to support Iraq,
the Government of Iraq is expected to address the
undertakings it made in the International Compact for
Iraq. We are confident that, with appropriate technical
support, Iraq will soon become a vibrant economy that
can reap the benefits of peace.
Other challenges include the disputed internal
boundaries, the constitutional review and national
elections. The issue of the status of Kirkuk will soon
come to the forefront. I hope that the Iraqi people will
be able to find an equitable solution to this issue with
the assistance of UNAMI. Political issues can be
solved only through the political process. Resorting to
violence to achieve political gains is totally
unacceptable.
Another important issue is how to normalize
Iraq’s relationship with the rest of us in the
international community and to achieve international
standing equal to that which it held prior to the
adoption of resolution 661 (1990). We very much look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report in response
to resolution 1859 (2008).
We welcome the positive interaction of the
Government of Iraq with its neighbours. We strongly
call on the Government, as a responsible partner, to
work constructively with neighbouring countries and
the international community to work out solutions on
all outstanding issues.
As we recognize the gains achieved so far, we
note that 2009 will be an important year for the future
of Iraq. I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
strong support for the Government and the people of
Iraq.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

09-24991

S/PV.6087

I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura to respond to
comments made by members of the Council.
Mr. De Mistura: I will say just a few words,
simply to acknowledge the many positive, constructive
comments and the advice offered by each member of
the Security Council. We look forward to continuing to
report progress. There will be ups and downs: we know
it. But what we heard today will encourage both
Ambassador Al Bayati and me to continue on this road.

09-24991

The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
comments. I look forward to his continuing to do a
good job, along with his staff.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

27
