S/PV.8735

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8735

th meeting
Thursday, 27 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Yao Shaojun
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. Michon
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Prince
Mr. Mpanyane
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05220 (E)
*2005220*

S/PV.8735

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I will now brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia.
In accordance with paragraph 11 (g) of resolution
1844 (2008), I have the honour to brief the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning
Somalia, covering the period from 26 October 2019 to
27 February 2020.
This is my first briefing since the adoption, on
15 November 2019, of resolution 2498 (2019), in
which the Council consolidated and streamlined the
provisions related to the arms embargo, imposed a ban
on the components of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) and renewed the mandate of the Panel of
Experts on Somalia until 15 December 2020. Following
the adoption of the resolution, the Secretary-General
appointed five members of the Panel of Experts on
16 December 2019, and a sixth expert was appointed on
13 January 2020.
At its first consultations this year, on 17 January,
the Committee met with the members of the Panel
of Experts on Somalia to discuss their priorities for
2020. In that connection, the new Coordinator of the
Panel of Experts highlighted the increased focus on
the revenue sources of Al-Shabaab, in line with the
provisions of paragraph 1 of resolution 2498 (2019).
She also mentioned the ban on IED components, the
charcoal embargo and the management of weapons
and ammunition as other priority areas for the Panel
of Experts. The Coordinator pointed out that the
recent attacks in Mogadishu and a series of incidents
in Kenya had highlighted the constant threat posed by
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and the region.
2/10

27/02/2020

The Coordinator stressed the importance of
re-establishing a constructive working relationship
with the Federal Government of Somalia, including
by allowing all members of the Panel of Experts to
visit Somalia. In that regard, she viewed her visit to
Mogadishu in early January, at the invitation of the
National Security Adviser to the President of Somalia,
as a promising step forward. The members of the
Committee were encouraged by those initial exchanges.
They agreed with the Coordinator that the priorities of
the Federal Government of Somalia were well aligned
with those set out in the mandate of the Panel of Experts.
From 21 to 23 January, I travelled to Mogadishu
in my capacity as Chair of the Committee, along
with Committee members who joined me from New
York or through their local and regional diplomatic
representatives. The report on my visit, which contains
details of my meetings with the President and Prime
Minister of the Federal Government of Somalia and
other interlocutors, was shared with the members of
the Committee. I would like to briefly summarize
my observations.
The visit was an important opportunity to help raise
awareness of the purpose and scope of the sanctions
measures, which are aimed primarily at Al-Shabaab
and other armed groups, and to gather first-hand
information on their implementation. I hope that it will
also contribute significantly to the re-establishment of
relations between the Federal Government of Somalia
and the Panel of Experts. The Coordinator of the Panel
has already visited Mogadishu three times, which is
an encouraging start, and I hope that other members
of the Panel will soon be able to visit Somalia as well.
I believe that the visit was also useful in helping the
members of the Committee familiarize themselves with
the political, security and humanitarian developments
on the ground.
I note that the Committee plays an ongoing role in
raising awareness of the sanctions regime, correcting
the misperception that the sanctions regime is targeting
the Federal Government of Somalia and promoting
a better understanding of the scope of the measures,
particularly the new ban on IED components. We
must also continue to stress that the sanctions regime
is not static. It is regularly reviewed, has evolved
over the years to reflect changing circumstances and
will continue to evolve. The Committee and its Panel
of Experts are partners of the Federal Government of
Somalia, with the mutual aim of countering the threat
20-05220

27/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

of terrorism and tackling the flow of illegal arms to
non-State armed groups in Somalia.
During the reporting period, the Committee received
three monthly updates from the Panel of Experts, one of
which was submitted pursuant to resolution 2441 (2018)
and the other two pursuant to resolution 2498 (2019).
The Committee also received correspondence from two
Member States. One letter raised concerns regarding
the findings of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea, the predecessor of the Panel of Experts, and
two others raised confidentiality issues. To date, the
Committee has responded to two of the three letters.
I will conclude by summarizing statistics with
regard to the arms embargo. Prior to the adoption of
resolution 2498 (2019), the Committee approved an
exemption request submitted by the Federal Government
of Somalia pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2111
(2013). The Committee also received a pre-delivery
notification from a Member State, pursuant to paragraph
4 of resolution 2142 (2014) and paragraph 14 of resolution
2444 (2018). Following the adoption of resolution 2498
(2019), the Committee received four pre-delivery
notifications from the Federal Government of Somalia,
pursuant to paragraphs 11 and 13 of resolution 2498
(2019), for one of which it also received a pre-delivery
notification from the supplier Member State, pursuant
to paragraph 14 of the same resolution. In addition, the
Committee received three pre-delivery notifications
from a supplier Member State and an international
organization, pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution
2498 (2019). Lastly, the Committee received a copy of
the Federal Government of Somalia’s biannual report
to the Security Council, pursuant to paragraph 35 of
resolution 2498 (2019), on the structure, composition,
strength and deployment of its security forces and the
status of regional and militia forces.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing this afternoon.
The Somalia sanctions regime represents a shared
effort by Somalia and its international partners to tackle
the greatest threats to Somalia’s peace and security and
to support long-term security sector reform. Its nature
as a partial embargo means that the Federal Government

S/PV. 8735

of Somalia is able to access the equipment and training
needed to tackle the scourge of Al-Shabaab. We greatly
welcome the support provided by Council members
in that regard. We strongly condemn the continued
attacks by Al-Shabaab, which take lives in Somalia and
beyond. At this point, I wish to pay tribute to the brave
men and women of the Somali armed forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia.
We welcome the Federal Government of Somalia’s
recent engagement with the Panel of Experts and the
Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia, including constructive meetings with the new
Coordinator of the Panel and a visit by the Committee
in January 2020, on which we have just been briefed.
We hope that that engagement can continue with the
support of the international community to enable
continued progress in building long-term stability
and security in Somalia and we look forward to a visit
to Somalia by the other members of the Panel in the
near future.
We are currently at a critical juncture in the longterm future of Somalia’s security. Together, we can work
to stop the flow of arms, improvised explosive device
components and illicit finance to Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups that threaten Somalia’s stability. We also
call for progress in agreeing individual designations
under the Somalia sanctions regime, in particular those
proposed in October 2019. Those listings represent an
important element in ensuring that the sanctions regime
has an impact.
Somalia and its international supporters face a
huge task in the coming years in delivering the full
transition to Somali-led security. The United Kingdom
will continue to stand firmly alongside Somalia, the
United Nations and regional partners in those efforts.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing. At the outset, I would
like to commend you for the visit that you conducted
to Somalia in January. I would also like to thank the
Somali representative for the support in coordinating
and facilitating the visit.
Germany reiterates that sanctions are an
indispensable instrument, contributing to stabilization
and State- and peacebuilding in Somalia, thereby also
to enhancing regional stability. In that regard, the visit
on which we were just briefed was very important,
including with regard to an understanding by all sides
of the sanctions regime in place.

20-052203/10

S/PV.8735

The situation in Somalia

To make one point very clear, the purpose of the
arms embargo is to support the Government and to
strengthen its ability to provide security. The focus of
the sanctions is on the fight against Al-Shabaab. The
newly imposed ban on improvised explosive device
components in particular will degrade Al-Shabaab’s
ability to manufacture home-made explosives. It is now of
paramount importance that that provision be effectively
implemented, particularly by neighbouring States.
We often hear it said that sanctions are not an end
in themselves. At the same time, it remains true that
sanctions have been adopted for a particular purpose.
As long as that purpose has not been fulfilled, the
sanctions must be maintained.
At the same time, Germany remains ready to
support the Somali Government in capacity-building,
for example, to better register and monitor the use
of small arms and light weapons. We are also ready
to continue to support security sector reform. In that
regard, I believe that much progress has been achieved.
An example is the biometric registration of almost all
members of the security forces, which is an ongoing
process. Such developments can help towards later
considering lifting some of the sanctions in that respect.

27/02/2020

We note that the arms and charcoal embargoes
against Somalia continue to work. Those bans have
proved to be a fairly effective tool for cutting off
the channels that supply the extremist and terrorist
forces. At the same time, the partial lifting of the
arms embargo on the supply of weapons to the Somali
security forces has had a positive impact. We support
further multifaceted assistance to Mogadishu to
improve the operational readiness of the Somali army
and the African Union Mission in Somalia, which bear
the main burden in combating terrorists.
Last year, the Council imposed additional
restrictions on the supply of improvised explosive
device components to the country. We trust that such
measures will work smoothly. However, we would
like to underscore that we do not see sanctions as an
end in and of themselves — only as a way of assisting
Somalia’s authorities to achieve peace and stability in
their country.

We are concerned about attacks against civilians
and the persistent sexual and gender-based violence in
Somalia. We therefore again call on all forces in Somalia
to strictly adhere to international humanitarian law.

With regard to relationships between the Committee
and its Panel of Experts and the Federal Government of
Somalia, we would very much like such contacts once
again to take on a normal tone. For this to happen, there
is a need to clearly understand that all the concerns
of Somalia’s sovereign authorities must be given full
consideration. The reality on the ground is such that,
if we do not do so, Somali stakeholders and external
forces are unlikely to deem it necessary to defer to the
authority of the central authorities. In that case, all our
efforts to provide political, economic and humanitarian
assistance will be in vain. The Federal Government in
Somalia must not have the impression that the Security
Council is biased in its work. In that regard, we
welcome your January visit to Somalia, Mr. President,
as well as the initial contacts with the Coordinator
of the Panel of Experts in Mogadishu. We trust that,
with the assistance of the renewed composition of the
Panel of Experts, we will be able together to turn the
page and to build constructive relationships with our
Somali partners.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your informative briefing on the
work of the Committee over the past four months.

Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.

The Russian Federation fully supports Mogadishu’s
efforts to achieve domestic political and socioeconomic
stability and to counter the main security threat in
Somalia, namely, the terrorist group Al-Shabaab.

At the outset, we would like to express our thanks to
the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, for his
briefing on the work of the Sanctions Committee and on

We continue to fully support the work of the
Panel of Experts. The first meetings between the new
Coordinator and the Somali authorities are encouraging
but cooperation must now be fully re-established. All
the experts need access in order to accomplish their
mandate. The cooperation of the Somali authorities
without preconditions is crucial to the effectiveness
of the sanctions instrument, which contributes to the
stability of Somalia and beyond. As the Council, we
must stand up for the Panel to ensure that it can do its
mandated work.

4/10

20-05220

27/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

the recent field visit he undertook to Somalia in January.
That visit clearly demonstrates the determination of
the international community and the United Nations
to continue to support Somalia to achieve stability and
development and engage in the reconstruction phase.
Our delegations believe that sanctions are not
an end in themselves and that they should constitute
a tool to assist and support the Somalia Government
in its stabilization efforts. We would like to take
this opportunity to commend the Somali Federal
Government for its determination to hold elections
within the established timeline. We would therefore
like to appeal to all Somali parties to put the national
interests above any other considerations and to fully
engage in a constructive dialogue to promote genuine
consensus on building an inclusive Somali State.

S/PV. 8735

cut Al-Shabaab off from its sources of weapons
and financing.
Thirdly, we feel the need to continue raising
awareness of the purpose of the sanctions regime. We
concur with the statement of the Chair that the sanctions
regime is not static; it must be used only as a means to
support a wider political strategy and peace process. It
must therefore have a clear, transparent and measurable
timetable. We would like to reiterate that its ultimate
objective is to support, ensure and maintain security
and stability in Somalia.
I wish to reaffirm Indonesia’s solidarity with
Somalia in achieving long-term peace and stability,
as well as our respect for Somalia’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

We call on the international community to continue
to provide all support to the Federal Government of
Somalia with a view to enabling it to hold the elections
within its set timeline, which would open up new
prospects for the Somali people to lay the foundation
for stability and reconstruction.

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your briefing
on your recent work in your capacity as the Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751
(1992), concerning Somalia. I also welcome your recent
visit to Somalia.

Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Let begin by thanking
you, Sir, in your capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992),
concerning Somalia, for your important briefing. I
would like to reaffirm our support for your leadership
and work as Chair. I would like to share several points
in that regard.

Over the past few months, the Federal Government
of Somalia has improved relations and enhanced
communications with the Sanctions Committee and
its Panel of Experts. The positive progress achieved
is encouraging. Maintaining the mutual trust and
cooperation between the Sanctions Committee and the
Panel and the Federal Government of Somalia is very
important as it bears upon the effectiveness of relevant
measures of the Security Council. China encourages the
Panel to continue to utilize its comparative advantages,
seek greater input from Somalia and countries and
organizations in the region, provide constructive
assistance based on needs and respond in a timely
manner on matters of interest to Somalia.

First, we commend your efforts as Chair to
contribute towards the resetting of relations between
the Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel of
Experts. As we said on previous occasions, dialogue
and cooperation between Somalia and the Panel, based
on mutual respect, are key for the Panel’s success in
discharging its mandate. We encourage continued
confidence-building exercises between the Government
of Somalia and the Panel and are heartened by the recent
engagement and visit to Mogadishu by the Coordinator
of the Panel.
Secondly, Indonesia continues to support the
Panel’s work priorities for 2020. As we stated during the
briefing on Somalia earlier this week (see S/PV.8731),
we are concerned by the ongoing threat of Al-Shabaab.
We welcome in particular the expanded focus on
Al-Shabaab’s revenue sources. We look forward
to seeing concrete recommendations to effectively

The Sanctions Committee is an important tool of
the Security Council to maintain regional peace and
stability. It should improve the focus of its work and
pay more attention to critical issues affecting regional
security, help Somalia effectively combat terrorist
forces, such as Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, and help the Somali Government
to enhance its governance and security capabilities.
Finally, China would like to reiterate that sanctions
are not the end but the means, and should contribute
to the political settlement of relevant issues. Sanctions

20-052205/10

S/PV.8735

The situation in Somalia

should be adjusted in the light of developments in a
timely fashion and eventually lifted.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): At the outset. I would
like to thank you, Sir, in your capacity as a Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992), concerning Somalia, for your briefing. We
commend the efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia and its recent constructive cooperation with
the Panel of Experts and look forward to their continued
collaborative efforts.
We support the important role the Somalia
Sanctions Committee and of the Panel to implement
their functions and mandates under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, especially their
central role in overseeing the implementation of the
sanctions regime with regard to Somalia. We would like
to emphasize that the Committee should discuss specific
recommendations thoroughly, with the assistance of the
Panel, to ensure the full implementation of the sanctions
measures put forth by the Council.
As noted by the Chair, the Committee should
also pay attention to the practicalities of the situation
in Somalia, including the legitimate concerns and
requests of the Federal Government of Somalia. In that
connection, it should make sure that sanctions measures
are targeted correctly and do not affect capacitybuilding and other national development plans. We find
it necessity to take into account the need to alleviate any
misperceptions about sanctions measures. At the same
time, the Committee and the Panel should continuously
pay close attention to the situation on the ground and
make the necessary adjustments to the sanctions regime
as appropriate.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for your briefing as well as your leadership
in leading the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia,
including for having organized a visit to Mogadishu
last month. Estonia participated in that visit and found
it very useful. We would like to add our voice to your
statement: we, too, hope that, as a result of the visit,
the Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel of
Experts will be able to reset their relations.
Given their mutual aim of countering the threat
of terrorism, we believe that the Panel of Experts is
a natural partner for the Somali authorities. Estonia
fully supports the priorities of the Panel of Experts for
2020, especially the expanded focus on Al-Shabaab’s
6/10

27/02/2020

revenue sources, the ban on components for improvised
explosive devices, the charcoal ban and weapons
and ammunition management. The Panel’s priorities
are closely aligned with the priorities of the Somali
authorities, as both aim to build a peaceful and
stable Somalia.
It is important to recall that the sanctions regime is
in place with the sole purpose of supporting the Somali
authorities in achieving the stabilization of Somalia.
It is, inter alia, preventing illegal arms trafficking
and Al-Shabaab from getting weapons. It cuts revenue
sources for Al-Shabaab. It helps the Somali authorities
to enhance security-sector reform and weapons and
ammunition management capacities. It is also important
to note that the sanctions regime entails notification and
exemption procedures, which ensure that the Somali
authorities can get the necessary equipment for their
defence and security forces.
A lot has been achieved since the last briefing by the
Chair, including the adoption of resolution 2498 (2019),
which consolidated and streamlined the provisions
of the arms embargo and imposed an improvisedexplosive-device components ban. This goes to show
that the sanctions regime is customized in a way aimed
at best helping the Somali authorities in continuously
changing circumstances. The sanctions regime is a tool
to help to transform Somalia.
Estonia would like to commend the Federal
Government of Somalia on the progress achieved,
including in the area of security-sector reform. We also
welcome the fact that the coordinator of the Panel has
visited Somalia three times already, and we encourage
the Somali authorities to grant access to all members of
the Panel, as only then will the Panel be able to begin
its important work.
Estonia hopes that in 2020 the Council, the 751
Committee, the Panel of Experts and the Federal
Government of Somalia can all work together in good
faith with strong unity of purpose to make long-term
peace and stability in Somalia a reality.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for your statement and your
visit to Mogadishu and to reiterate to you France’s full
support in your work.
I should like to touch on to three points.
The first relates to the arms embargo, which remains
an essential tool for moving towards sustainable peace
20-05220

27/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

in Somalia. The embargo limits the trafficking of arms
and ammunition to Somalia and prevents terrorist
groups from obtaining them. The embargo also makes
it possible to support the federal Somali authorities in
their efforts to reform the security sector and improve
their capacity to manage arms and munitions. In
addition, notification and exemption procedures enable
them to obtain the equipment that they require for their
defence and security forces.
My second point concerns the fight against the
funding of Al-Shabaab. For our part, we hope that the
Panel of Experts will begin to work together with the
Federal Government of Somalia and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in analysing Al-Shabaab’s
revenue sources and on mapping that terrorist group’s
illegal taxation system, as requested by the Council
in resolution 2498 (2019), of 15 November 2019. This
is a complex but important task that will contribute
to strengthening our collective action against
Al-Shabaab’s funding. We therefore call on all Member
States to cooperate fully with the Panel of Experts on
this issue.
My third and last point involves the cooperation of
the Somali authorities with the Panel of Experts, which
has been a difficult subject over the past couple of
months. We welcome the progress that has been made
since the beginning of 2020, with the three visits by the
new coordinator of the Panel of Experts to Mogadishu
and the discussions that were begun with regard to
priority cooperation between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the Panel of Experts. We believe that
these efforts are headed in the right direction and
respond in part to the expectations of the Council. It is
now vital that all Panel experts be able to carry out their
work in a free and independent manner through regular
visits to Somalia, on the basis of the mandate that was
given to them by the Council.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing and
for your contributions as Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia.
The United States is encouraged by the coordinator
of the Panel of Experts’ recent travel to Somalia and
meeting with the national security adviser to the
President. We hope that the visit will serve as a building
block to re-establish important information-sharing

S/PV. 8735

and constructive working relations between the 751
Committee and the Federal Government of Somalia.
This positive step comes at a critical time, as
Somalia continues to suffer from a lack of overall
security and faces significant humanitarian challenges.
Al-Shabaab, the Islamic State in Somalia and other
actors continue to threaten the peace and stability of
Somalia and the surrounding region. Disrupting and
ultimately eliminating sources of financing for these
groups is crucial in this fight. Addressing the issue
of financing and other ongoing threats will require
close cooperation between the Federal Government
of Somalia, international partners and members of the
Panel of Experts.
The United States is committed to working with
our partners and Member States to utilize the 751
Somalia sanctions regime to its full extent and reduce
Al-Shabaab’s ability to conduct attacks. This includes
providing technical assistance to counter the financing
of terrorism, support in tackling the threat of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), and capacity-building to help
the Somali security forces secure and properly manage
their conventional-weapons stockpiles.
The United States continues to support the arms
embargo so as to prevent Al-Shabaab and other actors
from accessing weapons and related materials. We
emphasize that the arms embargo does not prevent the
Federal Government of Somalia from obtaining the
military equipment that it needs; the embargo requires
only that arms shipments follow the required notification
process for transparency and tracking purposes.
Effective enforcement of the 751 sanctions
regime requires the Committee to act expeditiously
on the nomination of individuals. When Member
States identify and nominate individuals engaged
in the arms-trafficking and illicit charcoal trade, the
Committee should act quickly on such nominations.
We urge the Member States that have placed holds to
lift them immediately so that those individuals may be
properly sanctioned.
Finally, we urge Member States to support ongoing
Committee measures and sanctions designations and to
implement fully resolution 2498 (2019), which outlines
the arms embargo provisions and, importantly, places
a ban on IED components. We must continue to work
together and employ all available tools to ensure peace
and stability in Somalia and in the region to achieve a
better future for all Somalis.

20-052207/10

S/PV.8735

The situation in Somalia

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I am honoured once again
to address the members of the Security Council today
and would like to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia, for your visit to Mogadishu last month, during
which you witnessed first-hand the progress on the
ground. I wish also to thank you for your briefing.
My purpose today is threefold: first, to present
my Government’s considerations on the threats to
peace, security and stability in my country; secondly,
to provide an update on the important work that my
Government is undertaking to address those threats;
and, thirdly, to update the Council on our engagement
with the Panel of Experts on Somalia.

27/02/2020

involved in the recovered areas in Lower Shabelle,
namely Sabiid, Anole, Awdheegle and Bariire. Thus
far, 2,000 militias have been integrated into the
Galmudug forces and 374 into the Hirshabelle forces,
based on the politically negotiated Hirshabelle and
Galmudug frameworks. In addition, such efforts by
the Federal Government of Somalia has resulted in the
reintegration of the first battalion of 550 soldiers from
existing Somali National Army units. The sustained
offensive against Al-Shabaab terrorists illustrates the
increasing capabilities of the Somali security forces,
and, given the right conditions, the latter are capable
of effectively implementing the transition plan and
delivering security and justice.

In terms of existing and emerging threats to Somalia,
Al-Shabaab continues to pose the biggest threat to
Somalia and to the region. It retains the capacity and
the network to sneak suicide vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices and vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices into the capital, as seen in the recent
security incidents there, including the 28 December
2019 attack in the vicinity of the ex-control Afgooye
junction, and the vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device at a checkpoint on Makka Al-Mukarama road in
Mogadishu on 8 January. At the same time, the terrorist
group continues to influence some parts of Somalia
through its extensive extortion and intimidation
techniques as well as propaganda.

The Federal Government of Somalia has made
substantial progress in building the institutional
capacity of the Somali National Security Forces so as
to promote the rule of law and access to justice as well
as to improve the quality and delivery of governance.
In 2019, key benchmarks met by the Somali National
Army and overseen by the Minister of Defence
included completing the biometric registration of its
forces, the development of financial management and
procurement guidelines for the Somali national armed
forces, the creation of an efficient and effective system
in managing rations as well as reviewing such key areas
as personnel, logistics and finance. Logistical support
to the Somali national forces by the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia was also streamlined. The
Somali Police Force has also illustrated its potential by
supporting military operations and consolidating gains
made in recovered areas.

The Federal Government of Somalia remains
strongly committed to the implementation of the
transition plan, underpinned by the notion of a
comprehensive approach to security. The Government
recognizes that mutually reinforcing efforts on the
reform front in the security sector, coupled with effective
military operations and the delivery of stabilization
initiatives, are prerequisites for consolidating successes
in the transition plan.

The first 100 Darawiish officers have been deployed
in Lower Shabelle to support holding the liberated areas
and assisting with humanitarian deliveries, allowing
the Somali national forces to move further afield with
their operations. The Federal Government of Somalia
intends to accelerate force-generation efforts for
holding recovered areas with a view to creating an
environment conducive to stabilization activities and
the implementation of the rule of law.

Operation Badbaado, in Lower Shabelle, has been
the central focus of the Government after successful
military operations in which joint military operations
resulted in several strategic areas recovered by the
Somali National Army and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. Since February 2019, a total of 9,704 Somali
National Army forces have been generated, of which
1,023, under the October 14 brigade, were directly

On 30 December 2019, 385 new police recruits
from South-West State graduated and are to be
deployed to Lower Shabelle, following the new police
model agreed by the Federal Government of Somalia
and federal member states in 2016. On 13 February
2020, a further 300 Darawiish cadets at General
Kahiye Police Academy graduated and are now ready
for deployment. The Federal Government of Somalia’s

8/10

20-05220

27/02/2020

The situation in Somalia

objective is to generate 1,750 Darawiish police officers
for deployment in 2020. In 2019 alone, the Somali Police
Force generated a total of 3,212 new police officers.
In addition to the ongoing operational and
institutional capacity-building activities, the Federal
Government of Somalia has continued with efforts
designed to create the conditions needed to strengthen
local governance, reconciliation and rule of law, among
other stabilization efforts. To support the coordination
of stabilization activities in the newly liberated areas
as part of the Lower Shabelle military operations, an
interministerial task force, consisting of the Ministers
of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, Defence,
Justice and Judiciary Affairs, Internal Security, Health,
Information and Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster
Management, was formed and has focused on the need
to ensure coherent and conditions-based approaches to
stabilization activities.
While implementation of the transition plan is
under way, the existence of armed elements that are
not yet part of the Federal or state forces presents a
risk to stability. Integration efforts are under way to
incorporate militia groups into the forces, as set out
in the transition plan. However, integrated militia
forces require vast financial resources, equipment,
training and such other efforts as the demobilization
of non-active persons and civilian reintegration. The
Federal Government of Somalia continues to strengthen
weapons and ammunition management for the Somali
security forces. It has improved storage capacities and
undertaken consistent implementation of the marking
and registration of weapons as well as efforts aimed at
capturing data on weapons distributed.
With regard to the Panel of Experts on Somalia,
our aim is to begin and maintain a constructive
working relationship with the Panel and to cooperate
on determining how to address the security threats in
terms of terrorism financing, illegal weapons flow and
the illicit charcoal trade in Somalia, while helping to
reach a deeper understanding of Al-Shabaab’s use of
improvised explosive devises. The Federal Government
of Somalia has had a number of meetings with the
Panel’s Coordinator in the last few months, with a
view to improving relationships. However, we have not
agreed on the way forward, as our priorities remain
unaligned and our concerns continue to be unexamined.
As Council members are aware, the Panel or
the Monitoring Group during the previous mandate

S/PV. 8735

made unsubstantiated allegations against certain
individuals within and outside the Government.
Such allegations have damaged relations and caused
significant reputational damage. We are aware that the
best practice in monitoring the United Nations arms
embargo is to use evidence-based reporting with a
reasonable standard of proof, but that approach has not
been followed for recent incidents. We therefore request
once again that a reliable mechanism be established to
redress cases where allegations are wrongly made. The
Council must also ensure that all efforts are made in a
timely manner to ensure full investigations in cases of
misconduct by Panel of Experts, in line with the rules
and the regulations of the United Nations.
The Federal Government of Somalia is confident
that all efforts will be undertaken to strengthen and
improve accountability and responsibility in conductrelated matters, including through the application
of policy and practice guidance and enhancement
of investigation capacities. We trust that these
efforts will continue to improve awareness and that
violations are promptly investigated and addressed so
that accountability is ensured in cases of sustained
misconduct, thereby guaranteeing that full cooperation
between the host country and the Panel of Experts
is achieved.
In conclusion, Somalia continues to face
multidimensional challenges with competing priorities.
The Federal Government of Somalia is concurrently
engaged in countering an insurgency and building strong
and stable institutions in line with the national security
architecture and the Somali transition plan. Resource
gaps and logistical flexibility remain key challenges
in adapting to changing operational strategies by
the insurgents. Strengthening intelligence-sharing
mechanisms and joint planning is a priority for the
Federal Government of Somalia and pivotal in joint
operations to further recover the remaining areas under
Al-Shabaab control.
In this regard, the Federal Government of Somalia
requests the continued support of the international
community in the aforementioned areas to counter
the threats of Al-Shabaab effectively and bring
lasting peace and stability to Somalia and the region.
However, the sanctions continue to be imposed on
Somalia without proper assessment of its effectiveness.
We therefore once again wish to go on record that we
are seeking the full lifting of the arms embargo on

20-052209/10

S/PV.8735

The situation in Somalia

Somalia, which has no time limit or clearly defined or
verifiable benchmarks.
Lastly, my Government remains seized of the
important issues being discussed today, and I ask for
the Council to support our continued constructive
working relationship moving forward.
Upon instructions from my Government, I would
like to bring to the Council’s attention an urgent matter
that poses a serious threat to our peace and security.
The Federal Government of Somalia has exhausted all
diplomatic means in seeking the Government of Kenya
to refrain from actions that threaten the historical
relations between our two nations and the long-lasting
economic, security and political cooperation between
our two Governments and our citizens.
Somalia believes that our region can best succeed
with more cooperation and less interference. However,
Kenya continues to be a consistent destabilizing force
in Somalia, off-setting and negating its engagement in
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Kenya’s brash interference in Somalia’s domestic
affairs is a blatant breach of Somalia’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity.
Furthermore, Kenya’s continuous encroachment in the
Somali border areas clearly undermines our stability
and sovereignty. Our hard-earned progress, with the

10/10

27/02/2020

help of the international community, is today being
jeopardized by the negative anti-peace actions carried
out by the Kenyan Government. These destabilizing
actions not only negatively impact Somalia, but are
also antithetical to the objective of regional and global
peace and in clear violation of paragraph 4 of Article 2
of the Charter of the United Nations, which states:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations.”
The Federal Government of Somalia strongly
condemns those blatant violations and reaffirms that it
will take all necessary measures proceeding from its
responsibility to defend the inviolability, sovereignty and
unity of Somalia, in accordance with our Constitution,
as well as international law and covenants.
The Kenyan Government continues its destabilizing
actions against our nation, despite our multiple protests.
If the aforementioned actions do not immediately
cease, we will invoke Article 35 of the United Nations
Charter and bring our case against Kenya’s breach of
Somalia’s sovereignty, political independence, unity
and territorial integrity to the Security Council.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

20-05220
