156

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

Reca!ling a/so its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, and in particular the policy measures envisagcd in
the Strategy,
Recallingfurther its resolution 37/252 of 21 December
1982 on immediate measures in favour of the developing
countries,
Taking into account, inter afia. the immediate measures
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its sixth session, 171 and noting related
efforts in favour of developing countries by the relevant
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system,
Taking note of the Programme of lmmediate Measures
in Areas of Critica! Importance to Developing Countries.
contained in section V of the Economic Declaration
adopted by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983. 172 and the proposals contained in the Buenos Aires Platform, adopted at the Fifth
Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77, held from 28
March to 9 April 1983, 171
Taking note of the proposals on the immediate measures contained in the Declaration of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77, adopted in New York on
10 October 1983, 174
Noting that while effective action by the international
community is indispensable for the creation of an environment that is fully supportive of the national and collective
efforts of the developing countries for the realization of
their development goals, the primary responsibility for the
development of developing countries rests with those
countries themselves.
Aware that certain economic indicators point to the
recovery of sorne major developed market-economy countries, but that, while the recovery ofthe developed marketeconomy countries could be potentially beneficia! to the
developing countries, by itself it would not be sufficient
and could be aborted unless policy measures address both
the revitalization of the world economy and the reactivation of the development process in the developing world.
Grave/y concerned about the present world economic chmate of crisis and its negative impact on the developing
countries and their development prospects,
Reiterating, in that context, the need for the immediate
adoption of concrete measures in areas of critica! importance to the developing countries.
Also aware, in that context, that both immediate and
structural problems must be addressed fully and in a
coherent manner,
1. Agrees that concrete immediate measures in favour
of the developing countries should be taken in order to
contribute to the casing of current economic problems, to
promote the accelerated growth and development of the
developing countries on a sustained basis and to promote
the reactivation of the world economy;
2. Agrees that immediate measures within the organs.
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
should include measures directed, inter afia, at progress in
the following areas:
17 1 See Proceeding.1· o(lhe U1111ed N1111om Conkrcncc on Tradc and /krd
opment, Sixlh Session, ·vol. L Re¡,or1 ami Annexe.1· (l lnited Nations pubhcat1on-,,,Sales No. E.83.11.D.6).
¡, ~ A/38/132-S/l 5675 and C,>1-r. l and 2. annex, scct. !11.
171 Proceeding5 <d' thc l 1nited ,\'at1,1n, ( ·rn¡(erl'nce on Frade und /J{'l'Cl<i¡1men1. Sixth Session, vol. L Reporl a111i I n,wxc, (l lnited Nations puhlicatinn.
Sales No. E.83.11.D.6), anne, VI

(a) Food and agriculture, including special food aid
measures as required for seriously affected food-deficit
rnuntries in Africa:
(h) Money and fmance, transfer of resources, including
official development assistancc. indebtedness and multilateral development activities:
(e) Trade and raw materials, including access to markcts for thc cxports of devcloping countries. and urgent
appropriate action in the arca of commodities:
(d) Development of the encrgy resources of the developing countries:
(e) lmplementation of thc Substantial New Programmc of Action for the 1980s for thc Least Developed
Countries: 1"
J. Urges ali Govemments, bearing in mind the particular contribution devcloped countries can make, to pursue
effcctive negotiating efforts, within the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system. with a
vicw to the adoption of concrete measures in the areas
described in paragraph 2 above:
4. .-tgrees that policy measures of an immediate naturc
should be taken into account in the review and appraisal of
the lntemational Devclopmcnt Strategy for the Third
United Nations Dcvclopment Decade;
S. Requests thc relevant organs, organizations and
hodies of the Unitcd Nations system. in their areas of
competence and in accordance with their decisions, to takc
the appropriate action necessary for the implementation of
immediate measures in the arcas referrcd to in paragraph 2
above:
6. Requests the Sccrctary-General, in co-operation
with the executive heads of the organs. organizations and
bodics ofthe United Nations system, to submit a report on
the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
104th plenar_r meeting
20 Decemhcr 1983

38/201.

Liquidation of the United Nations Emergency Operation Trust Fund and allocation
of the remaining balance

Thc General Asscmhly,
Taking note of thc report of the Secretary-General conccrning thc need for liquidation of the United Nations
Emergency Operation Trust Fund, m
Ful/y aware o[ the original objectives for which the Fund
was created,
Deeply conccrncd about the exceptional situation faced
hy many developing countries, in particular African countries, which are afflicted by drought, faminc and malnutrition,
Concerncd a/so ahout thc special plight of the Palestine
refugees and thc tinancial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestinc Refugees in the
Near East.
Taking into account that developing countrics, through
the Caracas Programme of Action, 177 have taken it upon
themselves to implement a series of actions in the field of
economic and tcchnical co-operation among developing
countries, designed. inter afia, to help them face their criti174 See A138 494 and ( ·orr. l. annex.
175 Rc¡,ort <ftlw l 1nt1nl lú1110ns <·o,!fi•rcncc on th(' l.cast Derc/oped Countnc,,, Pan\. 1-14 5ie¡ 1/¡',nh,>r 198/ (llnited Nations puhlication. Sales No.
l 82.l.8L part onl'. ,rt·t -\
7(, ·\ 38 )/,(,_
J

117

\

\ó ~~\ and l 11n l annc,

V.

157

Resolutions adopted on thc reports of the Second Committce

-------------

--------------

cal development problems and attain thcir objectivcs, giving due regard to the special nccds of the lcast dcvcloped
among them,
1. Decides to Jiquidate thc United Nations Emcrgency
Operation Trust Fund and to allocate thc remaining balance to existing funds and programmes of the United
Nations as follows:
(a) Seventy per cent shall be channelled through
United Nations Development Programme-administered
funds to finance urgently needed projects, primarily in the
food and agricultura) sectors in countries affiicted by famine and malnutrition as a result, particularly, of scvere or
prolonged drought, with special emphasis on African
countries;
(b) Eighteen per cent shall be channelled through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agcncy for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, especially to its educational
programme;
(e) Twelve per cent shall be channelled through the
United Nations Development Programmc for the purpose
ofeconomic and technical co-operation among developing
countries; these funds shall be allocated to activities in
economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries of critica) importancc to developing countries,
according to the priorities set by them;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
action to ensure that the funds are allocatcd in accordance
with the present resolution as soon as possible;
3. Also requests the Administrator of thc U nited
Nations Development Programme to rcport to the Governing Council at its thirty-first session on action takcn to
implement the present resolution;
4. Further requests the Secretary-Gcneral to monitor
closely the implementation of the prcsent resolution, to
make available progress rcports and to rcport fully to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion.
f04th plcnarr meeling
20 Deccmhcr 1983

38/202. Strengthening of the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to natural disasters and other disaster situations
The General Assemb!y,
Reca!!ing its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 Deccmbcr
1971, by which the Office of thc Unitcd Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator was established, and 36/225 of 17
December 198 I, by which it reaffirmed the mandate ofthe
Office and, inter afia, called for thc strcngthening and
improvement of its capacity and effectivencss,
Recalling also its resolution 37/144 of 17 December
1982, in which the Assembly rccognized that, in order to
attain an effective co-ordination system of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance, it was essential to strengthen
and improve the capacity and effecti veness of the Officc of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and of
the United Nations system as a whole,
Recalling Jurther Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/47 of 28 July 1983,
Recognizing that, as a result of thosc resolutions and
other relevant resolutions and decisions, there is now in
place a workable system to promotc, facilitate and coordinate relief activities carried out by the l lnited Nations
178 A/38/202-E/ 198 3/94.
179 A/38/201-E/198J/69 and Corr 1 ande

system, in co-opcration with Govcmments and voluntary
agennes.
No/ing that the operation of that system has been much
improvcd but that therc remains a need for its full application.
Noting(urlhcr with appreciation the cffective response of
thc Office of the Umted Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator to reccnt maJor disasters,
Recogniz1ng that shortage of resources has been a constraint on an effectivc response of the United Nations to
disastcr situations.
Rccognizing a/so that the primary responsibility for
administration, relief operations and disaster preparedness
lics with the affected countries and that the major part of
thc material assistance and human effort in disaster relief
comes from thc Govemments of those countries,
Rccognizing furlhcr the importance of the contribution
of thc lnternational Committee of the Red Cross, the
League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and
appropriate voluntary organizations,
l. rakes no1c with apprcciation of the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations system to respond to natural disasters and other disaster situations, 178 as well as of
his report on the work of the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 179 and of the statement
made by thc Co-ordinator on JO November 1983; 18º
'
l•./oles with particular interest the observations and
conclusions of the Secrctary-General relating to the transportation, more rapid delivery and distribution of relief
supplics. reconstruction and rehabilitation and the need
for more effeetive monitoring and evaluation procedures
to assess the way in which thc Office ofthe United Nations
Disaster Relicf Co-ordinator and the intemational community as a whole havc dealt with the mobilization and
provision of disaster relief in particular cases;
3. Rccognizcs the importance of disaster preparedness
and prcvcntion activitics, and calls upon the Offi.ce of the
linited Nations Disastcr Relief Co-ordinator, Govemments and agencies involved to ensure that a high leve) of
attcntion is given to them;
4. Rcafjirms the sovereignty of individual Member
States, rccognizes the primary role of each State in caring
for thc victims of disasters occurring in its territory and
stresses that ali relief operations should be carried out and
co-ordinated in a manncr consisten! with the priorities and
needs of the countries concemed;
5. 5itresscs that the quality and appropriateness of
material and other assistance provided by the intemational community should meet the particular needs of the
populations of disaster-affected areas;
6. Rcpca/s its cal! to ali Govemments and competen!
organs and organizations to co-operate with the Office of
the lJnitcd Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and to
improve. in particular, their flow of information on relief
assistance, action, plans and needs;
7. Rcquests the Officc of the U nited Nations Disaster
Rclief Co-ordinator to continue and improve further the
flow of information to Govemments, organizations and
agencies concerned, so that a more complete picture of
rclicf aetivities, assistance received and further requiremcnts may be provided to ali concemed;
8. Stresscs the need for the continuance and further
strengthening ofrelations between the Office ofthe United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and appropriate voluntary organizations working in the arca of disaster relief,
!XII 0!/1< 1,,/ Record,· o/ 1he c;,•11aa/
(

·, 11>11111rt,·c

hsemNr. lhmv-1.·11?hth Sesmm, Sl'Cond

14th nweting. rara·, 1 -1 ~
