United Nations

S/PV.6717

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6717th meeting
Tuesday, 21 February 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

President Gnassingbé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Courtial
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Amrani
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zmeevskiy
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The impact of transnational organized crime on peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region
Letter dated 17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/42)
Letter dated 8 February 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Togo to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/83)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-23593 (E)

*1223593*

S/PV.6717

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council transmitting
the report of the assessment mission on the impact of
the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The impact of transnational organized crime on
peace, security and stability in West Africa and
the Sahel region
Letter dated 17 January 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2012/42)

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

Letter dated 8 February 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of Togo to the
United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/83)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Benin, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Finland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mali, Mauritania,
Nigeria, Norway, Senegal, Tunisia and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Yuri V. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ms. Helga
Schmid, Deputy Secretary-General of the External
Action Service of the European Union, to participate in
this meeting.
I wish to welcome the Secretary-General and
Ministers participating in today’s meeting. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2012/83, which contains a
letter dated 8 February 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of Togo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

its

First of all, on behalf of the Togolese
Government and people, I would like to take the
opportunity provided by today’s debate to express my
deep appreciation for the support that the Security
Council has extended to Togo since we assumed the
presidency of the Council for the month of February, as
clearly illustrated by the participants’ presence here in
New York today.
I should also like to reiterate to the SecretaryGeneral, to whom I once again extend my best wishes
for success during his second mandate, my heartfelt
congratulations for his ongoing efforts to promote
peace, security and development throughout the world.
The Council’s consideration of the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region is of
crucial importance on a variety of fronts, for my
country and for all of the States concerned. First, the
situation concerning peace and security in West Africa
and the Sahel continues to be very fragile, in spite of
the efforts that have been made. There are countries
emerging from conflict that border on States in which
the socio-political situation continues to be precarious.
Secondly, new threats to peace, security and
development, such as piracy at sea, have emerged and
intensified. Such threats undermine the foundations of
States and the efforts made to promote democracy and
social and economic progress in the region. Thirdly, in
the Sahel in particular, the actions of rebel groups,
which are already endangering the stability and
territorial integrity of several countries, have
unfortunately intensified following the Libyan crisis,
which has led to a significant flow into the region of
weapons of every calibre.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/42, which contains a letter dated

2

12-23593

S/PV.6717

The convergence of all those factors, along with
terrorist activities in Nigeria and the Sahel, have made
both subregions a theatre for all sorts of trafficking,
including in drugs, weapons and human beings. The
latest report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Office for West Africa (see
S/2011/811) points out that the two subregions
continue to be a preferred area for trafficking in
cocaine and the production of synthetic drugs. Of
course, Africa and the Sahel are not the only regions
where that problem is an issue. Drug trafficking and
organized crime also pose a major challenge to
democracy, justice and the rule of law in other parts of
the world.
Countries emerging from conflict are even more
vulnerable, given that public order has been disrupted.
Meanwhile, the grip of poverty facilitates corruption
and the infiltration of still weak institutions by
international criminal networks. Moreover, drug
trafficking is increasingly linked to other types of
trafficking in the region, in particular in fuel supplies,
as well as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
Considering that the frequency and intensity of
piracy at sea has increased along with the number of
armed attacks in the region, specially along the coasts
of Nigeria, Benin and Togo, as well as the fact that
pirates have access to all sorts of cooperation with
other criminal organizations on land, one can well
imagine the complexity of the challenge faced by our
States in order to contain organized crime. Likewise,
criminal groups have stepped up their efforts when it
comes to the swift and uncontrolled circulation of
weapons of every calibre, as we have unfortunately
seen from the situation in northern Mali.
Transnational organized crime is therefore a
source of great concern for the countries of West Africa
and the Sahel. It continues to be a major obstacle to the
development of our countries’ economies, insofar as
security issues require the mobilization of significant
intellectual, human and financial resources that should
be invested in development efforts. It also undermines
the foundations of States and the efforts made to
promote democracy and the rule of law. In addition,
organized crime significantly undermines the positive
impact of the reforms undertaken by our countries to
pull our peoples out of poverty and destitution.
It is for that reason that the Governments of West
Africa and the Sahel region have initiated major

12-23593

political and legal efforts to address the situation. The
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) plan of action for the period 2008 to 2011,
which concluded last year, is an appropriate framework
to combat organized crime in the region. I welcome the
fact that United Nations agencies and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are working with
ECOWAS to renew the plan.
For several years now, the Government of Togo
has been engaged in a fierce fight against organized
crime in all its manifestations. In addition to
institutional measures, such as the ratification of many
international legal instruments on organized crime and
terrorism,
my
Government
has
adopted
a
comprehensive national strategic framework to combat
drugs and crime. In developing that framework, we
enjoyed the expertise of several of our partners,
including France, the United States of America, the
European Union and the ECOWAS Commission.
The framework, which covers the period from
2009 to 2013, is structured around five priority pillars,
ranging from strengthening coordination mechanisms
to promoting the capacity of the State in efforts to
prevent criminal activities. In that regard, I would like
to thank all our development partners and to encourage
them to support the efforts of Togo and all the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel region.
It is encouraging to note that the international
community is not indifferent to the issue of organized
crime in West Africa and the Sahel region. The United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, is
already committed to the fight against the various
criminal activities of organized crime. By devoting a
debate (see S/PV.6233) to drug trafficking in 2009,
endorsed by a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32),
and by adopting, on Nigeria’s initiative, a resolution on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (resolution 2018 (2011)) in
October 2011, the Council has shown its determination
to combat that new threat to international peace and
security through all legal means.
In the same vein, my country welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recent deployment of two
assessment missions to the subregion — on the
repercussions of the Libyan crisis on the security of the
Sahel region and on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
There is no doubt that those initiatives make it possible
to have a more coherent and comprehensive approach
that can enable our countries to undertake the desired

3

S/PV.6717

efforts to prevent the West African subregion and the
Sahel from being consumed by violence and chaos.
Nevertheless, the scope of the battle to be waged
is such that West Africa and the Sahel region will not
be able to undertake that fight without the involvement
of the international community. Our countries need
additional assistance, both material and financial, in
order to face the many challenges posed by the heavily
armed drug traffickers and criminal groups infecting
our region. Security forces must have available
appropriate means to confront and defeat those
criminal groups. To that end, they need to be better
trained and equipped. Similarly, the legal systems of
our countries should be strengthened and should
establish cooperation, among each other and with
INTERPOL, with a view to exchanging information.
We therefore think that a significant and coordinated
joint effort among the States of West Africa and the
Sahel is essential, including firm support from the
international community, so as to defeat organized
crime and associated activities. In particular, major
cooperation is needed both in countries where drugs
are produced and in those where drugs are consumed,
in order to neutralize the related traffic.
I wish to express my gratitude to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the entire United
Nations system, as well as to the Member States that
have, each at its own level, provided their assistance
and expertise in the day-to-day fight that our respective
countries
are
conducting
against
organized
transnational crime.
Our countries are aware of the responsibilities
that fall to them with regard to political and economic
governance and strengthening the rule of law. In the
same vein, they work so that new graduates and the
unemployed can find work and not become easy prey
for organized criminal groups. We believe that the
international community should strongly support the
role of civil society and of non-governmental
organizations involved in activities against illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime.
In order to ensure better cooperation of actions at
all levels, Togo proposes the creation of an
international contact group on organized transnational
crime, similar to the international Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.

4

The challenges in the fight against organized
transnational crime are of such a dimension that they
call for intensification of international coordination of
actions against that scourge. In that regard I call for
greater mobilization of the international community
and greater support for the States of West Africa and of
the Sahel region. I am convinced that the Security
Council will spare no effort in continuing to consider
this issue and giving it all the necessary attention.
We should not allow organized crime to
destabilize West Africa and the Sahel, because a lack of
coordinated action could lead to violence and the
destruction of the hard-earned gains of recent years. It
could also cost us the development of our countries.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): Let
me offer a special welcome to President Gnassingbé
and thank him for having taken the time to come to
New York to preside over this important meeting.
Despite the encouraging progress in certain
countries with regard to the development of peace and
security, stability in West African and the Sahel region
is of increasing concern, and with good reason.
Organized crime, drug trafficking and piracy are on the
rise. The sudden upheaval in Libya is having
repercussions such as the influx of weapons. A growing
food crisis rooted in drought, high food prices and
conflict currently affects millions of people, and the
situation could become still worse.
There are reports of links between insurgent
groups, criminal groups and terrorist organizations.
There is even fear that we could see in this region a
crisis of the same magnitude of that affecting the Horn
of Africa. That must be avoided at all costs.
This meeting is thus very timely, and I commend
the initiative of Togo in using its presidency of the
Council to highlight the urgency of the various threats.
(spoke in English)
Transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, affects peace, security and stability
wherever it occurs. It undermines the authority and
effectiveness of State institutions, erodes the rule of
law and weakens law enforcement structures.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

As West Africa remains a transit point for drug
traffickers between South America and Europe, the
potential for instability will continue to grow. This is
horrendous for the people of the region of the
Economic Community of West African States. It also
presents a serious challenge to the peace operations in
the region authorized by this Council.
To address the issue, we are working closely with
the authorities in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia
and Sierra Leone in the context of the West Africa
Coast Initiative. We have begun to build transnational
crime units trained by United Nations police. But this
is merely the beginning of what we must do.
The Governments of the region will need the
support of regional organizations and the wider
international community to build and sustain the
required capacity in information-sharing, prevention,
investigation,
law
enforcement
and
border
management. This should unfold in parallel with the
creation of alternative sustainable livelihoods and
addressing the challenges of poverty, human insecurity
and underdevelopment. We must also strengthen the
capacity of peace operations in the region by
embedding specialized units in our missions to
complement the efforts of host State police and other
law enforcement agencies.
I am especially disturbed by reports of terrorist
activity. The assessment mission I dispatched in
December 2011 to look at the effects of the Libya crisis
on the Sahel found that terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, have begun to form
alliances with drug traffickers and other criminal
syndicates. Such alliances have the potential to further
destabilize the region and reverse hard-won democratic
and peacebuilding achievements. The growing
incidence of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea exacerbates
the situation.
The consequences of inaction could be
catastrophic, especially for oil-producing countries that
are frequently targeted for their high-value petroleum
assets, and for countries — both coastal and in the
hinterland — that rely extensively on their ports for
national revenue. Just last week, off the coast of
Nigeria, an incident of piracy resulted in the murder of
the ship’s captain and engineer.
The Council will recall that in November 2011 I
deployed an assessment mission to the Gulf of Guinea
to assess the threat and help the Government of Benin

12-23593

in formulating its response. The mission highlighted
that any comprehensive maritime security strategy to
combat piracy should be encompassed within a wider
transnational organized crime response. This should
include drug trafficking, illicit fishing, illicit dumping
of toxic waste and illegal or clandestine immigration or
migration. As the Council continues its discussions, I
would like to reiterate the assessment mission’s
recommendation that a regional summit of Gulf of
Guinea heads of State be convened as early as possible
in 2012 with a view to developing a comprehensive
regional anti-piracy strategy.
The United Nations is already deeply engaged in
helping the countries of West Africa and the Sahel to
combat crime, drug trafficking, piracy and terror. We
have seen this toxic brew in other regions, in Africa
and elsewhere. We must now be ready to do even more
to keep the situation from escalating. The warnings are
there. The trends are clear.
We have a responsibility to cooperate even more
closely with Member States, as well as with regional
and international organizations. Our common goal
must be to ensure durable peace and stability in West
Africa and the Sahel region.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) to brief the Security Council on the
impact of organized crime on security, stability and
development in West Africa and the Sahel region.
Indeed, those transnational challenges in the region
have evolved from social and criminal problems into
threats to security, stability and development.
(spoke in English)
The West African transit route feeds the European
cocaine market, which has in recent years grown
fourfold, reaching an amount almost equal to the United
States market. We estimate that cocaine trafficking in
West and Central Africa generates some $800 million
annually. South American drug cartels are exploiting
regional vulnerabilities in West Africa — poverty,
unemployment, lack of border control, weakness of law
enforcement structures and endemic corruption. For
those criminals, West Africa represents not only the
shortest but also the most cost-effective channel for

5

S/PV.6717

trafficking illicit drugs to Europe. In doing so, they use
a range of different transportation methods — secondhand aircraft, large and small ships, and container
shipments.
West Africa is not only a cocaine transit area. The
local consumption market is growing fast, and drug use
is increasing across the region. There are up to
2.5 million drug users in West and Central Africa.
We also need to understand the extent to which
drug trafficking in the region may be linked to piracy
off the coast of West Africa. However, piracy and drugs
are not West Africa’s only concern. Trafficking in
human beings, arms and counterfeit medicines have
also been reported. The smuggling of migrants and
other illegal activities are also growing.
In the face of those transnational issues,
UNODC’s approach has been strategic and tactical. It
represents a multidimensional effort that acknowledges
the multifaceted nature of those challenges. Our
approach recognizes that while the problems in West
Africa are local in nature, the solutions are often
global. In promoting an inter-agency approach, for
example with the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), we try to deliver practical action through
regional programmes, while also designing activities
that complement each other across different regions.
Our overall goal is to support and strengthen
local institutions and to encourage partnerships among
States and regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). All our activities are based on the
principle of shared responsibility.
On that subject, I add my voice to the need to
renew the ECOWAS Praia Political Declaration and
Regional Action Plan beyond 2011, as one of the best
means of uniting local and international responses. I
also welcome the initiatives of Member States,
particularly, the work of Togo, which has adopted a
national strategy under the ECOWAS Praia Political
Declaration and Regional Action Plan. UNODC stands
ready to support activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission to mainstream transnational organized
crime into the peace and security agendas.
The West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI),
operating under the umbrella of UNODC’s West Africa
programme and in partnership with DPKO, the

6

Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and INTERPOL,
supports the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan. That
Initiative builds upon national and regional ownership
and focuses on inter-agency cooperation and the rule of
law. WACI will soon be extended to the Republic of
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire and will help sustain regional
reforms.
I thank our partners for their financial support of
WACI. Both UNODC and the United Nations system in
general are at the disposal of Member States.
We are working to introduce best practices to the
region based on our worldwide experience. Our Central
American Network of Prosecutors against Organized
Crime and Drug Trafficking, which has been active in
Central America since 2011, is an example of how we
are strengthening the criminal justice chain through
exchanges in information and best practices. Now we
have the necessary funding to introduce a similar
network of organized crime prosecutors in West Africa.
Through such activities we can promote regional
connectivity and later ensure that those networks work
together across the Atlantic Ocean. That will be an
excellent example of South-South cooperation.
Other important initiatives include the Global
Container Control Programme operating on both sides
of the Atlantic and complemented by a similar
programme, AIRCOP, for both regions’ airports. Those
programmes are helping to build capacities across land,
sea and air.
UNODC’s development of transnational crime
units also provides a role model for the future. Such
units have been established in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Guinea Bissau. The units in Sierra Leone and
Guinea Bissau have both reported seizures. However,
our work can not be effective, if it is not based on a
clear understanding of the nature and scope of existing
challenges. A new threat assessment in the region is
being undertaken by UNODC and will be completed
soon. It will be focused on the trafficking routes across
the Atlantic Ocean.
In November 2011 a United Nations inter-agency
mission to Benin and Nigeria, co-led by DPA and
UNODC, defined the incidence of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea as a major threat to the peace, security and
economic interests of States in the region. The
mission’s report recommended better coordination
among the regional bodies and noted that the United
Nations is well placed to achieve that coordination.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Working with its partners, UNODC plans to use its
West African programme to translate the report’s
recommendations into firm action.
In the Sahel region, where concerns remain about
the security situation, UNODC is assisting with the
implementation of a regional initiative on judicial
cooperation, including Mali, Mauritania, Niger and
Burkina Faso. At the national level, UNODC is
supporting Mali and Mauritania in the implementation
of national integrated programmes and working with
the European Union on projects in Nigeria.
To conclude, I stress the need for continued
political commitment. I also commend the countries in
the region for the efforts they are undertaking to
combat these threats. However, additional resources
are needed if we are to sustain reforms in the long term
and contribute to security sector reform.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Courtial (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Togo for organizing this debate,
which gives us a chance to exchange ideas about the
impact of organized transnational crime on
international peace and security in West Africa and the
Sahel. I also thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing and I
would like to take this opportunity to reassert my
country’s appreciation for his work and the
organization he runs.
I align myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
The Security Council has many times been made
aware of the threats posed by international organized
crime to stability and security in various regions in the
world, such as Afghanistan, Haiti or Central America.
But the case of West Africa — which has undergone
many conflicts over the past decade — shows the
diversity of organized crime and, above all, its negative
effect on efforts at achieving good governance and
rebuilding public institutions in post-conflict
situations.
The Council has several times expressed its
concern about the growing drug traffic and its
destabilizing effect in Guinea-Bissau. The phenomenon
affects the whole of West Africa and is tied in with

12-23593

maritime insecurity and armed piracy on the high seas.
Organized crime networks form and use the Sahel
region — which is particularly porous — as a transit
area, before spreading to the rest of the continent or the
shores of Europe.
We also know that, as elsewhere, drug trafficking
in Africa attracts other transnational illicit trade, such
as in weapons, money laundering and human
trafficking. The spread of both small arms and heavy
weapons is another challenge characteristic of West
Africa and the Sahel region. The penetration of funds
from those illegal trades into the broader regional
economy, the corruption it causes, and the violence
among criminal groups striving to capture markets all
undermine governance and threaten socio-economic
development.
In that context, France welcomes the fact that the
Security Council is assessing the impact of those forces
and also welcomes the initial responses implemented
by the States of West Africa. Various bodies of the
United Nations are working to promote political
awareness of the challenges involved and more
effective political collaboration in addressing them. On
the ground, we must take advantage of the
opportunities for cooperation among the various United
Nations agencies and other international organizations
working on those issues. The instability caused by
various forms of illegal trade, particularly drug
trafficking, requires a coordinated response, as well as
reconstruction and crisis prevention policies that
include combating transnational organized crime. This
principle is at the heart of the West Africa Coast
Initiative, which includes Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone,
Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia and which is supported by
France.
I would like specifically to commend the role
played for several years now by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in helping the
States of the region. Since 2008, UNODC has played a
major role in implementing the 2008-2011 Praia
Regional Action Plan of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). The direct
involvement of African countries is critical, especially
of those suffering the full brunt of the destabilizing
effects of that illegal trade. The voices of those
countries must be better heard and their actions
supported.

7

S/PV.6717

In that regard, we are fully convinced that
ECOWAS must play a central role. Given the
international dimension of the criminal networks of
which we are speaking, some of which have their
origins outside West Africa and even outside the
continent, it is more crucial than ever to strengthen
regional and international cooperation on matters of
policing and the rule of law. It is particularly important
to establish national criminal justice systems that are
accessible and aligned with international norms.
The United Nations Conventions against drugs,
the United Nations Palermo Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and United Nations
Mérida
Convention
against
Corruption
have
established an exemplary and appropriate policy
framework for the fight against narcotics. It should be
universalized and implemented.
The States of West Africa and the Sahel region
can count on strong and determined support from
France and, more broadly, from the European Union, in
strengthening their capacities to combat transnational
organized crime. The European Union is a major
player, providing substantial support for efforts to
combat drug trafficking and organized crime in West
Africa and for the fight for maritime security, both in
the Gulf of Guinea and in the Sahel region, where the
Union is implementing significant technical assistance
programmes.
France is fully committed to those efforts,
alongside the countries of West Africa. Thanks to its
network of volunteers and other partners, its interior
security attachés and its liaison officials, we have been
able to step up our cooperation. In that regard, France
has contributed more than €10 million to technical
cooperation programmes in support of good
governance and the justice sector in the countries of
the Sahel region, as part of its special priority funds
programme.
France is also fully committed to the fight to
ensure maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, for
example by developing a three-year project for Benin,
Ghana and Togo, and also working alongside the
Economic Community of Central African States.
Finally, each year, our interior security attachés in
West Africa, often in close coordination with other
relevant international
organizations,
implement
technical assistance programmes that include police
training and the provision of equipment. We must

8

strive to strengthen coordination between the United
Nations, African regional organizations, the European
Union and other specialized organizations working in
that area, such as INTERPOL.
Lastly, within the United Nations system itself,
there is a need for coordination among the bodies,
agencies, funds and programmes that play a role, direct
or indirect, in providing assistance in the fight against
transnational organized crime. It seems to us important
that we are all informed about what will be done in that
area. We would therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s continued consideration of cross-cutting
threats, especially transnational organized crime, when
considering conflicts, prevention strategies, integrated
missions and peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, we hope that the Secretary-General
can provide recommendations to the Security Council,
better enabling the Council to fully understand and
address those cross-cutting threats, particularly in the
case of West Africa and the Sahel region. Those
recommendations should focus on the main,
destabilizing factors. In that regard, we consider drug
trafficking to be the number one priority.
Finally, there is a need for the Security Council to
continue to be informed and updated on these issues
and continue to discuss them, based on regular
briefings from the Executive Director of UNODC.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank you in particular, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. I also
want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings today.
Transnational organized crime is a scourge
everywhere, but West Africa and the Sahel region are
plagued by a particularly insidious version. Criminal
networks corrupt societies that face pressing
developmental challenges in a region emerging from
years of conflict. The Security Council must address
the situation using a holistic approach, in tandem with
the African Union, subregional organizations and other
actors. Governments in West Africa and the Sahel
region have made significant efforts to fight organized
crime through the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the West Africa Coast
Initiative and numerous other bilateral and subregional
partnerships.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

However, the dangers continue to grow. West
Africa and the Sahel region face increasingly complex
and sophisticated criminal activities, including
terrorism, the embezzlement of public funds and the
illicit trafficking of drugs, arms, oil, people and
counterfeit goods, which threaten regional stability by
inflaming conflicts and undermining development.
Drug trafficking remains a principal threat. As we
have heard, according to the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United Nations Office
for West Africa and reports provided to the Security
Council, drug trafficking is increasingly intertwined
with other forms of trafficking in the region. The
United States continues to support the West Africa
Coast Initiative through UNODC in order to address
border and corruption issues in an area of the world
where an estimated $1 billion in cocaine is trafficked
annually, a number more than twice the gross domestic
product of many West African nations.
Criminals that conduct kidnap-for-ransom
operations have substantially supported terrorist
networks in the Sahel region. Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb has demonstrated its ability to carry out
criminal activities and attacks against soft targets
across significant distances.
Illicit arms trafficking is another serious aspect of
transnational crime in West Africa and the Sahel
region. Poorly secured stockpiles of conventional
weapons and ordnance are a potential source for arms
smugglers in the region. In October 2011, the United
States completed a project in Guinea-Bissau that
destroyed over 80 metric tons of obsolete military
ordnance at the request of the host nation. We
encourage States to assist, where possible,
Governments in North and West Africa to destroy
surplus, obsolete or poorly secured weapons and
ammunition stockpiles.
The Libyan crisis has introduced a new set of
cross-border challenges. We remain concerned about
the risk of weapons, including man-portable air defence
systems, or MANPADS, moving across borders. As
Secretary of State Clinton announced in Tripoli last
October, the United States is providing $40 million to
assist Libya in securing and recovering its weapons
stockpiles. So far, we have scoured over 1,500 bunkers
and have helped to identify, recover and secure
approximately five thousand MANPADS and
components.

12-23593

We appreciate the financial and technical
assistance provided, including by the United Kingdom,
Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, France and Italy.
We support the work of the United Nations Sanctions
Committee panel of experts with respect to the
assessment of MANPADS and other proliferation
threats, and we encourage States that have exported
MANPADS to Libya in the past to share information
with the Libyan authorities to assist them in accounting
for unsecured missiles.
Finally, we note with appreciation the decision by
this presidency to hold a separate meeting on piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea, since piracy and armed robbery at
sea also increasingly threaten the peace, security and
stability of West Africa and the Sahel. We look forward
to the discussion on this topic on 27 February.
Mr. Zmeevskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, and your country for taking the initiative
to hold a meeting of the Security Council on such an
urgent issue. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for their substantive
briefings.
The events of recent years have shown that
globalization provides mankind not only with new
possibilities for collective development but also with
new criminal challenges. The way we respond to such
challenges will determine the political stability of
entire States and regions.
We observe dangerous trends in West Africa and
the Sahelo-Saharan region. Unfortunately, in 2011
problems increased in that region, one of the top being
the task of ensuring security. That issue has grown
exponentially against the backdrop of terrorist events
in Libya and other criminal threats and challenges.
We note with concern the increased activity of
organized crime, particularly piracy, in the Gulf of
Guinea and the growth of illegal drug trafficking.
Smuggling and the sale of weapons, including in small
arms and light weapons, through the territories of a
number of countries in the Sahelo-Saharan region,
along with continuing illegal migration, pose a threat
to the international community. Experts believe that the
leakage of Libyan weapons is linked to the activities of
terrorist groups. Their activities have spread
geographically and the number of terrorist attacks is

9

S/PV.6717

increasing, as a result of interlinking with organized
crime and drug trafficking. The activity of terrorist
groups such as Al-Qaida in the Maghreb countries is of
particular concern.
Old forms of crime persist — human trafficking
for labour and sexual exploitation, the use of forced
labour. The smuggling of oil and diamonds continues.
Behind many of those crimes lies corruption.
Illegal drug trafficking provides considerable
financial support for terrorism, violent extremism and
organized crime. Not only has West Africa become one
of the main hubs for smuggling cocaine to Europe, but
the region has also adapted to the production of
synthetic drugs, and major new routes for Afghan
heroin have developed there. Tension is growing in
inter-religious relations. Suffice it to recall the
churches blown up by the terrorist group Boko Haram
during the Kurban Bayram holiday toward the end of
last year.
In the context of ensuring security in that region,
we propose that the main effort be conducted by the
countries of the region, in a leadership role, with the
support of the international community, in a
comprehensive effort focused on the following areas.
First, the flow of Libyan arms needs to be
addressed. Precisely with that goal in mind, Russia last
autumn launched the initiative for the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2017 (2011), which places
responsibility on the new authorities in Libya, its
neighbours and the international community for the
earliest solution to that urgent matter. The Panel of
Experts of the Sanctions Committee on Libya and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
have also noticed the significant threat to security
posed by the uncontrolled spread of Libyan weapons.
Of particular concern is the flow of man-portable
air defence systems (MANPADS) and missile
launchers, which threaten civil aviation not only in the
Sahelo-Saharan region but far beyond its borders.
Information has been received regarding interest in
MANPADS on the part of the terrorist organizations
Al-Qaida in the Maghreb and Boko Haram. We suggest
that work by United Nations bodies to resolve that
problem could be reinforced by efforts in the
framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum. We
believe it is important that the Counterterrorism Forum
respond to the stated readiness of the Sahel quartet to
cooperate in preventing the spread of Libyan weapons

10

and in taking further steps to implement resolution
2017 (2011).
Secondly, given that it is more than likely that
Libyan weapons will fall into the hands of terrorists,
the growth in transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking means that the security capacity of the
Sahelo-Saharan Governments must be strengthened.
We must implement broad, integrated measures that
emphasize enhanced border security, protection of
airports, intensified exchange of information and the
training the staff of law enforcement bodies. None of
that can be accomplished without international support.
We support the activities of the United Nations
and its Office on Drugs and Crime, and we are
strengthening our partnership with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other African regional structures that
address the issue of combating criminal challenges.
It would also be useful to establish a broad
regional platform to combat such threats. That would
respond to the ECOWAS regional plan to combat
organized crime and drug trafficking and would
support specialized coastal initiatives for West Africa,
established with the support of the United Nations and
INTERPOL. We should maximize use of the platform
developed by UNODC for an integrated regional
programme for West Africa for 2010-2014, as well as
country-based programmes.
Thirdly, in the longer term, we must pay greater
attention to de-radicalizing the population, especially
the young. Emphasis should be placed on addressing
problems of employment and in the area of education.
Particular attention must be paid to increasing the
effectiveness of efforts to counter extremist tendencies,
which are the ideological basis and the breeding
ground for the actions of terrorist groups in the region.
It is essential to create in the region, under the auspices
of the United Nations and UNESCO, an atmosphere
that rejects new challenges and threats, and to work
with the media and with the structures of civil society
to achieve that goal. We must also cut off at the root all
attempts to draw the regional diaspora abroad into
terrorist activity.
Fourthly, ensuring an effective legal component in
order to combat those criminal challenges is of utmost
importance. First and foremost, that concerns, of
course, strict respect for the provisions of international
law and of the Charter of the United Nations.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Of great importance in establishing a broad
anti-criminal
front
is
ensuring
full-fledged
participation by States of the region in the fundamental
international agreements, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime of
2000 and its Protocols, the United Nations Convention
against Corruption of 2003, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. No less important
is ensuring the establishment and the implementation
of domestic laws in line with the provisions of the
international treaties. We note the key role played by
the UNODC in providing such technical support to
States of the region.
Fifthly, it would be useful to task UNODC, as
part of its global research into financial flows from
various types of criminal activities, to pay particular
attention to that problem as it relates to West Africa
and the Sahel region. Disrupting the financial basis for
international criminal syndicates has led to major
success in combating them.
Sixthly, we consider intrinsically related the issues
of security and development in West Africa and the
Sahel region. We advocate the design by countries of the
region, with the participation of the donor community,
of an integrated comprehensive socio-economic
strategy.
A significant role could be played here by using
the potential of international organizations such as the
United Nations Development Programme, United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization in implementing
programmes aimed at job creation in countries of the
region and involving the business community in efforts
aimed at reducing the social influence in favour of
terrorism and other international criminal activity.
The Russian Federation has experience in the
implementation of such programmes, including in West
Africa. Our country emphasizes the provision of
humanitarian assistance through United Nations
channels. We are providing bilateral support to
countries of the region by training professional staff in
areas including health, construction and the staff of law
enforcement agencies.
We hope these thoughts will be taken into
account when the Secretary-General prepares specific
recommendations for the Security Council on further

12-23593

steps to be taken in this area. We believe that their
implementation will comprise an important component
of global efforts of the international community aimed
at countering criminal challenges and threats and will
help to ensure security and stable development in the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel region.
It is important that this region be transformed into
a platform for cooperation among all interested parties
that is based on the principles of international law,
rather than an area of competition benefiting only
organized crime and international terrorism.
Mr. Amrani (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to welcome President
Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, who has enhanced the
Council by his participation in this important meeting.
At the same time, on behalf of the Kingdom of
Morocco, I would like to thank the Togolese Republic
for its initiative in organizing a discussion on an issue
of major importance to West Africa and the Sahel
region and the entire African continent.
We also thank your country, Mr. President, for
organizing a public debate on 27 February to discuss
the report of the assessment mission (S/2012/42) that
visited countries in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as your
country’s determined commitment to defend African
interests in the Security Council. Together with today’s
discussions and those of last month on the Sahel
region, the upcoming debate will make it possible to
clarify an overall perspective on the situation in West
Africa, a region that is dear to us and with which we
share centuries-old ties.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their presence and
contributions to the discussion.
Transnational organized crime is a real challenge
to stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. It
threatens the sovereignty of States and all efforts aimed
at building peace and development in the region. Today
those regions find themselves facing increasingly
complex challenges that have resulted, for most part,
from drug-trafficking and a newly emerging generation
of
transnational
organized
crime
activities
characterized by major robberies, piracy at sea and
terrorism, activities heretofore unknown in our region.
Those criminal networks are increasingly linked and
replenish each other while growing internationally,

11

S/PV.6717

thus strengthening their
destabilizing effects.

destructive

ability

and

Furthermore,
the
increasingly
clear
interconnections among transnational organized crime,
armed groups and separatist movements and small
terrorist groups are, in our region, a source of concern,
to which the international community should devote
greater attention.
In West Africa, laudable major initiatives have
been launched at national, regional and subregional
levels, in particular the adoption of the Praia Plan of
Action against drug-trafficking; the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan and the West Africa Coast
Initiative. Today, a new approach is being developed
by ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea in order to respond to emerging challenges in
the context of the Gulf of Guinea, among other things.
Because of its geographic position and in response
to various challenges generated by trans-Atlantic drugtrafficking and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, Morocco
has already taken the initiative of bringing together, in
August 2009, 22 African countries issuing from the
Strait of Gibraltar to the Cape of Good Hope. Today,
three of them are by happy coincidence members of the
Security Council. The Moroccan initiative led to the
establishment of the ministerial conference of African
Atlantic coastal States. Both the initiative and its
resulting conference were established as a platform to
bring together the affected coastal countries in order to
deal with the challenges coming from the Atlantic
Ocean through a flexible cooperation and coordination
mechanism free from institutional constraints and that,
above all, complements existing initiatives.
In that context, I note that the first meeting of the
ministers for security participating in the conference
will take place shortly. Its main objective is to assess
the measures to implement the security pillar of the
action plan adopted in Rabat in November 2010 which
aims to strengthen more flexible cooperation among
security, police and legal authorities as well as
exchanges of information and intelligence information
within the ministerial conference based on the main
objective of combating transnational organized crime.
(spoke in English)
Transnational organized crime cannot be dealt
with by a State or a region alone. Increased solidarity

12

and enhanced concerted action are crucial between the
States of West Africa and the Sahel in order to
sustainably tackle the multiple challenges posed by that
crime. A global approach is therefore required to
address such challenges through the innovative and
overarching
mechanism
of
cooperation
and
coordination, particularly between the western and
northern subregions of Africa.
With regard to the fight against the transatlantic
trafficking of drugs, namely, cocaine, broader
cooperation based on the principle of shared
responsibility is essential in order to find long-term
responses to the disturbing scourge that is
progressively taking root, day by day, in the regions of
West Africa and the Sahel. In that regard, it is
important to support and strengthen existing
subregional and transregional African mechanisms and
to ensure that their implementation is urgently
undertaken. In that context, the international
community is called upon to assist the countries of
West Africa and the Sahel.
The sharing of expertise, intelligence and knowhow is an effective way to help countries develop
capacities in the fight against that crime. Among the
African Atlantic States, many countries have already
expressed their willingness and readiness to share
experience, expertise and know-how with other
members of the African transatlantic initiative — all,
of course, in the spirit of African solidarity and SouthSouth cooperation. The same spirit should also prevail
between countries of the North and the South, as well
as within triangular cooperation.
It goes without saying that any action undertaken
to fight transnational organized crime requires a
concerted approach in dealing with the root causes that
allow for the development of that threat, which are
weak rule of law, a lack of judicial and police
cooperation among neighbouring countries and across
borders and a lack of capacity, as well as the many
socio-economic challenges facing some of the
countries of the region.
We therefore welcome the valuable role played
by the United Nations, particularly UNODC, and
international partners, namely, the European Union, in
assisting States in the region in many of those fields.
Such cooperation should be further strengthened in a
coherent, coordinated and concerted manner,

12-23593

S/PV.6717

addressing jointly and in a balanced way both the
security and the development aspects.
With regard to the last point, one cannot overstate
the crucial importance of development in all its
socio-economic and human dimensions as a force for
stability, security and prosperity. His Majesty King
Mohammed VI has always advocated the need to
address development in all its aspects, namely, through
South-South cooperation and regional integration.
Morocco firmly believes in, and is firmly committed
to, pursuing that goal in cooperation with other African
countries.
Finally, the prompt response and shared
responsibility of States in the West Africa region and
the Sahel are important and imperative to provide
sustainable responses to the threat. For its part, the
international community, through the United Nations,
must also establish an early-warning mechanism,
allowing them to assist, if necessary and at short
notice, relevant countries of the region. Their
development should be the key response to the issue.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Togo for the initiative to convene this open
debate on the impact of transnational organized crime
on peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region. I welcome His Excellency President
Gnassingbé presiding over today’s meeting. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Executive
Director Fedotov for their statements.
In recent years, transnational organized crime has
spread in West Africa and the Sahel region. The
increase in the trafficking of illegal drugs and arms,
piracy and terrorist activities seriously threaten peace
and stability, endanger economic and social
development and have a negative impact on the
humanitarian situation in that region. China expresses
its serious concern in that regard.
We appreciate the consistent efforts made by
West Africa and the countries of the Sahel region to
combat transnational organized crime. We hope that
West Africa and the countries of the Sahel region will
learn from the positive experience of other regions,
draw up and improve comprehensive strategies,
strengthen capacity-building and promote cooperation
in border management, justice and law enforcement so
as to better assume responsibility for maintaining peace
and stability in the region.

12-23593

We welcome the relevant efforts made by
regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, to cooperate with
countries in the region. We support West Africa and the
countries in the Sahel region in their efforts to
strengthen practical cooperation through regional
coordination.
The countries in West Africa and the Sahel region
are developing countries and urgently need the active
support and assistance of the international community
to combat transnational organized crime. In the short
term, the lack of resources, technology and capacity is
the main obstacle to West Africa and the countries in
the Sahel region combating transnational organized
crime. We appeal to the international community to
increase its input of capital and technology and to
provide effective assistance to the relevant countries
and regional organizations on the basis of full respect
for the sovereignty of the countries concerned. We
hope that the United Nations will actively exercise its
coordinating role and that members of regional
organizations and United Nations specialized agencies
fully utilize their respective advantages and expertise
to promote resource integration and allocation as an
effective guarantee of relevant efforts of countries and
organizations in the region.
The Security Council should continue to be
seized of the issue of transnational organized crime in
West Africa and the countries in the Sahel region and
promptly adopt the necessary measures. In the long
term, poverty and delayed economic and social
development are the breeding ground for transnational
organized crime in West Africa and the countries in the
Sahel region. We appeal to the international community
to actively take practical and effective steps to assist
countries in the region in their economic recovery and
development, job creation and better living standards
in order to solve the root causes of the problem.
The security situation in West Africa and the
Sahel region has a significant impact on combating
transnational organized crime. The current problem of
arms proliferation in West Africa and the Sahel region
is rooted in history, but the recent regional conflict has
exacerbated the matter. China is very concerned about
that. We hope that the relevant parties in the
international community will draw lessons from that,
be prudent in dealing with regional crises and conflicts,
continue to settle disputes peacefully through dialogue
and negotiation, avoid taking any action that exceeds

13

S/PV.6717

the mandate of the Security Council, and play a
constructive role in maintaining regional peace and
security.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to warmly welcome you, Sir, and thank you
for convening and presiding over this debate. We
would also like to welcome the high-level
representatives who are with us today and to thank the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their
very detailed and concise briefings.
West Africa and the Sahel region are in a critical
security situation that has been exacerbated by internal
and external factors. The presence of various forms of
transnational organized crime, as well as the spread of
small arms and light weapons and the threat
represented by an increasing terrorist presence, are
concerns that require international cooperation in
timely support of the efforts of States and the regional
and subregional organizations.
We share the concern — expressed in the report
of the assessment mission to the Sahel (see S/2012/42)
and reiterated by the Secretary-General — over the
combined effects of poverty, food insecurity and
natural disasters, together with institutional fragility
and limited access to basic social services, have
heightened the vulnerability of the Sahel communities
and increased their dependency on humanitarian
assistance. This picture confirms the need to adopt
effective mechanisms and measures to enhance
international cooperation and coordination among
States against the various manifestations of
transnational organized crime and to prevent terrorism
from finding a breeding ground in the region.
The Organization as a whole must act to provide
assistance, address the immediate problems and find
long-term solutions to structural problems. We agree
with the recommendations to approach these
challenges from an integrated perspective, respecting
the balance between efforts to enhance security and
those to promote the region’s social and economic
development.
Similarly, we support the conclusion of the
United Nations assessment mission on piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea to the effect that any viable or lasting
regional strategy to combat piracy will also need to
include measures to reduce high levels of youth
unemployment, wide income disparities within society,

14

the prevalence of corruption, the uncontrolled
circulation of illicit weapons, and other structural
measures (see S/2012/45). As part of this integrated
focus, which enhances the coherence among the
political, justice, security, development and human
rights spheres in this and other situations on its agenda,
the Security Council plays an important role in
supporting the enhancement of the rule of law and
ensuring national capacity-building to promote
functioning institutions and the provision of basic
services.
We agree with Mr. Fedotov that the Security
Council must contribute to the important work being
undertaken by other United Nations organs. However,
the increase in organized crime can threaten the
achievements that have been made in enhancing
stability, governability and institution-building in
situations on its agenda.
It has to be recognized that transnational
organized crime in its various forms has a global
dimension. It generates billions of dollars, leading to
violence and corruption and affecting the international
community as a whole. The scope and complexity of
this phenomenon requires integrated, coordinated
efforts on the part of the United Nations system and the
international community. It is therefore necessary to
continue to emphasize the General Assembly’s role as a
forum for discussion and establishing consensus to
address these issues and challenges.
We are concerned over the tendency to ignore the
agreements established within the framework of the
General Assembly with regard to transnational
organized crime and the global problem of drugs as
global concepts and the tools we need to confront
them. This trend could be a step backwards on previous
commitments established on the basis of shared
responsibility and the need to adopt a comprehensive,
balanced approach in the framework of international
cooperation.
At the same time, it is necessary for the
international community to address all criminal
activities with the same resolve. The Organization must
have binding instruments to improve control over the
trade in small arms and light weapons, explosives and
related material, and ammunitions and over the
marking, identification and prohibition their transfer to
non-State actors.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Other specific measures that could contribute to
improving the situation in the Sahel and West Africa
include enhancing border control by providing the
necessary technology and financial resources,
establishing cooperation agreements for effective
judicial systems, information exchange and assistance
in implementing relevant international standards.
Colombia is convinced that there is a need for
strategic alliances to ensure that we work together to
establish more secure societies, because isolated efforts
to address transnational and multidimensional crimes
are inadequate. The international community’s goal
must be to eliminate all forms of organized crime in
the context of international cooperation.
We reiterate our commitment to working at the
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. We are
participating in the West Africa Coast Initiative and
cooperating in capacity-building for the countries of
West Africa to combat international organized crime,
including drug trafficking, and to see that justice is
done.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Mr. President, we thank
you for convening this important debate and for your
personal presence today.
Germany attaches great importance to the fight
against organized crime. We highly appreciate the
efforts of the delegation of Togo in this regard. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks and Mr. Fedotov for his briefing at the outset.
We all have been observing with growing concern
the impact of transnational organized crime on peace
and security in West Africa and the Sahel region. The
spread of transnational organized crime — including
illicit trafficking of drugs, arms and human beings, as
well as the more recent phenomenon of acts of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea — and insecurity go hand in
hand. They are facilitated by weak governance,
insufficient implementation of the rule of law and
corruption.
Countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
are especially vulnerable to organized criminal
activities, which in turn further undermine the already
weak institutions of these States. In recent years, links
between organized crime and terrorist groups, made in
a mere partnership of convenience, have become a
particular concern.

12-23593

Most of the States in West Africa and the Sahel
lack the capacity and equipment to address criminal
and terrorist activities effectively. At the same time,
transnational organized crime is a security threat that,
by definition, cannot be tackled by any one country
alone. A comprehensive, integrated approach is
required to address transnational organized crime.
Cooperation and coordination between the affected
countries, as well as with and between the regional
organizations must be strengthened. Informationsharing in particular needs to be improved.
To this end, several instruments and initiatives
have
been
developed,
yet
their
effective
implementation requires enhanced national and
regional capacities, strong political will and sufficient
financial support. Let me highlight the following
example.
At the global level, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the so-called Palermo Convention, including its
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, is of
particular importance. We welcome the recently
developed United National Office of Drugs and Crime
framework for action providing guidance on how to
implement the Protocol against the Smuggling of
Migrants, and we encourage all States parties to make
use of this helpful instrument. The Palermo
Convention, like other United Nations conventions
focusing on organized crime and illegal drugs, provides
important legal tools to counter these scourges of
humanity.
At the regional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Regional Action
Plan 2008-2011 represents a promising framework for
combating illegal drug trafficking and organized crime
in West Africa. It should be extended to 2012 and
beyond, and its implementation should be accelerated.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Office in West Africa and INTERPOL
have played a crucial role in assisting the ECOWAS
Plan through the West Africa Coast Initiative. Its focal
points for cooperation — the so-called transnational
crime units — could serve as an example for other
regions.
The Judicial Regional Platform of Sahel
countries, established in 2010, is aimed at
institutionalizing judicial cooperation in preventing

15

S/PV.6717

and combating organized crime, corruption, drug
trafficking and terrorism. We encourage other States in
the region to join that Platform.
Effective regional and international cooperation
in the fight against transnational organized crime relies
heavily on the stability and capacities of the individual
partners involved. National capacities therefore need to
be strengthened, and root causes need to be addressed
in countries susceptible to organized crime. That
includes the promotion of the rule of law and of good
governance in fostering socio-economic development.
Germany has been working together with
countries in West Africa and the Sahel region, as well
as with regional organizations and the United Nations
agencies concerned, in fighting transnational organized
crime, including through addressing its root causes. In
that regard, I should like to mention our support for the
Global Container Control Programme, which is aimed
at ensuring the effective control of container cargo in
several West African countries, in order to suppress
and prevent drug trafficking from Latin America via
West Africa to Europe.
Furthermore, we support capacity-building
projects aimed at enhancing the rule of law and the
justice systems in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia, the
Niger and Sierra Leone. We also support the activities
conducted by ECOWAS in States of the region to
enhance police capacities in post-conflict situations.
Germany also cooperates with Côte d’Ivoire in
the control of small arms and light weapons by
supporting the relevant authorities, by training and
capacity-building, and by developing arms-collection
mechanisms at the community level. We contribute to
the European Union’s Sahel strategy, which addresses
both development and security issues and is aimed at
strengthening regional cooperation.
With a view to dealing with the long-term
socio-economic root causes of transnational crime, we
would recall that just a week ago agreements
establishing the West African Science Service Centre
on Climate Change and Adapted Land Use were signed
in Lomé. That forward-looking initiative is designed to
respond to climate change and to preserve sustainable
livelihoods in the region. Climate change certainly
constitutes one of the root causes of the current food
crisis in the Sahel.

16

Germany recently allocated €12 million in
additional funds for food aid in the region, and the
European Union is increasing its food aid from
€95 million to €124 million. We hope that concerted
efforts will help to overcome this humanitarian crisis.
Let me conclude by pointing out that my
delegation associates and aligns itself with the
European Union statement to be delivered later.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened and
for chairing this important debate, and for your clear
statement of concern at the beginning of the debate. I
should like also to thank the Secretary-General for his
earlier contribution and Mr. Fedotov for his briefing
today.
It is right that the Security Council has recently
focused on the potential threats to regional peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel created by the
trafficking of drugs, weapons, oil, counterfeit goods
and other commodities. Those threats undermine
regional stability and economic development, and they
fuel conflict and terrorism. The United Kingdom
welcomes Togo’s leadership on those issues.
We share the view that many West African
countries appear to be leaving behind a long and
troubled period of civil war. However, the Sahel region
still faces a range of complex and interlinked
challenges, including food insecurity, conflict,
terrorism, diminished State capacity and climatic
shocks. In addition to a growing humanitarian crisis in
the region, recent Tuareg insurgencies in northern Mali
and evidence of Al-Qaida’s growing ambition in the
region make this a critical area for the international
community to focus on.
Defeating terrorism, disrupting organized crime
and, above all, achieving sustained peace and security
in the region are issues that should indeed be
considered in the Council.
The United Kingdom is working closely with its
international partners to ensure a coherent and focused
approach to promoting security and development in the
Sahel. One of the key vehicles in that connection is the
European Union Sahel strategy, which the United
Kingdom is pleased to support.
The year 2011 showed a significant increase in
the volume and impact of armed robbery and piracy
incidents in the Gulf of Guinea linked to illegal

12-23593

S/PV.6717

fishing, oil bunkering and trafficking of narcotics,
people and weapons. Those incidents appear to be
concentrated off the coast of Nigeria and Benin,
although there have been reports of attacks further
along the coast and out to sea, some including evidence
of the use of mother ships. Such incidents threaten the
security and the economic and social stability of
countries in the region. It is therefore in all of our
interests to work together to address the threats to
maritime security to prevent further destabilization,
and, like others, I welcome the opportunity to discuss
this in more detail later in the month.
We believe that maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea can best be addressed through a regional
response. We encourage States in the region to work
more closely together on this issue and with the United
Nations Office in West Africa. It is important that
action be taken now to prevent the situation from
deteriorating further, and we hope that West African
heads of State will be able to prioritize activities to
tackle the range of maritime security threats facing
their countries.
In that regard, the United Kingdom strongly
welcomes the leadership shown by ECOWAS and the
Economic Community of Central African States in
working together on a maritime security strategy for
West Africa.
We also warmly welcome the industry-led
initiative to create a maritime trade informationsharing centre based on the United Kingdom’s
Maritime Trade Office, which has proved very valuable
in tackling piracy off the coast of Somalia.
As with piracy, the problem of drug trafficking in
West Africa requires regional solutions alongside
specific national action. We look forward to ECOWAS
ministers implementing the regional plan against drug
trafficking agreed in 2008. Cocaine traffic through
West Africa fuels corruption and conflict. It impedes
economic development and poses a direct threat to
those countries battling illegal drug use. The United
Nations estimates that approximately 50 tons of
cocaine, worth about $1.8 billion, are passing illegally
through West Africa to Europe every year. In the last
six months alone, nearly 400 kg of cocaine, with a
United Kingdom street value of more than $30 million,
has been seized by the Togolese authorities.
This is a timely and important debate, and I am
grateful for Togo’s leadership on this critical issue. We

12-23593

fully support the draft presidential statement negotiated
by Togo and agreed by the Council.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you
for having convened this meeting and in particular for
joining us personally today. We also welcome the
concept note (S/2012/83, annex) circulated by your
delegation as background for our debate, as well as the
briefings by the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
I should like to make five points, centred more on
the thematic aspects than the geographical ones that are
part of the subject of this open debate. While there is
little that we may be able to contribute to the specific
situation of West Africa and the Sahel region,
unfortunately my country has been a direct victim of
transnational organized crime and, therefore, has some
experiences that it can share.
The first point is precisely that. Although our
attention today is focused on West Africa and the Sahel
region, we could just as well be discussing my own
region, Central America. In other words, transnational
organized crime is a universal problem, whereby
numerous low- or medium-income countries are
transformed into transit points of illicit activities, be
they drug trafficking, human trafficking, contraband of
stolen durable goods, trafficking in precious stones or
others. The phenomenon has some common
characteristics, the main one being the vulnerability of
the affected countries.
Those countries tend to have a geographical
location that favours the moving of illicit goods and
services from their source to the market for their final
consumption. They tend to be low- or medium-income
countries, with relatively weak justice and security
institutions and large contingents of low-income
people, who are consequently susceptible to the
temptation of exposing themselves to activities outside
of the law, as well as a culture of opaqueness in
financial management.
Furthermore, in smaller economies the magnitude
of resources managed by transnational criminal cartels
has a relatively heavy weight, which facilitates the
cooptation — or, alternatively, intimidation — of those
people who can facilitate their illegal activities. The
phenomenon does not always constitute a threat to

17

S/PV.6717

peace and security, although clearly it has that potential
in some cases.

of that is undertaken in the framework of the Central
America Integration System (SICA).

That brings me to my second point, which is that
if the illicit activity is of a transnational nature, it must
be tackled through actions that combine robust
responses in each country together with a strong
element of international cooperation. Although it
sounds like a truism, it is nevertheless true that the
countries that serve as the main markets encouraging
the activities of criminal cartels are co-responsible for
the phenomenon of transnational crime. As a result,
they should also take responsibility in responding to
that scourge.

In the fourth place, transnational crime, whose
purview in the United Nations tends to be concentrated
in the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
impacts on virtually all the activities of our
Organization. That is why it has been a subject of
concern in the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, some of the subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council and, of course, the
Security Council, depending on the issues under
consideration. It is a cross-cutting issue that, among
many other aspects, has the potential to disturb
international peace and security. But our preference is
to address that phenomenon with a broader approach,
including a strong component of alternative strategies
to encourage economic agents to devote themselves to
profitable and lawful activities.

Cooperation takes on a broad range of forms that
ranges from cooperation to strengthening local
capacities to international covenants and standards.
Guatemala has an interesting experience in having
associated the United Nations, the Government of the
country and the donor community in establishing the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). As to international covenants and
standards, just as an illustration, we are a party to the
Convention on the Protection of Children and
Cooperation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption and
to the three international conventions against illicit
trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances. As is known, the Security Council itself as
well as the General Assembly have made contributions
to limiting illegal transactions in diamonds, especially
when the proceeds of their trade fuel armed conflicts.
All of that is a result of international cooperation.
In the third place, combating transnational crime
is a highly propitious field for interregional
cooperation, whether it be in West Africa or in Central
America. When a group of small States faces that
phenomenon, logic dictates closing ranks and
cooperating to face a common challenge. For example,
in our case, the Central American Governments have
adopted a regional security strategy. The strategy
includes four components, namely, fighting crime,
preventing crime, strengthening institutions and the
rehabilitation, reinsertion and management of penal
systems. A Central American security commission has
been established to follow up on the execution of the
specific projects that are part of each of the
components I have mentioned. It is supported by the
close collaboration of Mexico and Colombia, as well as
the cooperation of bilateral and multilateral donors. All

18

Finally, precisely because of what was I said in
connection with the previous point, responding to
organized transnational crime requires an integral and
holistic approach. It should be tackled from the supply
and the demand sides of the traded goods and services.
It requires strengthening our security and justice
institutions for criminal prosecutions and holding
people accountable. In addition, it needs to offer
alternatives for those who live in the shadow of illicit
activities, both the leaders of cartels as well as the
great number of individuals who make their livelihood
from these activities due to a lack of better
opportunities.
I trust, Mr. President, that those lessons drawn
from our experiences in Central America will be useful
to your own region.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I congratulate Togo
and the President for being with us today, which is
testimony to the importance of the issue that the
Security Council faces today. I believe that, by and
large, all those who have spoken so far have been fully
supportive of this timely initiative.
I would like to thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
consistent efforts to monitor the situation in the region.
We thank Mr. Alexander Zmeevskiy for giving us his
considered opinion in this matter.
Pakistan has a long-term and deep-rooted
commitment to the security and stability of West

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Africa. Over the years our peacekeepers in that region
have been deployed in Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia. We therefore have an abiding interest in the
continued well-being of the region. Pakistan also has
close relations with all countries of the Sahel region
and supports the efforts of their Governments towards
peace, stability and socio-economic development.
The significant challenges faced by countries of
West Africa and the Sahel have serious implications for
their stability and development. There are complex
causes underlying the challenges, and I enumerate
them here: the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
foreign interference and intervention, and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. In recent times these
difficulties have been exacerbated by transnational
organized crime, including narcotics and weapons
trafficking, piracy and terrorism, which, by
undermining Governments and social and economic
stability, are reversing gains that have been made,
especially in post-conflict situations.
Several recent United Nations reports have
highlighted the worsening security, economic and
humanitarian situation in West Africa and the Sahel
region as a result of those threats. According to the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Office for West Africa (S/2011/811), criminal
organizations continue to use West Africa as a transit
point for trafficking cocaine and heroin. Also, the
report of the assessment mission (S/2012/42)
highlighted the impact that the Libyan crisis has had on
the already precarious security situation in the Sahel.
For the Sahel region, the Libyan crisis has been
like a genie in a bottle. The bottle has been uncorked,
and the genie is out. Many of us here are not yet even
aware of the mischief that this genie continues to play
in that region.
But when I am in doubt, I look upon the
European Union as an important source of information.
I am looking at their paper and reading from it the
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel.
The Strategy has four key issues, and I will read the
first, which is the most important:
“that security and development in the Sahel” —
this is very important — “cannot be separated,
and that helping these countries achieve security
is integral to enabling their economies to grow
and poverty to be reduced.”

12-23593

I read further:
“The Sahel is one of the poorest regions of
the world. It faces simultaneously the challenges
of extreme poverty, the effects of climate change,
frequent food crises, rapid population growth,
fragile governance, corruption, unresolved
internal tensions, the risk of violent extremism
and radicalization, illicit trafficking and terroristlinked security threats.”
This, I think, is a far more comprehensive review
of this region by the European Union. We should take
from it. It names the three core Sahelian States as
Mauritania, Mali and Niger, though the geographical
conditions, and therefore challenges, also affect parts
of Burking Faso and Chad.
Why I read from this Strategy is to review the
relevance of what our friends feel so strongly about in
Europe, and rightly so. I believe that being among the
poorest countries in the world, the Sahelian States are
facing enormous stress. The proliferation of weapons
from Libya has been a catastrophe. Mali already faces
very significant undermining of its hard efforts to try to
rebuild, as I have said, according to the European
Strategy, its political-economic framework.
I would like to suggest that we have been a little
lax in allowing the situation to get so far out of control.
Are we really in control of the situation? The answer is
“Maybe, but more likely, maybe not”. The reason is
that most of the institutions that are considering this
region, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), are, unfortunately, understaffed,
underfinanced and overlapping on many issues. Yet
nobody is in control. We have heard several members
here speak of how we can bring together this sort of
situation through institutionalization. We have recently
done so between Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan;
already, a cache of three tons has been stopped within
the last few days.
The question really is, are we interested in doing
something on a piecemeal basis, or are we going to try
to help this region substantially. Why do I say this? I
think we have not really considered what is happening.
As of today, with regard to the financing of this region,
unfortunately, the Council would be surprised to know
that whereas drug trafficking in the United States is
$37 billion a year, in Europe — if we do not count the
recent adjustments of the euro against the dollar — it is
about $33 billion a year. They are practically at par, if

19

S/PV.6717

you consider the value change of the euro. According
to my friends in UNODC, approximately 13 or 14 per
cent of all European illicit trade from South America
enters through the region we are discussing here today.
We are talking about approximately $4.25 billion
dollars.

we can more easily tabulate the end-users of all these
pillaged products because all of them sit among us here
today — maybe including myself. We must look within
ourselves and be able to say “This is where this goes”,
and then persuade our own membership to exercise
moral restraint to be able to stop this pillaging.

In a region where total economies are $7 billion
or $8 billion, that amount of money traversing the
countries cannot be met by just looking at it in a
situation here and saying “Oh, you have not got the
institutions; yet, with what you have, you need to
empower them.” Let us take UNODC, with a budget of
$460 million — 50 per cent of which is raised
voluntarily. They give 10 per cent of that to this region.
That means $4 million to fight an ingress of $4 billion.
I do not think it is going to be handled very easily. We
have not equipped ourselves in a genuine and honest
way in trying to resolve this problem. I think we ought
to be a little more street smart about this.

That has happened recently in the terrorist trade,
where we have said that money cannot be sent through
alternative sources; it must be sent through a banking
process or it will be suspect. Surely, we can do
something akin to that in helping Africa to retain for its
own people the resources that are being taken away so
mercilessly. Let us therefore do what the Europeans
also say — let us build the capacity of the States of
West Africa and the Sahel. This will help to combat
transnational crime, because they know best how to
handle it provided they have some resources to attend
to it.

I also believe there are aspects that we tend to
overlook. While I praise the African Union’s Plan of
Action on Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the
Economic Community of West African States Regional
Action Plan against organized crime and illicit drug
trafficking and the West Africa Coast Initiative, their
impact cannot be optimal, due to various constraints,
not the least of which is that most of those countries
are handling the problems individually. They are not
being assisted to do this in a systematic fashion.
So while we talk about all sorts of situations, I
believe that there has been a further deterioration.
Interdiction efforts alone will only increase the price of
drugs; it will not eliminate the problem. Today, we see
a large number of people living in those regions falling
victim to this consumption, and that is going to further
exacerbate the situation. I believe that Europe, as the
ultimate consumer, should invest a lot more and give a
lot more attention to its own strategy document for
security and development in the Sahel, with much
larger commitments of financing and funding. I do not
see that happening at the United Nations.
I believe that another aspect that, as I said earlier,
must be controlled is the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. Africa remains a continent with rich
resources, but they have been pillaged for years.
Unfortunately, we see that those who pillage these
countries are very often in Government and otherwise
in positions of power, but we have not understood that

20

I would say that, in the end, we in the United
Nations need to act coherently in this region, addressing
the diverse requirements of dealing with these
challenges. All relevant United Nations entities have a
presence on the ground in the region, but there is a need
to achieve greater coordination and synergy between
their respective and individual roles. But the States of
the region — and this must be reaffirmed here — must
enjoy special privilege and status to deal with bringing
it together; in other words, a stronger and larger
presence on the stage that the United Nations sets for
itself to be able to help this region.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank and congratulate the Togolese
presidency on convening this open debate on the
impact of transnational organized crime on peace,
security and stability in West Africa and the Sahel
region. We welcome the presence at this very important
meeting of His Excellency the President of the
Togolese Republic. We are also grateful to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement and to
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
Growing transnational threats contribute to
undermining governance, social and economic
development and stability, as well as peacebuilding
advances in West Africa and the Sahel region. We note
that, despite the fragile security situation in a number
of countries in West Africa and the Sahel region, there
have been no major crises reported there in recent
times. We welcome the activities of the United Nations

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Office for West Africa and its partners in the United
Nations system, as well as of the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and other
relevant organizations that contributed to this situation.
The efforts of the respective Governments in this
regard should be noted as well. It is commendable that
the States and leaders of West Africa and the Sahel
region have adopted a number of important initiatives
and measures at the national and regional levels to
tackle the threat of organized crime in their region.
At the same time, despite the progress achieved,
threats to peace and stability remain and require
continued serious attention. Like other members of the
Council, Azerbaijan is seriously concerned by the
terrorist and separatist activity and increasing violence
and attacks by armed groups, which have been
aggravated by the illicit proliferation of weapons from
within and outside the region. Nor should we
underestimate the risk of the spread of weapons beyond
the region, with the potential of their falling into the
hands of terrorists and separatists in other parts of the
world.
A stronger commitment to an international order
based on the rule of law and international law is
essential to cooperation among States in addressing
common challenges and to contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Azerbaijan stresses the importance of ensuring that the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of the States of West Africa and the
Sahel region are fully observed and respected.
It is clear that most of the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel region cannot overcome threats in
isolation. Even successful national efforts cannot
restore overall normalcy and ensure a comprehensive
solution if they are not supported by the United
Nations system and the broader international
community. Serious attention should be given to
appeals from the respective countries, which need
capacity-building and funds to counter the threats and
address the challenges.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
initiative to deploy a United Nations inter-agency
assessment mission to the Sahel region, as well as for
the comprehensive report (see S/2012/42) that the
mission has submitted. The analyses carried out by the
mission are illustrative of the need to strengthen
cooperation, including through the development of a

12-23593

common approach for the Sahel region. We agree with
the mission’s view that any immediate long-term
strategy should take into account the root causes of the
problems in the region. The findings and
recommendations of the mission in that regard require
serious consideration, and we hope that they will
contribute to enhancing the United Nations systemwide strategy to respond to the needs of the respective
States.
The rise of maritime piracy is another challenge
requiring a concerted effort on the part of the countries
and organizations of the region, with the support of the
international community. Indeed, piracy attacks in the
Gulf of Guinea have become more frequent in recent
months. This phenomenon represents a threat not only
to peace and security, but also to the political and
socio-economic development of the countries
concerned.
We commend the national efforts of the affected
countries to mobilize international attention to this
problem. At the same time, it is vital to develop a
comprehensive strategy to counter piracy, as
specifically noted in the Council’s resolution 2018
(2011) of 31 October 2011. In addition, it is important
that the countries of the region be provided with the
necessary support, including financial assistance, to
strengthen their capacity to fight piracy. We look
forward to discussing this topic at the debate later this
month.
More should be done with respect to
intercommunity and interreligious dialogue, which, in
our view, are of additional importance against the
background of the efforts being made to ensure peace,
security and stability in the region. It is obvious that
success will depend on greater coherence among all
stakeholders. It is therefore important and
commendable that, in spite of the varied regional
membership, all of the countries are willing to work in
a more coordinated manner.
Last but not least, Azerbaijan supports the draft
presidential statement on the topic to be issued
following the debate.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Mr. President, presiding over our
meeting today. We welcome President Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbé of Togo to the Council and are
pleased that he has personally participated in this
meeting. We congratulate Togo for organizing this

21

S/PV.6717

debate on the impact of drug trafficking and organized
crime in West Africa and the Sahel region. We thank
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for their informative remarks.
In recent years, West Africa has made significant
progress towards security and development. The
violent conflicts and election-related violence that
devastated the region for many years have ended, and
countries that were ravaged by conflicts are going
through a post-conflict development phase. That
progress is increasingly at risk from the threat posed by
transnational organized crime, including with regard to
illicit weapons, drug trafficking, maritime insecurity in
the Gulf of Guinea and terrorism.
Drug trafficking and organized crime have
negative impacts on the security and stability of States.
The international community, in collaboration with the
countries of the region, should continue to support
regional initiatives to fight the scourge of drug
trafficking and organized crime. In that regard, we are
of the view that the United Nations, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) should coordinate their efforts to support
the region and the countries of the Sahel to fight
organized crime.
In that regard, we welcome the initiative taken by
UNODC to closely work with ECOWAS to develop a
regional plan that includes aggressive measures to fight
drug trafficking and organized crime in the region.
South Africa is of the view that that intervention,
coordinated with and integrated within the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), is in direct
support to the implementation of the ECOWAS
political declaration and its regional action plan on
drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse.
South Africa supports the close collaboration on
security sector reform by the West Africa Coast
Initiative with the Department for Political Affairs,
UNOWA, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and INTERPOL. In our view, that is a concrete
example of an integrated and effective approach to
fighting drug trafficking and organized crime. South
Africa encourages the countries of the region to
develop an integrated drug control strategy that
addresses the capacities of countries to combat drug
trafficking and organized crime. In that regard, the
region needs a comprehensive and integrated approach

22

that strengthens coordination among the countries of
the region and countries of origin, transit and final
destination.
The Libyan crisis has injected new elements of
instability in an already vulnerable area. There is no
denying the fact that the Sahel region had its own set
of challenges prior to the onset of the Libyan crisis.
However, literally overnight, the entire region was
forced to deal with the consequences of the unfolding
crisis in Libya, which brought with it an inflow of large
numbers of returning jobless migrants and large
quantities of weapons and ammunition. The effects of
that disturbing combination manifested themselves in
different forms in the different countries that comprise
the Sahel. What started as a conflict in one country has
now spilled over to become a regional problem with
unprecedented consequences.
The proliferation of arms brings to bear greater
challenges on the Sahel region, of a greater magnitude,
and for Governments that already have to deal with
porous borders, trafficking in drugs and weapons, and
the presence of armed groups and active terrorist
groups. Those challenges pose an obvious threat to
international peace and security. The region has
additional problems to contend with, such as increased
criminal activity and armed clashes with security
forces as a result of weapon trafficking from Libya,
heightened radicalization and widening networks of
terrorist groupings, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and Boko Haram.
Clear political will exists among the States of the
subregion to find common solutions to their common
problems. Looking forward, we urge the United
Nations system to address those challenges in a
coherent and integrated manner, working in partnership
with those countries and in accordance with their
national and subregional structures. The international
community has an important role to play in facilitating
support and technical assistance through coordination
by the United Nations. Such systemic interventions,
managed in an integrated and coordinated manner, will
constitute an investment in the long-term stability of
the subregion.
Finally, South Africa fully supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted later today.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council and to thank you for presiding over

12-23593

S/PV.6717

this meeting. I also want to commend your delegation’s
leadership in organizing this timely debate and for
preparing a comprehensive concept paper (S/2012/83,
annex) for our deliberations today. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
subject and for his several important initiatives to
address the problems of transnational organized crime
in West Africa and the Sahel region. I would also like
to thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his valuable statement.
While countries in West Africa and the Sahel are
more democratic today than in the past and have
achieved respectable rates of economic growth, they
continue to suffer from a number of problems that have
political, security and socio-economic dimensions. The
importance of enduring peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region therefore cannot be
overemphasized. Addressing those problems will not
only help the region, but will also have a positive
effect on democracy and development in Africa as a
whole. A number of countries in the region, including
Mali, Senegal and Guinea-Bissau, face crucial
elections this year. We hope that elections will be held
in a peaceful manner and will further strengthen the
roots of democracy in those countries and in the larger
region.
Over the past year, several problems in the region
have been accentuated. Those problems transcend
national boundaries and may pose long-term threats.
Transnational organized crime, including illicit drug
trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and arms
trafficking, are undermining efforts of Governments
and international community to ensure peace and
stability.
Military operations carried out ostensibly for the
protection of civilians have clearly resulted in millions
of civilians being adversely affected in the Sahel,
Maghreb and West Africa regions. They have resulted
in a deterioration of the security, economic and
humanitarian situations in the entire region. In a
relatively short period of time, the countries in West
Africa and the Sahel have had to contend with the
influx of nearly half a million returnees and a large
inflow of arms and ammunition. The loss of
remittances and the high unemployment among youth
have exacerbated security problems, food insecurity
and the nutrition crisis. Those have put tremendous
burden on Governments in the region and strained their

12-23593

limited capacity to deal with transnational organized
crime. Recovering from the after effects of those
conflicts will require concerted action by the
international community.
A number of problems, including the proliferation
of arms, terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, et cetera,
have a regional dimension and need to be tackled
through regional cooperation. Illicit drug trafficking
and its growing links to the financing of terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons as a result of conflicts in Côte
d’Ivoire and Libya, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and so
on, demand action at the national and regional levels,
with the constructive assistance of the international
community. The United Nations should lead the
international efforts and focus on institution- and
capacity-building and on the provision of adequate
resources to national authorities and regional and
subregional organizations.
A comprehensive strategy to deal with the
problems should include the creation of effective
Government institutions, particularly in the fields of
security, law enforcement, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The
countries concerned should implement all legal and
administrative measures to combat organized crime and
related issues in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001) and other relevant regional and international
instruments. The promotion of democracy and the rule
of law will not only help to establish peace and
security, but also help in socio-economic development.
Development and employment-generation programmes
should be undertaken so that youth can be weaned from
criminal activities, and their energies channelled
properly.
Simultaneously, the strategy should facilitate
regional cooperation under the auspices of the relevant
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). In that connection, we
welcome the efforts of the United Nations through the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
UNODC to create synergies with Governments and
regional organizations to tackle transnational organized
crime.
It is necessary that regional initiatives by
ECOWAS and the Economic Community of Central
African States be implemented fully and that technical
support be extended to develop coherent action plans

23

S/PV.6717

for addressing transnational problems. Steps by
regional and subregional organizations, such as the AU
plan of action on drug control and crime prevention for
2007-12, the ECOWAS regional plan of action to
address illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse for 2008-2011, the ECOWAS counterterrorism strategy and the West Africa Coast Initiative,
are welcome and need to be fully implemented.
In conclusion, we think that the United Nations
should become a more effective partner of the AU in
the resolution of African conflicts. The relevant United
Nations agencies should support regional and
subregional organizations and assist in their capacitybuilding and in facilitating their implementation. The
United Nations offices in the region, including
UNOWA, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Office to the
African Union, should look into practical and concrete
ways to strengthen the efforts of national Governments
and regional institutions, to bring greater coherence
and coordination.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in
French): We are honoured by the presence of His
Excellency the President of the Togolese Republic. We
thank him for presiding over this important debate and
for his opening statement.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Togolese presidency for taking this
initiative and for making possible a reflection on how
to improve integrated responses from the international
community to the challenge of organized crime in
Western Africa and the Sahel. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Ambassador Fedotov, for their very useful
presentations. We agree with their analyses and
recommendations.
Portugal has long been a strong supporter of a
regional approach to the challenges facing West
African countries. That is also a central concern of our
tenure in the Security Council, one that we often
stressed during the past year. In the meeting we
organized during our presidency last November on new
challenges to peace and security, international
organized crime figured in a pre-eminent way (see
S/PV.6668).

24

We believe that efforts aimed at tackling issues
such as organized crime from a purely bilateral level
are not only insufficient but can even be
counterproductive. Indeed, given the transborder nature
of the traffics in question, success in combating
transnational crime in one single country can easily
lead to increased trouble for its neighbours. Crime
networks increasingly have access to new technologies
and vast financial resources — often larger than those
available to affected countries — which allow them to
shift activities rather quickly from one country to
another. In other words, organized crime and its
ramifications function within a regional context, not
within the framework of national borders. Therefore,
responses must take that reality into account. Unless
there is an effort not simply of coordination but of
pooling resources, chances for long-term success in
combating transnational crime are rather slim.
In the particular case of Western Africa and the
Sahel, there is clearly a widespread understanding of
the need for regional, multilateral solutions for the
challenges posed by transnational crime. Recent United
Nations reports, namely, those on the impact of the
Libyan crisis in the Sahel region (see S/2012/42) and
on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/2012/45), show
that countries and regional and subregional
organizations have in recent years launched a number
of initiatives directed towards combating various forms
of organized crime. In the particular case of the Sahel
countries, Governments have demonstrated the
political will to jointly address growing instability in
the region. That is an important point, inasmuch as it
highlights the centrality of locally owned solutions for
the problems facing West Africa and the primary
responsibility of local actors to define their priorities
and their strategies. As in other areas, the role of the
international community should therefore be that of
assisting existing initiatives, especially by enhancing
institutional capacity and promoting more cooperation
and a better understanding of how comprehensive the
current challenges are.
In that context, I would like to highlight three
aspects, which in our opinion deserve the particular
attention of the international community. First, as most
studies and reports indicate, the confluence and
juxtaposition of illicit trafficking, violence, corruption
and terrorism represent a serious challenge to peace
and security in Western Africa and the Sahel. There are
documented linkages among different forms of

12-23593

S/PV.6717

organized crime and also between organized crime
networks and terrorist and rebel groups operating in the
region. However, we still need to know more about
how those linkages operate, particularly in the matters
of the financing of operations, the recruitment base and
the proliferation of weapons and ammunition. In the
case of piracy, we must understand more clearly the
connection between attacks at sea and criminal
networks operating in the countries of the region.
That is why we support more systematic
reporting on transnational crime trends in West Africa,
as well as on the efforts undertaken to tackle those
trends. But we also believe that such efforts would
benefit from greater information-sharing among the
countries in the region, including intelligence-sharing.
International efforts should be aimed at enabling more
cooperation in that respect.
Secondly, we should aim at finding an
appropriate balance between repressive measures
against organized crime and the need to address the
social and economic context. Some of the countries in
West Africa still find themselves in post-conflict
situations, with fragile institutions and serious
economic and social problems — chiefly very high
rates of unemployment — leaving very few options
open, especially for young people. Therefore,
recognizing the link between security and development
allows us to focus on the root causes of instability and
functions as a conflict-prevention measure. The recent
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in this
area, including the meeting last year of the four West
African configurations to discuss the problem of
transnational crime, is a good practice from which the
Security Council should also benefit, through more
regular interaction with the PBC.
My third point is related to the need to address
the legal and institutional gaps in the region.
Appropriate legal instruments and capable institutions
are crucial to countering organized crime, to
preventing and punishing corruption and to fighting
impunity. International initiatives, such as those
undertaken by UNODC and the West Africa Coast
Initiative, aimed at strengthening those two dimensions
by providing training and expertise, should be
encouraged and strengthened as a matter of priority.
There is certainly much to be done at the national
level in that respect, but given the nature of the
challenges, we should focus our attention on the

12-23593

development of regional instruments to tackle
organized crime. Recent reports, as well as the concept
note (S/2012/83, annex), have made concrete proposals
to that end, but I underline in particular the priority
that in our view should be given to judicial cooperation
and capacity-building.
In that respect, we encourage relevant
institutions, including UNODC, the United Nations
Office for West Africa, the Economic Community of
West African States and the African Union, to work on
innovative solutions, directed at the support of
appropriate judicial mechanisms to prosecute organized
crime-related cases on a regional basis, thus relieving
local judicial systems of the burden of having to face
transnational criminal networks alone.
In that judicial perspective, we must be aware of
the transnational nature of the trafficking in question,
which requires that special attention be paid to
developing and supporting programmes, both national
and regional, aimed at strengthening bordermanagement capacities.
I have previously mentioned various ongoing
initiatives that originated in the West African region.
Some of those initiatives have triggered international
support for their implementation. I would mention in
particular the support provided by the European Union
as part of its strategy for the Sahel, which has a strong
security and development focus. Ms. Helga Schmidt,
Deputy Secretary-General of the European Union
External Action Service, will be underlining that
concrete cooperation later in this meeting. Portugal
naturally supports her statement.
To be successful, international involvement
requires coherence in the efforts taken by the
international community. A coordinated and integrated
approach is thus of the essence, building on experience
gathered and on solutions and lessons learned in
similar situations of concern in other regions of the
world. Such an approach would help prevent the risk of
duplication and ensure that international responses
effectively address the multiple dimensions of such a
complex phenomenon as organized crime.
As a member of the Security Council, Portugal
stands ready to collaborate in our collective effort to
find new and bold responses to a problem that extends
beyond the West African region, and thus indeed
affects us all.

25

S/PV.6717

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council has before it the text of a presidential
statement to be issued on behalf of the Council on the
subject of this meeting.
I thank the Council members for their valuable
contributions to the statement. In accordance with the
understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2012/2.
It is so decided.
I now give the floor to Mr. José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Counter-Terrorism Cooperation.
Mr. Madeira: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Togolese Republic for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. Your
presence here, Mr. President, is a testimony to your
personal commitment and that of your country to the
advancement of peace, security and stability in Africa
and in the world, in general. Allow me to convey the
apologies of the Chairperson of the Commission,
Mr. Jean Ping, who could not be with us here today
owing to prior unavoidable commitments. He wishes
the Security Council successful deliberations.
The discussions we are holding today are of
particular relevance to the efforts being made by the
African Union (AU) to address the multifaceted
challenges facing the continent in terms of peace and
security. The Common African Defence and Security
Policy, adopted by our Union in 2004, has clearly
defined what Africa’s security and stability rests upon.
The Policy emphasizes not only the traditional threats,
such as intra-State conflicts, but also non-traditional
threats emerging from a changing international
environment, including transnational organized crime
ranging from arms, drugs and human trafficking to
contraband smuggling, piracy and money laundering.
Today, the impact of transnational organized
crime is more evident than ever before. More
alarmingly, crime is converging with other transnational
threats, such as extremism and terrorism. Failure to
address those threats comprehensively, effectively and
collectively puts at risk the very foundations of the
viable democratic States in Africa that our people have
been striving for since independence.

26

The African continent is particularly vulnerable to
transnational organized crime. Porous borders,
weakened State institutions as a result of prolonged civil
strife, poverty, environmental degradation and
challenges to securing natural resources are but a few of
those vulnerabilities. A response to those threats should
therefore be comprehensive and multidimensional.
More importantly, strong commitment on the part
of all stakeholders is an imperative. In a globalized
world, criminal networks span continents, and Africa is
being affected by crime spillover from other regions.
We can no longer afford to think in terms of national
interests alone. We need to carefully envisage how we
can best respond to internal and transnational threats.
Over the past few years, the West Africa region,
the Sahel region and the continent as a whole have
undertaken commendable efforts towards putting in
place
joint
decision-making
and
operational
mechanisms to combat crime, terrorism and piracy.
Their efforts deserve the full support of the
international community.
As recently as 29 January, at the initiative of the
African Union, ministers and other senior officials of
the countries of the Sahel region met in Addis Ababa to
discuss common security challenges, on the basis of
the report and recommendations of the joint AU-United
Nations mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis on
the Sahel region that visited the region in December
2011. I am pleased to inform the Council that in a few
weeks’ time an expert-level meeting will be convened
by the African Union, in collaboration with United
Nations, to agree on the required follow-up measures.
That will be followed by a meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the situation in
the Sahel region.
As we redouble our efforts to confront
transnational crime, we need to enhance the
effectiveness of our action through institution-building
and reform. Of equal importance, we must strengthen
the rule of law and accountability, in order to curb
crime in a sustainable manner. We also need to realize
that confronting crime is not only about patrolling
borders and waters. We must also commit ourselves to
creating alternative economic opportunities for the
most vulnerable sections of our populations by
addressing the underlying socio-economic conditions
that give rise to crime, poverty, environmental
degradation and social exclusion.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Over the past few years, various studies and
research have been conducted and many more reports
written on the growing threat of transnational
organized crime in West Africa, the Sahel region and
Africa as a whole. Now we need to start talking about
what we can do, in the spirit of shared responsibilities,
to confront this menace. In Africa, efforts should focus
on the implementation of and effective follow-up to the
numerous instruments that have already been adopted.
I would therefore like to thank you, Mr. President,
once again for your leadership and for providing us
with this forum to discuss this critical issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Helga Schmid, Deputy Secretary-General
of the External Action Service of the European Union.
Ms. Schmid (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you personally, Mr. President, and the Togolese
presidency for having invited me to take the floor on
behalf of the European Union (EU) during this timely
and relevant debate. It is an honour to be here today.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
for their insightful remarks. We can only agree with all
the important issues they have brought to the fore. The
United Nations can count on unwavering support from
the European Union to move our common, ambitious
agenda forward.
Following the end of the cold war in the 1990s,
West Africa has undergone a process of
democratization, which has been consolidating over the
years. Importantly, West African States are currently
involved in a solid regional integration process. The
European Union views those regional integration
mechanisms as key pillars for bringing peace, security,
stability and prosperity to the region.
But despite those important strides, the countries
of the region still face daunting challenges, ranging
from challenges to democracy, including human rights
violations, weak governance and corruption, to
security, economic, environmental and humanitarian
challenges.
Those threats, especially in combination, could
send the region’s security and humanitarian situation
into a deteriorating spiral. Indeed, across the Sahel

12-23593

region of western Africa, a combination of drought,
poverty, high grain prices, environmental degradation
and chronic underdevelopment threatens to plunge
millions of people into a new food and nutrition crisis
this year. Twelve million people are at risk of hunger.
The European Union has already taken rapid and
determined action to prevent famine in the Sahel. We
are
scaling
up
humanitarian
assistance
to
€125.5 million for the Sahel region. Combined with at
least €150 million of development assistance, that
brings European Union funding for the Sahel so far this
year to almost €275 million. However, it is estimated
that €700 million will be required to cover the next six
months. Overall, and despite many decades of effort
and international aid, the situation remains very
worrying.
Against that backdrop, we would like to
congratulate Togo for its proactive approach and for
having put the issue of organized crime so high on the
agenda of its presidency. This is an important and
urgent subject for the United Nations. But it is also a
very important matter for the international community.
These problems also seriously affect us all. Our duty is
to raise awareness of these threats to peace and
stability. It is also in our common interest to maintain
and step up action in West Africa in the years to come.
The European Union is already acting on these
challenges, and it stands ready to play its role and stay
the course.
The European Union has well-established and
highly substantial cooperation with the region, and it is
firmly committed to continuing to support West Africa
in facing its challenges. Ours is a comprehensive
approach, in partnership with the region, covering all
the main challenges related to organized crime. That
includes the Sahel and support in the fight against
drugs and piracy, to recall some important examples.
For the Sahel, the European Union has recently
adopted a comprehensive Strategy for Security and
Development to support the countries most concerned
by the problems of insecurity. The Permanent
Representative of Pakistan has already referred to it in
his remarks. It is an ambitious strategy, in partnership
with all the European Union member States as well as
with the countries of the region. It is endowed with
substantial political and financial resources covering
political, security, development and diplomatic action.
It is a strategy building on the principle of ownership

27

S/PV.6717

and promoting regional cooperation among the most
concerned countries.
The EU is also considering possible civilian
action in the region within the realm of our Common
Security and Defence Policy. But the main
responsibility and leadership lies with the Sahel
countries concerned.
The fight against drug trafficking is a critical
challenge for West Africa. The region has given itself a
promising action plan, based on the Praia Declaration
against drugs. It is essential that it now be translated
into concrete action. The EU has made clear its firm
determination to support the region’s efforts to
implement the plan, and we are liaising with the United
States as G8 Chair and with other partners to
coordinate and maximize the impact of our support.
But the main burden is on the region’s shoulders; it
must lead the fight, with the unfailing support of the
European Union and the rest of the international
community.
Piracy off the coast of West Africa is a growing
problem. Escalation in both the frequency and the
intensity of attacks on citizens and trade is causing a
significant decline in customs and port revenues, as
well as damaging the prospects of the subregion. The
EU is already taking action to help the region to
confront that scourge. For example, we are funding
INTERPOL’s development of a police information
system for Ghana and Benin. Under that system, a
single data base on organized crime will be created and
will be made available to all 15 West African States.
Other possibilities for supporting the subregion
are currently being explored. Again, West African
leadership will be essential at both the national and
regional levels to confront this important challenge
successfully. Under the same principle of regional
leadership and ownership, we fully support and
welcome the increasing involvement of the Economic
Community of West African States in confronting
security and development challenges.
To conclude, let me underline our common
objective to have a stabilized, more peaceful,
democratic and prosperous West African region, an
area safe for people and trade, where local governance
is improved, wealth is better distributed and benefits
from the natural resources reach local communities.
Continued and deepened regional integration should
result in effective institutions and common policies in

28

support of peace, stability and governance, thereby
increasing prosperity. Significant improvements in
good governance and human rights will also be
essential in order to address the root causes of
insecurity.
The EU remains deeply committed to helping
West Africa, in partnership with its countries and its
regional organizations.
Mr. Kogui N’Douro (Benin) (spoke in French): I
would like first, Mr. President, to renew the
congratulations of your friend and brother, His
Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of
Benin, on the outstanding election of your country, the
Togolese Republic, to the Security Council as a
country of West Africa and on its assumption of the
presidency for this month. President Boni Yayi was
unable to travel to New York in response to your
invitation, for his high-level commitments as current
Chairman of the African Union obliged him to remain
in Africa. He asked me to represent him at this historic
debate, which is of vital importance for security in
Africa.
The collapse of the old regime in Libya has
resulted in massive population movements and the
dispersal of the arsenal of the former Libyan army.
Those phenomena have considerably intensified the
challenges facing West Africa, and the Sahel in
particular, with respect to combating organized
transnational crime. They have been destabilizing
factors, increasing the strength of existing rebellions in
certain States of the Sahel and leading to their
radicalization. They have also led to the resurgence of
pernicious forms of coordinated criminal activities,
such as kidnapping with ransom demands and gun
battles with security forces that are sometimes limited,
due to the superior firepower of the insurgents. We
must also be concerned by the infiltration of dirty
money, which brings great risks to our young
democracies.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
high quality of the background document your country
prepared to inform this debate on problems whose
complexity you have highlighted (S/2012/83). The
Government of Benin agrees with the analysis in the
report and in this Council urgently appeals to the
international community to properly assess what is at
stake for international peace and security due to the
situation in West Africa and the Sahel.

12-23593

S/PV.6717

Our Governments are being sorely tried in the
exercise of their governmental functions with respect
to protecting people and property within our territories.
It is difficult for them to guarantee satisfactory
conditions for survival within their borders. That
situation holds considerable threats not only for the
inhabitants of border regions and isolated areas, who
are daily exposed to increasing hardships, but also for
the large urban centres. Acts of armed aggression are
on the rise.
National security forces on constant alert have
undertaken effective measures to combat criminal acts,
including trafficking in drugs and counterfeit
medicines and money laundering. To that end, the
Government of Benin has just established a canine unit
with sniffer dogs. Benin has adopted a systematic
policy of burning all confiscated material to eliminate
the risk of dispersion. The public security forces are
supported by the national defence forces whenever
such intervention is considered necessary for
appropriate and determined measures to combat
criminals in their corners. Thus, recently some
godfathers of transnational crime were identified and
expelled from Benin.
In that regard, Benin enjoys fruitful cooperation
with its immediate neighbours, in particular with the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, in coordinated efforts at
the subregional level and beyond. Among the measures
taken at subregional, regional and international levels,
we note in particular the establishment of various legal,
political and security measures and the implementation
of coordinated operational activities.
Aware of existing risks, President Yayi has
launched a determined fight against corruption and is
promoting reforms in various areas. In order to restore
respect for ethics and good professional practices, the
Government has adopted a law against corruption and
related misdemeanours. The law has largely been
implemented throughout the entire territory by
ministerial teams. Those actions are based on United
Nations conventions to which Benin is party, such as
the United Nations Convention against Corruption and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
important contribution of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in supporting

12-23593

efforts of Governments to strengthen relevant national
institutions, including judicial structures, and to
enhance synergies necessary for the efficacy of policies
implemented and of resources mobilized to reach that
goal.
The Government of Benin welcomes the attention
given to strategic relations between the Security
Council and the African Union, in view of the security
challenges faced by the African continent, and in
particular the Council’s adoption of resolution 2033
(2012), which contains relevant provisions to make
possible significant improvement in interaction,
cooperation, consultation and the regular coordination
of activities at various levels.
The Government of Benin believes that the
international community must devote greater attention
to issues of public security in Africa and give greater
support to individual and collective efforts of States to
counteract transborder organized crime. In particular,
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
must be combated with greater determination, in close
liaison with the African Union and subregional
organizations. Particular attention should be given to
the essential linkage between security challenges,
developmental challenges and challenges linked to the
fragility of our State institutions, in order to enable the
implementation of coherent regional strategies.
An integrated approach is also necessary to
address the problems of resident migrants and those in
transit, unemployed citizens and scattered armed
combatants. Their disarming and productive reinsertion
into the economic life of their host country must be
supported with appropriate measures. It is important to
prevent that distressed population from being won over
by armed groups that seek to destabilize States in order
to take control of their resources. That is imperative to
ensure effective conflict prevention.
Before I finish, I must refer to piracy and armed
robbery at sea, an aspect of organized transnational
crime. We welcome the Security Council’s intention to
allocate a special meeting to this issue during the
current month. In that regard, I wish to express the
thanks of His Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of
the Republic of Benin, to His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
to all members of the Security Council for the
appropriate measures they have taken to assist Benin

29

S/PV.6717

and other countries of West Africa that are facing those
serious threats of criminality in our States.
My country, Benin, is particularly grateful for the
effective and efficient support of the Nigerian naval
forces, alongside their Beninese brothers, in carrying
out joint patrols. We also express our profound
gratitude to France, the United States, the European
Union, China and other States for the active solidarity
they have demonstrated towards Benin and for their
substantial contribution to national capacity-building in
countries of the subregion.
The Government of Benin hopes that the meeting
of the Security Council to deal with the report of the
assessment mission that visited Benin and some other
West and Central African countries in 2011
(S/2012/45) will lead to concrete measures aimed at
ensuring an adequate response to existing threats.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me to express my delegation’s warmest
congratulations to the President of the Council on his
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February, and above all on his leadership in
taking the initiative to organize this debate on a topic
of great importance to my country, whose security
situation has obvious subregional dimensions.
That is why I wish to take advantage of this
opportunity to convey the thanks of the people and
Government of Côte d’Ivoire on the election of its
President, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, on 17 February to
head the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), our common subregional organization.
Through that election, the members of that
organization demonstrated once again their support and
encouragement to Côte d’Ivoire in its reconciliation
and reconstruction efforts.
In listing the major challenges facing the
subregion, President Alassane Ouattara explicitly
mentioned the question on the agenda for today’s
debate, while setting out his thoughts on the priority
actions to be taken in the areas of strengthening
institutions, democracy, rule of law and good
governance in order to ensure lasting peace and
development in the subregion. In particular, he
highlighted that our subregion faces new threats with
respect to security, including the resurgence of old

30

conflicts that have weakened entire sections of society
and threatened our defence capabilities. He called for
defining a shared defence policy, for pooling our means
in order to halt the upsurge in terrorism, for
re-establishing control of our coastal areas that are
threatened by marine piracy, and for containing the flow
of arms that aggravate criminality and organized crime.
President Ouattara also stressed that in response
to the security challenges and in order for ECOWAS to
become a true centre of stability and a policy source,
the time is ripe to strengthen strategic partnerships,
especially on military issues and in order to modernize
the Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group — the peace forces of ECOWAS. To
follow up, he noted the firm political will of ECOWAS
to combat transnational organized crime, piracy and
terrorism and has taken steps in that direction. In that
context, ECOWAS intends to strengthen its strategic
partnerships to better conduct its actions.
We salute resolution 2033 (2012), adopted by the
Council at the conclusion of the high-level debate
(S/PV.6702) that was organized under the initiative of
the South African presidency of the Council and
presided over by President Jacob Zuma himself. The
resolution enables reactivation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and strengthens
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in particular.
My delegation takes note of the letter from the
Secretary-General in document S/2012/42, transmitting
the “Report of the assessment mission on the impact of
the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region, 7 to 23 December
2011”. It also notes document S/2012/83, containing
the “Annex to the letter dated 8 February 2012 from
the Permanent Representative of Togo to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General: Concept
note on the impact of transnational organized crime on
peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region”. My delegation naturally supports the
recommendations contained therein.
With regard to the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the leaders of the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS “move
urgently to lead the efforts to mobilize international
support
for
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations” (S/2012/42, para. 70), this debate
should be a first significant step in that direction. It
should thus help to strengthen the impetus of the

12-23593

S/PV.6717

necessary multilateral partnership in combating
transnational organized crime in West Africa and the
Sahel region.
Furthermore, my delegation fully supports the
assessment in the concept note submitted to us stating
that:
“assistance from the international community that
frames all of these disputes in narrow “security”
terms without also taking steps to address these
broader questions of conflict prevention,
governance and sustainable development will not
provide an effective solution”. (S/2012/83, annex,
p. 4)
My delegation thus supports the idea of enhancing and
systematizing strategic coordination mechanisms at the
security level, with the establishment of a joint defence
system, to be announced at the upcoming meeting of
Chiefs of Staff of States members of ECOWAS and of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and countries of the Sahel region, pursuant
to one of the decisions of the fortieth summit of
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, held on
16 and 17 February.
In addition to the strategic coordination
mechanism to be established at the security level,
similar mechanisms should be implemented in the

12-23593

context of economic and financial issues, as well as
sustainable development. Such an approach would
certainly make it possible to combat poverty and
effectively bolster the fight against insecurity, in
general, and transnational crime, piracy, terrorism, in
particular, since the poverty of populations and the low
representation of national institutions in areas of
difficult access in certain Sahel countries, in particular,
are used by ill-intentioned people and organizations to
destabilize some ECOWAS, ECCAS and Sahel
countries.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that, in
order to overcome all the above-mentioned challenges,
the actions of the international community should be
firmly rooted in the context of establishing strategic
coordination mechanisms involving both States
members of the African Union and States Members of
the United Nations, supported by the expertise of
relevant bodies of the United Nations system and
partner countries.
The President (spoke in French): There are a
number of speakers remaining on the list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of Council
members, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

31
