Resolutions adopted on .the reports of t,he Third Committee

Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
830 A (XXXII) and 830 H (XXXII) of 2 August
1961 concerning the Report on the World Social Situation,4 and balanced co-ordinated economic and social
development,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to continue the study of the question of balanced and co-ordinated economic and social development,
2. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council, the regional economic commissions, th{! Committee for Industrial Development, the Social Commissioi;i and the specialized agencies concerned should
continue to pay special attention to problems of balanced economic and social development, taking into
account the interaction of economic growth and social
development and all valuable experience of countries
of various economic and social systems;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
recommend, after appropriate studies, measures which
may be helpful primarily to the less developed countries in planning for balanced and co-ordinated economic
and social development ;
4. Recommends further that the Special Fund
should take this question into consideration when providing assistance to requesting countries ;
5. Expresses the wish that the regional institutes
of economic development which are in the process of
being created in the various regions under United
Nations auspices would include in their terms of reference the study of social factors affecting economic development;
6. Believes that an exchange of experience in the
field of co-ordination of economic and social development will be fruitful.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1675 (XVI). Strengthening of the work of the
United Nations in the social field
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1392 (XIV) of 20 November
1959 in which it rec;ognized that economic development
and social development are interrelated and that social
progress is an end in itself as well as a means of
furthering economic development,
Recalling further its resolutions 1393 (XIV) of 20
November 1959 on low-cost housing and 1508 (XV) of
12 December 1960 on low-cost housing and related
community facilities,
Taking note of recommendation No. 115 concerning
workers' housing adopted by the International Labour
Organisation at its forty-fifth Conference on 28 June
1961,
Having considered chapters VI and VIII of the
report of the Economic and Social Council to the
General Assembly,11
1. Notes with satisfaction the action taken by the
Economic and Social Council to strengthen the activities
of the United Nations in the social field, particularly
'United Nations publication, Sales No.: 61.IV.4.

• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
SuppTe~t No. 3 (A/4820).

29

the decision to enlarge the Social Commission and to
convene it annually, the establishment of the ad hoe
group of experts on the relation of community development programmes to national development programmes
including land reform, the establishment of the ad hoe
group of experts on housing and urban development,
and the Council's request that the Social Commission
reappraise its basic direction with a view to giving
increased attention to matters. of social policy;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 841 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 designed to bring
about close co-ordination between the programmes of
industrialization, rural development, urbanization and
housing;
3. Calls the attention of Governments of Member
States and the appropriate authorities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies to the necessity
of closely co-ordinated action in dealing with the problems relating to those programmes ;
4. Expresses its satisfaction that the Economic and
Social Council will give consideration, at its thirtythird session, to having a combined plenary debate on
world economic trends and the world social situation
at its thirty-fourth session, thus giving practical recognition to the interdependence of eqmomic and social
factors in development ;
5. Requests that the Economic and Social Council,
on the basis of the information gathered in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1508 (XV),
consider proposals to expand and co-ordinate international programmes and give assistance, at the request
of Governments, to national programmes in the field
of low-cost housing and related community facilities;
6. Expresses its strong support of the hope expressed in Economic and Social Council resolution
840 J (XXXII) of 2 August 1961 that all necessary
provision will be made to enable the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to discharge effectively its
responsibilities in the social field, in particular those
relating to research, operational programmes, United
Nations Children's Fund projects concerned with social
services for children and those arising from the increased activities in the social field of the regional economic commissions.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1676 (XVI). Urbanization
The General Assembly,
Having noted Economic and Social Council resolution 830 B (XXXII) of 2 August 1961 in which the
Council approved the proposal for concerted international action in the field of urbanization,
Recognizing the magnitude of problems stemming
from the growing concentration of population in urban
and metropolitan areas, inter alia, the increasing volume
of investment required to provide sufficient employment
and to establish and maintain social and physical
services and facilities in those areas,
Recognizing further the difficulty of adaptation to
urban life of people from rural areas, the inadequacy
of urban institutions designed to fadlitate such adaptation and transition, and the lack of basic research,
studies and evaluation of successful techniques in those
fields,

30

General Assembly

1. Recom'1'1Wnds that Governments of Member
States assess the adequacy of measures dealing with
various aspects of the urbanization process and review
their national policies and programmes affecting urbanization ;
2. Recommends further that Governments designate
existing, or establish new, organizations as national
centres on urbanization in accordance with Economic
and Social Council resolution 830 B (XXXII);
3. Requests the · Secretary-General to suggest appropriate ways of organizing among such centres an
international exchange of the results of research and
studies and of practical experience in the field of urbanization;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, the Special
Fund, the regional economic commissions and the
specialized agencies concerned to co-operate with Governments in carrying out the necessary basic research
and studies, in formulating comprehensive plans for
urban and regional development and in establishing
and expanding the required community service and
facilities;

5. Invites Governments to enlist citizens' participation in such programmes.
1081st plenary '11UJeting,
18 December 1961.

1677 (XVI). Co-operation for the eradication of
illiteracy throughout the world
The General Assembly,
Expressing its concern at the fact that there at present
exists, in many countries of the world, mass illiteracy
which, in several countries, extends to a great part of
the population and acts as a brake upon the advance,
both of individual countries and of human society as
a whole, along the path of economic and social progress,
Confirming its resolutions 330 (IV) of 2 December
1949, 743 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, 1049 (XI)
of 20 February 1957 and 1463 (XIV) of 12 December
1959, recommending the establishment of free and compulsory primary education and the raising of such
education to the level enjoyed by the peoples of the
advanced countries,
Having regard to its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 and recalling Economic and Social
Council resolutions 768 (XXX) of 21 July 1960 on
co-operation on behalf of newly independent countries
and 837 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 on African educational development,
Convinced of the great importance of literacy and
general education to the development of peaceful and
friendly relations among nations and peoples,
Sharing the view that the literacy campaign and
assistance in all fields of education should be the responsibility of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Bearing in mind the usefulness of the efforts made
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of literacy aQd
education in general, and particularly of the decision
taken by that organization, at the eleventh session of
its General Conference, in resolution 8.63 of 15 December 1960,

Sixteenth Session

Noting that even greater efforts are called for, at the
present time, with a view to eradicating mass illiteracy
throughout the world as speedily as possible,
1. Invites the United Nations, Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization :
(a) To make a general review, at a regular session
of its General Conference, of the question of the eradication of mass illiteracy throughout the world, with the
object of working out concrete and effective measures,
at the international and national levels, for such eradication;
( b) To present, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at a regular session a
survey of the position in the world with regard to the
extension of universal literacy, together with recommendations on the measures which might be taken,
within the framework of the United Nations, for cooperation in the eradication of illiteracy;
2. Calls for the extension of effective assistance for
the eradication of illiteracy and the promotion of education of all kinds to the developing countries both
bilaterally and within the framework of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies;
3. Expresses the hope that the Governments of
those countries will assign, in their programmes of
social development, prime importance to the problem
of eradicating illiteracy.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1678 (XVI). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
R.ecognizing the basic importance of child welfare
programmes, not only to the future well-being of
children but also to the role they will play as useful
and productive members of society,
Noting the report of th~ Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund entitled "Survey of
the needs of children", 6 the decisions of the Executive
Board of the Fund following from his report, and Economic and Social Council resolution 827 (XXXII) of
28 July 1961 by which the Council endorsed those
decisions,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Fund has thus
taken steps to translate still more effectively the provisions of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child 7
into improved programmes of welfare for children,
1. Endorses the new emphasis and approach represented by those decisions, in particular those aspects
which will assist developing countries desiring to:
(a) Make intensive and integrated surveys of child
needs for the purpose of identifying those priority needs
which might most effectively be met by national and
international action ;
( b) Draw up long-term plans and programmes for
child welfare on the basis of such surveys ;
• Report by the Executive Director (E/ICEF /410 and Add.l)
and supplementary reports by the Bureau of Social Affairs of
the United Nations Secretariat, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (E/ICEF/411-415 and 415/Add.l.).
7
Resolution 1386 (XIV) of 20 November 1959.
