S/2021/850

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 October 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 4 October 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2584 (2021) of 29 June
2021, in which the Council encouraged a more robust examination of alternative
support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, with detailed and
operational options for that support, including through bilateral and multilateral
mechanisms and organizations other than the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and w ith the consideration of
all appropriate funding options, and requested me to also include an assessment of
the implementation of paragraph 13 of Council resolution 2391 (2017), including on
the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United
Nations security forces, in a report to be issued by no later than 30 September 2021,
without prejudice to any future Council decision.
To that end, an assessment was conducted from 12 July to 31 August by a team
comprised of representatives from the Department of Peace Operations; the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; the Department of Operational
Support; the Office of Legal Affairs; MINUSMA; the Office of the United Nat ions
High Commissioner for Human Rights; and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel. The team held a series of consultations with the permanent members
of the Security Council, the permanent representations of the States members of the
Group of Five for the Sahel in New York, the Executive Secretariat and the Support
Committee of the Group of Five in Nouakchott, the Ministers of Defence of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, the leadership of the Joint Force, the African Union, the
European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Germany.
I remain convinced that a dedicated United Nations support office funded
through assessed contributions is the most effective approach to provide sustainable
and predictable support to the Joint Force. At the same time, support models should be
designed to promote regional ownership and enhance the capacity of the Joint Force to
become self-sufficient. In that spirit, identifying further steps that the States members
of the G5 Sahel could take to improve the operational effectiveness of the Joint Force
and make the support and technical assistance of international partners more efficient
is also crucial. Those parameters have informed the assessment and shaped the
development of the options detailed in the present letter and its annex (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-14473 (E)

181021

*2114473*

S/2021/850

Annex
Assessment of support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel

I. Context
1.
The security situation in the Sahel remains volatile, with high levels of violence
further constraining the ability of Governments in the Sahel region to sustain the
delivery of social services while ensuring the safety and security of their populations.
Terrorism continues to spread throughout the region and has reached coastal States.
Parts of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger are affected by outbreaks of intercommunal
violence resulting in mass displacements, providing a vacuum in which terrorist
groups proliferate, further eroding State authority. Chad is grappling with incursions
by Boko Haram and “Islamic State West Africa Province” in the Lake Chad basin and
with instability along its borders. According to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Sahel region is facing an exceptional crisis.
In 2021, almost 29 million Sahelians will need assistance and protection, 5 million
more than was the case in 2020.
2.
The anticipated return of foreign fighters and the huge influx of small arms from
Libya add more challenges that will further burden the armed and security forces
composing the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. Meanwhile, the Force
is to operate in the context of the reconfiguration of international forces in northern
Mali and the Liptako-Gourma tri-border area shared between Burkina Faso, Mali and
the Niger.
3.
In addition to the creation of the G5 Sahel and its Joint Force, several o ther
regional initiatives to counter terrorism have been developed in recent years,
including the Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security cooperation and the
operationalization of the African Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo Saharan region in 2013, the Accra Initiative of 2017, and the Extraordinary Summit
of the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) of 2019, which was aimed at mobilizing the ECOWAS Standby
Force. Some of the initiatives have remained declarations of intent, while others lack
funding or mechanisms for follow-up. Against that backdrop, and given the deeply
concerning developments in the Sahel, the creation of the Joint Force, despite the
persisting challenges, is a strong manifestation of political will by the five core States
of the Sahel that merits the support of the international community.

II. Key findings
A.

Capacities of the Group of Five for the Sahel
4.
The assessment team carried out an evaluation of the operationalization of the
Joint Force, the strategic vision of the G5 Sahel and the desired end state for the
Force. The team enquired about concrete steps and timelines for achieving the end
state, as well as about planned operations and resulting needs, with the objective of
determining a baseline and developing costed options for future support. In the
strategic concept of operations for the Force, the operationalization is broken down
into two phases, the second of which is to be launched at a later ti me and anticipates
its transformation into a regional security operation. On the basis of information made
available to it, the assessment team concluded that refining and honing a shared vision
for the future of the Sahel to guide and inform the full oper ationalization of the Force
would merit further consultations among Governments of the Group of Five.

2/11

21-14473

S/2021/850

1.

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
5.
In March 2021, the Joint Force launched Operation Sama 3 in Sector Centre, a
long-term operation conducted in several phases in coordination with other partners.
The same month, the Force was reinforced with the arrival of the eighth Chadian
battalion, comprising 1,200 elements and currently based in Téra, Niger. Its
deployment brought the total number of Force troops to 5,535 soldiers. However, on
21 August, Chad announced the withdrawal of some of the troops for strategic
reasons. As at 15 September, Chad had repatriated at least 400 troops, leaving 800 in
Téra. The Force leadership informed MINUSMA that the Force planned to conduct
two major operations per sector per year, coupled with other ad hoc operations. In
that regard, the Force provided a budget table, enclosed with the present letter, with
an overview of annual funding needs.

2.

Executive Secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel
6.
The G5 Sahel has taken steps to increase its autonomy and administrative capacity
and to improve organizational governance, including regarding the Joint Force.
7.
The Commander of the Joint Force plans his operations on the basis of the
strategic and equipment plans received from the Defence and Security Committee, an
entity that brings together the military chiefs of staff of the G5 Sahel. The Commander
has two reporting lines: one to the Executive Secretariat of the Group, the other to the
Committee. The secretariat is not authorized to conduct its own procurement
exercises. The Force depends entirely on material and equipment from individual
member States, through the Committee, as it cannot pr ocure or obtain those supplies
directly. Consequently, the role of the domestic military chiefs of staff is essential.
8.
Following the Pau Summit of January 2020, the G5 Sahel strengthened the
prerogatives of the then Permanent Secretariat and transformed it into an executive
secretariat. Additional staff were recruited to enhance the coordination in the security
and development interventions of the Group of Five. The Executive Secretary increased
international fundraising and advocacy efforts on behalf of the Joint Force. The
European Union coordination hub, a mechanism created in 2018 to match the needs of
the Force with donor pledges, was transferred from Brussels to Nouakchott in 2020 and
was absorbed by the Support Committee, a multilateral body that a cts as an interface
between the Force and the Executive Secretariat. The Committee also manages the trust
fund of the Group of Five. In 2020, it carried out its first independent procurement
exercise and purchased 44 vehicles worth $13.5 million. According to interlocutors of
the Group of Five, the fund is currently depleted. During its extraordinary summit held
in N’Djamena in February 2021, the Group of Five created an operations fund for the
Force, to which several West African countries have contributed.
9.
As part of measures to strengthen institutional governance and capacity, the
Executive Secretariat of the Group of Five called for greater involvement of the
African Union to accompany the aforementioned processes. African Union
interlocutors indicated interest, but noted their own limited capacity, which would
require the support of another partner.

B.

Implementation of the human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces and the
operationalization of the compliance framework of the Joint Force

1.

Progress
10. Through the implementation of the compliance framework and the human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces,

21-14473

3/11

S/2021/850

anchored in the commitments of the States members of the G5 Sahel, steady progress
has been made by the Joint Force to integrate human rights into its structures and
operations, including through the enhanced application of the compliance framework
at the battalion level. This is critical given, inter alia, the impact of human rights
violations on efforts to fight impunity and rebuild trust between national and regional
security forces and the population.
2.

Challenges
11. Nevertheless, integrating human rights into United Nations support for the Joint
Force remains a challenging endeavour. Difficulties common to implementing the
human rights due diligence policy and the compliance framework include scarce
information on the impact of Force operations and a general lack of communication
to differentiate operations conducted in a national capacity and those conducted under
the command of the Force. Consequently, it remains difficult to determine
responsibility in cases involving civilian harm or damages. The crucial issue of
accountability is further affected by the limited visibility of pending investigations
and the lack of appropriate follow-up to violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law allegedly committed by members of the Force.

C.

International support
12. The assessment team mapped existing support provided by various partners to
the Joint Force in order to determine the options that could be leveraged or expanded
upon. It found that the most consistent and systematic direct operational supp ort,
albeit limited in scope, is currently provided by MINUSMA pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2391 (2017) and its operative paragraph 13, as well as resolutions
2359 (2017), 2480 (2019), 2531 (2020) and 2584 (2021).

1.

Support provided by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali
13. To date, MINUSMA has delivered 3.9 million litres of fuel and lubricants a nd
67,000 ration packs to the Joint Force in compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy. The Mission also supported the construction of the Force
headquarters, procured medical supplies in response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and conducted three medical evacuations in Mali.
14. In August and September 2021, MINUSMA carried out verification missions to
all countries of the G5 Sahel, accompanied by the contractors for fuel and rations
delivery, to (a) map supply routes; (b) assess storage capacity; (c) discuss tax
exemption matters; and (d) identify venues and plans for training on the human rights
due diligence policy, in preparation for the implementation of its enhanced support
mandate pursuant to Security Council resolution 2531 (2020).
15. MINUSMA found that none of the eight battalions had adequate storage
capacity. During follow-up meetings, national authorities committed to providing
equipment for storage and expressed their willingness to grant tax exemption on all
supplies for the benefit of the battalions. The Mission also found that initial estimates
provided by the Joint Force did not meet its operational requirements. The quantities
of fuel, ingredients and rations have therefore been increased, and drinking water,
which was not initially included in planning, has now been included. In addition,
during meetings with the leadership of national armed forces, MINUSMA learned that
States members of the G5 Sahel provided air support to assist during operations but
lacked Jet A1 aviation fuel to increase offensive air support.

4/11

21-14473

S/2021/850

2.

Other support
16. The European Union remains the most important donor to the Joint Force, with
contributions totalling €256.6 million. In addition, the trust fund of the G5 Sahel
received contributions from Rwanda ($1 million), Turkey ($5 million), the United Arab
Emirates ($12 million) and the West African Economic and Monetary Union ($867,000).
17. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is currently exploring options
for enhanced support for the G5 Sahel, including through its Support and Procurement
Agency. The organization plans to conduct its own assessment, which will inform its
future engagement in the Sahel region.
18. Several Member States provide bilateral support to the States members of the
G5 Sahel, while others are piloting a hybrid model that combines bilateral support
with a coordination role for regional entities. In interactions with the assessment team,
bilateral donors stated that, until the organizational and institutional capacity of the
Group of Five, including its capacity to receive financial support, was strengthened,
bilateral support remained the only viable option for the time being.
19. The team found it challenging to obtain a comprehensive overview of all
contributions by partners and donors to the Joint Force. In order to provide more
effective long-term support, there is a need for better coordination and for the
centralization of such information to avoid duplication and improve complementarity.

D.

Challenges
20. While all interlocutors underscored their strong support for the Joint Force as
an exceptional initiative that warrants international help, there is no convergence of
views within the international community on how best to provide it. The assessment
team identified several issues that have made it challenging to establish a more
coordinated, comprehensive, sustainable and predictable support mechanism for the
Force, including the question of whether the Force is the best option under the
prevailing circumstances in the Sahel; its governance mechanism; accountability and
compliance; transparency and access to information; and financial reporting.
21. In that context, Member States and regional organizations have championed
different approaches across a whole spectrum of options, ranging from bilateral
support to a full-fledged, dedicated support office based in the Sahel. Despite those
challenges, all interlocutors agreed that any support provided to the G5 Sahel as a
whole, and the Joint Force as its military arm, made sense only if local capacities were
strengthened at both the regional and national levels. All interlocutors also expressed
strong support for a strengthened oversight role for the Executive Secretariat.

III. Measures to be taken by the Group of Five for the Sahel
22. Independently of any support provided by international partners, the G5 Sahel
could take a number of steps to further operationalize the Joint Force a nd increase its
effectiveness and reach, through enhanced coordination and information -sharing in
the face of a common and complex security challenge. Such steps would build upon
relevant African Union instruments, including the Common African Defence and
Security Policy of 2004 and the African Union Non-Aggression and Common
Defence Pact of 2005, both of which call for enhanced security and defence
cooperation among African Union member States, including in the fight against
terrorism and organized crime.
23. Specifically, this enhanced cooperation could include the pooling and sharing of
services and military equipment, including air assets. Other modalities could also be
21-14473

5/11

S/2021/850

envisaged by learning from relevant international experiences, including the conducti ng
of joint procurement exercises and arrangements regarding mutual support services for
spare parts. Lastly, and as part of the drive to enhance the effectiveness of the Joint
Force, the Group of Five countries could consider developing clear rotation sch edules
and clarifying command and control structures, as well as developing specialized
capacity based on comparative advantage and location. For instance, medical
evacuations could be provided by the member States with the air assets most suited to
such operations, whereas others might provide offensive air support, transport or storage
equipment. In this respect, it is encouraging to note that the chiefs of defence staff of the
Group of Five have tasked their respective heads of air forces to come up with
recommendations on how to pool their capabilities to cut costs and foster greater
effectiveness. Those recommendations are to feed into the next meeting of the chiefs of
defence staff, scheduled to take place in Burkina Faso in November 2021.
24. The arrangements mentioned above, if proactively and effectively pursued, will
go a long way in reducing costs, achieving economies of scale and ensuring an
efficient use of the limited resources available to the Group of Five countries. The
same approach should be considered in other areas, including human rights, to
maximize the impact of collective efforts by the countries. The efforts will also foster
greater cooperation among the countries and signal further political commitment
towards collectively addressing the security challenges at hand while creating
conditions for more effective international support.
25. Achieving that objective would require a joint stocktaking exercise and a
thorough review of relevant international experiences, on the basis of which practical
and feasible modalities for enhanced cooperation could be proposed. A United
Nations advisory office (see below), working closely with the African Union, the
European Union and other partners, could provide valuable support in that regard by
facilitating the conduct of the aforementioned exercise and review and identifying
comparative advantages.

IV. Options for enhanced international support
26. In the immediate to medium term, strengthening the ownership and capacity of the
G5 Sahel should be a key component of any support provided to the Joint Force. This
would ensure that the Group of Five further builds the political consensus and develops
the institutional capacity necessary to drive the regionalization of the Force and tackle
the multiple challenges facing the Sahel in a comprehensive manner. Furthermore, and
irrespective of the support model, it is essential that the Force be guided by an
overarching political and strategic framework. A dedicated political forum, comprising
representatives of the Group of Five and other international and regional organizations,
such as the African Union, ECOWAS, the United Nations and the European Union, as
well as members of the Security Council, could be envisaged. It would both promote
regional ownership and foster enhanced international support while ensuring that the
operations of the Force were aligned with important political processes, such as the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
27. On the basis of the findings outlined above, the Secretary-General proposes two
options for enhancing support for the Joint Force.
1.

Option 1: advisory office to the Executive Secretariat of the Group of Five for
the Sahel
28. The United Nations advisory office would aim to provide technical and expert
assistance to the Executive Secretariat of the G5 Sahel in the areas of political affairs,
human rights, operational planning and administrative planning, including on modalities

6/11

21-14473

S/2021/850

for the adequate pooling and sharing of resources, excluding logistical and material
support. The advisory office would be modelled on the former African Union
Peacekeeping Support Team of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which
successfully provided expert advice to the African Union on the planning and
management of its peace operations and was eventually – alongside other United Nations
support and liaison mechanisms – subsumed into the present United Nations Office to
the African Union. Building upon the comparative advantage of the African Union in
peace enforcement and the leveraging of relevant African Union instruments on defence
and security cooperation, the advisory office would include a joint United NationsAfrican Union planning team to also provide guidance and assistance on cross-cutting
issues such as military doctrine and training and to coordinate within the United Nations
and with other partners the provision of support for the capacity-building of the Joint
Force. Technical and expert assistance could be envisaged in the areas of military
operations; force generation; medical assistance; aviation; police; public information;
procurement; human resources; human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces; finance; contingent-owned equipment;
and information and communications technology. Under that option, the human rights
and protection mechanism, as established under the compliance framework and the
human rights due diligence policy, would remain unchanged and would therefore
constitute the support that MINUSMA is currently authorized to deliver.
29. It is envisaged that the advisory office would be co-located with the Executive
Secretariat in Nouakchott. Funding could be envisaged through a multi-donor trust
fund.
30. Should the Security Council consider this option favourably and a formal
request be forthcoming from the States members of the G5 Sahel, it would be
necessary to identify further capacity-building requirements, as well as the duration
of the assistance and benchmarks against which to measure progress towards the
desired objective.
2.

Option 2: dedicated United Nations support office
31. A dedicated United Nations support office for the Joint Force would aim to
support the implementation of its strategic concept of operations by providing
logistical support to operations conducted under the auspices of the Force. It would
provide the most sustainable and predictable funding, empower the G5 Sahel by
establishing a foundation for the planning and conduct of operations and provide a
strong framework for the protection of human rights.
32. A dedicated support office would entail the expansion of the support currently
provided by MINUSMA (water, rations, fuel and medical evacuation within the
borders of Mali) to cover engineering services, maintenance services, information and
communications technology services, cargo transportation, medical supplies, and
medical and casualty evacuations in all areas of operation. There are two basic models
for the design of the support office, irrespective of whether it is funded through
assessed contributions or donor funding:
(a) A model with a heavier reliance on United Nations -provided service
delivery, entailing a heavier United Nations staff footprint;
(b) A model based on the maximum use of outsourcing, with a lighter United
Nations footprint focused mostly on supply chain functions, contract management
and quality assurance, in addition to reporting.
33. Both models would seek to establish support arrangements in the most effective
and efficient manner, building upon the expertise developed through the provision of
support to the Joint Force by MINUSMA and using, to the extent poss ible, existing

21-14473

7/11

S/2021/850

United Nations support arrangements in the region. The support office would promote
transparency and accountability through its fair and transparent processes, flexibility
and scalability, and would be more suited to supporting kinetic opera tions in the area
of operations. It could be tailored to the operational needs and capacity of the Group
of Five as it enhances its own capacity over time.
34. Regardless of the mode of delivery of support, it is envisaged that the support
office headquarters could be situated in Niamey to take advantage of its central location
and the ready availability of commercial services. A smaller liaison office would be
established in Nouakchott to ensure coordination with the secretariat of the Group of
Five. Further operational offices are envisaged in Bamako, Ouagadougou and
N’Djamena to ensure that operational planning, prioritization and coordination are
synchronized with the support requirements across the area of operations. An operations
cell would be established in Bamako to work with the Joint Force headquarters.
35. A key feature of the design of a United Nations support office would be to ensure
that Joint Force operations are overseen by a coordination mechanism that would
govern the operations of the office, involving the secretariat of the Group of Five, the
Force headquarters and the office, through which a common understanding of the
operations to be supported could be established and monitored. The coordination
mechanism would be essential in ensuring that the office supports only those
operations conducted under the auspices of the Group of Five.
36. A support office would apply the same principles and approaches to continue to
reinforce the human rights and protection agenda, including by ensuring human rights
compliance, as established under the compliance framework and the human rights due
diligence policy.
37. Should the Security Council consider this option favourably and the requisite
resources be available, it is envisaged that advance phase implementation could begin
immediately, with the aim of reaching full operational capacity by the end of 2022 or
early 2023. The establishment of a support office would require dedicated resources to
conduct planning in appropriate detail before costs, staffing, modes of support delivery,
the United Nations footprint and governance arrangements could be finalized.
3.

Other considerations
38. The assessment team held several discussions with regional organizations, such
as the European Union and the African Union, to explore options for their increased
engagement in the region. The European Union is currently considering options for
enhanced support through its newly created European Peace Facility for 2022 –2023,
including for security sector reform, training and military equipment, including some
lethal equipment but excluding small arms, but it stressed that it was too early to
provide an indication of the modalities, scope and scale of such support.
39. The African Union expressed its willingness for and interest in an enhanced role,
especially in relation to encouraging deeper cooperation among the Group of Five
countries and supporting their efforts in the area of governance. However, it stressed
that it would require the financial support of an other donor to provide practical
logistical support to the Joint Force.
40. The assessment team also explored options for an enhanced coordination of
bilateral support. The United Nations, with its convening power, could potentially
play a role in that regard, either through the dedicated political forum mentioned
above, as part of options for enhanced international support, through MINUSMA, or
within the framework of the Coalition for the Sahel. The team found that enhancing
coordination would be crucial but should by no means be mutually exclusive of any
of the options outlined above.

8/11

21-14473

S/2021/850

4.

Recommendations to enhance the implementation of the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security
forces and the human rights compliance framework
41. Under both the compliance framework and the human rights due diligence policy,
improved structures and internal practices to address human rights concerns must
continue to be developed together with the Joint Force. This approach should start with
operationalizing a mechanism with the Force and the military personnel of the five
countries that would help to bring about deconfliction between operations conducted in
a national capacity and operations under the command of the Joint Force, and help with
the subsequent determination of responsibility for human rights violations. As a matter
of priority, enhancing the capacity of the provost deployed to battalions of the Group
of Five to conduct independent, impartial investigations and ensure accountability for
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law by elements of the Force
remains essential. Meanwhile, it will be important to strengthen the national and
regional ownership of the compliance framework by the Group of Five, including by
building the human rights capacity of its Executive Secretariat and the headquarters of
the national forces and by further supporting civil-military cooperation and relations
between the Force and local populations. Lastly, strong and continuing political will
and commitment on the part of the States members of the Group of Five and the Force
will be crucial, in addition to the support from international actors.

V. Conclusion
42. The Joint Force is a critical initiative that should be seen as a tool complementing
the multifaceted United Nations engagement in the Sahel that the United Nations
should more effectively support. When considering how best to support the Joint
Force, the guiding questions should concern how to address th e challenges faced by
the Sahel in a sustainable and effective manner and how best to support national actors
in their efforts to implement the initiatives that they have devised themselves. A fully
autonomous Group of Five with the capacity to support its various entities, including
the Force, remains the shared objective of the States members of the Group of Five –
an objective shared by the Security Council. Consequently, that element should be the
first consideration for any support option to the Force.
43. The establishment of a United Nations advisory office could help to build this
capacity and provide urgently needed, albeit not logistical, support, while
simultaneously providing the political space for dialogue on long -term solutions. At
the same time, it is the deep conviction of the Secretary-General that a dedicated
United Nations support office would be best suited to providing the predictable,
sustainable and reliable support that the Group of Five merits. I call upon the members
of the Security Council to consider this option once more, taking into account the
flexibility and scalability of the detailed proposal contained in the present assessment
and its enclosure. Meanwhile, the Secretary-General wishes to stress the need for
continuing engagement and support from bilateral and multilateral partners to the
Group of Five, including the European Union and the African Union.
44. Regardless of any support provided, addressing governance challenges will be
critical to ensuring lasting stability in the Sahel. Military and security solutions, while
necessary given the scale of violence and armed threats in the region and their
repercussions for security elsewhere in Africa and beyond, cannot be successful on
their own. They must be complemented by equally determined efforts to improve
governance and foster inclusion. The Secretary-General welcomes the efforts being
made by the countries of the region to invest not only in security and defence but also
in good governance, human rights, infrastructure, resilience and human development,
21-14473

9/11

S/2021/850

and encourages them to enhance those efforts. He calls upon the international
community to capitalize on efforts made to improve governance by regional actors,
including the African Union, and to intensify their support in that regard. Only that
will bring about the results that are hoped for. For its part, the Secretariat will reach
out to the African Union Commission to examine how best to work together in support
of governance-related efforts by the Group of Five countries, building upon the
relevant African policies and norms.

10/11

21-14473

S/2021/850

Enclosure
Overview of annual funding needs

Description

Amount
(United States
dollars)

Notes

Dry and fresh food

25 000 000

Lump sum

Diesel

4 200 000

4 million litres

Fuel

3 570 000

3.4 million litres

Ingredients

4 440 000

1.48 million litres

Mine protective vehicles

51 200 000

16 vehicles at each of 8 locations

Vehicle maintenance and servicing

2 000 000

Lump sum

Vehicle spare parts

2 500 000

Lump sum

Field defence, accommodation, kitchen

32 000 000

2 camps at each of 8 locations

Camp maintenance

16 000 000

$1 million per camp per year

Generators and solar power

10 000 000

Lump sum

Generators, servicing

400 000

Lump sum

Generators, spare parts

2 000 000

Lump sum

Water and sanitation

48 000 000

2 camps at each location at $3 million per camp

Rubber bullets

2 000 000

For training

Quick-impact projects

5 000 000

Lump sum

Troop allowances

94 110 912

5,492 soldiers at $1,468 per month each for 12 months

Military staff officer allowances

16 224 000

152 military staff officers at Joint Force headquarters and
186 military staff officers (62 at each command post in
3 sectors), $4,000 per month per military staff officer

Force Commander (D-2)

111 502

Annual salary

Deputy Force Commander (D-1)

100 800

Annual salary

Chief of Staff (P-5)

88 162

Annual salary

Drones

8 000 000

Lump sum

Helicopter for medical evacuation

2 100 000

20 evacuations per sector per year plus mobilization and
crew fees, 3 sectors

Reconnaissance aircraft

4 000 000

3 aircraft (1 per sector)

Attack helicopters

25 020 000

Fire support, 6 aircraft (2 per sector)

Telecommunications

20 000 000

Radios, satellite telephones, prepaid communication, etc.

Furniture, stationery and equipment

5 000 000

Lump sum

Information-gathering (intelligence)

840 000

Troop- and police-contributing country
reimbursement

7 058 993

Total

21-14473

$70,000 per month
Self-sustainment and major equipment for 8 battalions

390 964 369

11/11
