S/PRST/2003/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4856th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 November 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statement of its President of 12 March
2003 (S/PRST/2003/2) and welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
13 October 2003 (S/2003/987), reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of the
country, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council reiterates its firm support for the Somali National
Reconciliation Process launched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and led by Kenya. The Council commends
the progress made and acknowledges the challenges ahead.
“The Security Council welcomes the relevant decisions made by the 10th
Summit of IGAD and the 1st Ministerial Meeting of the IGAD Facilitation
Committee on the Somali Peace Process in October 2003.
“The Security Council urges all Somali leaders to participate
constructively in the Leaders Meeting planned by the IGAD Facilitation
Committee in Kenya in November 2003 to bridge their differences and to reach
agreements on a viable government and a durable and inclusive solution to the
conflict in Somalia.
“The Security Council commends the Government of Kenya for its
crucial role in facilitating the Somali National Reconciliation Process, and
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda for joining in the facilitation work, and
encourages the Facilitation Committee to work concertedly towards a
successful conclusion of the Process.
“The Security Council also commends the support given by the African
Union to the Somali National Reconciliation Process, including its
participation in the Process and its commitment to deploy a military observer
mission to Somalia once a comprehensive agreement is reached.

03-60789 (E)

111103

*
0
3
6
0
7
8
9
*

S/PRST/2003/19

“The Security Council calls on the international community to continue
its efforts to support IGAD in its facilitation of the Somali National
Reconciliation Process, and calls on the donor countries to contribute to the
Process, the Trust Fund for Peace-building in Somalia and the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Somalia.
“The Security Council expresses serious concern regarding the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, and calls on the Somali leaders to facilitate
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance and to assure the safety
of all international and national aid workers.
“The Security Council welcomes the forthcoming mission of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) to Somalia and States
in the region from 11 to 21 November 2003 as a step towards giving full effect
to the arms embargo. The Council calls on relevant States and organizations to
cooperate with the above mission.
“The Security Council reiterates that a comprehensive peace-building
programme with special emphasis on disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration will be important to post-conflict Somali.
“The Security Council expresses its readiness to assist the Somali parties
and support IGAD in implementation of the agreements reached in the Somali
National Reconciliation Process.”

2
