JBRAR’

Illll
---

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

lj

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . .. . , . . .

1

Expression of welcome to the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire . . , . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires a,i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15515) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2406)

SIPV.2406

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2406th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 14 December 1982, at 5.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Wlodzimierz

NATORF

(Poland).

Prcsrnt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France,
Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2406)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Charge
d’ Affaires a.i, of the Permanent Mission of
Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to
to President of the Security Council (S/15515)
The meeting

the representatives
of Algeria, Angola, Botswana,
India, Lesotho and Zimbabwe, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

of the agenda

~vas called to order at 5.55 p.m.

Expression of welcome to the Parliamentary
UnderSecretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland and to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zaire.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Thutnae
(Lesotho) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Sahnoun (Algeria). Mr. de Figueiredo {Angola), Mr.
Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Krishnan (India) and Mr.
Mashingaidze
(Zimbabwe) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today
in response to the request contained in the letter dated
9 December 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires adinterim
of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, which is contained in document S/15515.
5. The Secretary-General
wishes to make a statement. I now call upon him.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to acknowledge
the presence at the Council table of the Parliamentary
Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom .of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
Mr. Malcolm
Rifkind,
to
whom, on behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome.

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I was deeply
shocked to learn of the attack carried out by the South
African Defence Force (SADF) against targets in
Maseru, which was a grave violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the territorial integrity of a
sovereign Member State. The attack has resulted
in the tragic loss of innocent lives and much suffering.

2. I should also like, on behalf of the Council,
to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Kamanda
wa
Kamanda, former representative of Zaire to the United
Nations,
in his new capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zaire.

7. I have been in close touch with the United
Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (HCR),
since many of the victims were reported to be refugees. He has dispatched a special mission to Lesotho
to consult with the Government
on the situation, to
ascertain the condition of survivors and to offer the
families of those refugees who have been killed any
additional
help that might be necessary for theit
welfare.

Adoption of the agenda

Complaint
by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15515)
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from

8. The prtcise identification
of the victims has
been rendered difficult by the fact that many bodies
are badly mutilated.
However, of the 42 victims
accounted for, it has been confirmed that 19 were
registered refugees and four others were in the process
of being registered. Investigations
are continuing,
and it should be possible to ascertain the exact number
of refugees killed through identity cards which were

issued to them by the Kingdom of Lesotho in collaboration with the Office of HCR. There are some
11,500 refugees in Lesotho, of which about 1,000 are
formally registered.

been immeasurabiy
harmed in a most arrogant and
inhuman manner by the apartheid rkgime of South
Africa.
16. As members of the Council and the world
community already know, in the early hours of 9 December 1982, at about 1 o’clock in the morning, units
of SADF violated our borders, invaded Lesotho and
caused heavy damage and loss of life in its capital
city, Maseru. In that unprovoked and indefensible
attack at least 42 people were killed, men, women and
children. Houses were razed to the ground and other
property was destroyed. No occasion in the recent
history of our nation has shaken us as these events
have.

9. I should like to emphasize that the Government
of Lesotho has consistently endeavoured to ensure
that refugees under its care are treated in accordance
with established
international
standards.
Lesotho
is a party to the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees of 1951’ and the Protocol relating to the
Status of Refugees of 1967,’ as well as to the Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa of 1969, adopted under the aegis
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). Lesotho
has followed the practice laid down in these instruments by granting asylum to refugees and by facilitating
their integration
within its society. This practice of
integrating refugees speedily explains why the refugee
population
in Lesotho is scattered and not confined
to camps or specific localities.

17. This is not the first occasion on which the
Council has been req;rested to consider an issue
affecting Lesotho and its neighbour, the Republic of
South Africa. This time the reason for our appearing
before the Council is the naked act of aggression against
Lesotho by South Africa, aggression which has been
explained by the Commander of SADF, Constand
Viljoen, as intended to pre-empt operations planned
by refugees of the African National Congress of South
Africa (ANC) resident in Lesotho against targets in
South Africa during the coming festive season. At
the same time, a suggestion has been made that this
murderous attack was intended to avenge some acts of
sabotage which took place in different parts of South
Africa during the course of this year. Lesotho totally
rejects this hollow explanation.

10. The international
community
has long recognized Lesotho’s commitment
to the cause of refugees. Through its support of programmes of HCR,
it has provided Lesotho with financial and material
assistance amounting to some $3.3 million over the
past two years. This programme has been directed
towards the care and maintenance of refugees and to
their local integration through employment,
training
and educational
projects. Moreover, every attempt
has been made to resettle elsewhere those refugees
who, for security or personal reasons, did not wish to
stay in Lesotho.

18. As anyone conversant with the activities of the
Pretoria rCgime in the region will have suspected,
none of these claims is supported by facts. We wish
to place on record the following facts with regard to
the identity of some of the persons murdered during
this criminal adventure.

I I. It is my hope that the international
community
will continue to provide generous assistance to Lesotho
to strengthen the country’s capacity to provide care
and maintenance to all those who seek asylum within
its borders.

19. At a house belonging to one Lehlohonolo
Moloi, eight youthful refugees on their way to the ANC
school in Tanzania were killed, including two men
who had arrived in Lesotho only in August 1982 as
refugees from South Africa.

12. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now hear
a statement by His Majesty King Motlotlehi
Moshoeshoe II of Lesotho.
13. I have the honour to extend a warm welcome
and express the highest esteem to His Majesty Motlotlehi Moshoeshoe
II of Lesotho. I invite him to
address the Council.

20. Mr. Zola Ngini was murdered in his house,
together with his three visitors-a
medical doctor and
two others-who had just arrived from South Africa.
21. Mr. Phakamile
Mphongoshe-also
known as
Mavimbela-was
murdered, together with his wife,
a male visitor and the latter’s son and daughter. AU
were visitors from South Africa who had been in
Lesotho for only four days.

14. King
MOSHOESHOE:
Mr.
President,
on
behalf of the people and Government of the Kingdom
of Lesotho we wish to thank you for your prompt
reaction to our request to summon, as a matter of
urgency, this meeting of the Council.

22. At the house of Mr. Themba Mazibuko,
tWO
South African blacks who were regular visitors to
Lesotho and a South African high-school student
were killed.

IS. You have, Mr. President, distinguished
yourself as an able diplomat and a worthy representative
of your country, the fraternal People’s Republic of
Poland, at the United Nations. We are pleased, therefore, to appear before the Council under your presidency to plead the just cause of our people, who have

23. Are these the type of people who could have
been planning incursions into South Africa?
2

LIBRARY

24. In addition to those citizens of South Africa,
12 Lesotho citizens, including women and children,
were also murdered. It is inconceivable to imagine
that these Lesotho citizens were plotting altacks
against South Africa. At no stage did South Africa
warn or advise Lesotho-as
we would have expected
between peace-loving
neighbours-of
the reasons
advanced by the Commander of SADF.

29. At the risk of his image as an African patriot,
our Prime Minister has conferred with the rulers of
South Africa on bilateral and regional problems with
a View to promoting peaceful coexistence. Why, then,
in the face of this overwhelming evidence of Lesotho’s
policy of non-interference in South Africa’s internal
affairs, does South Africa attack us?

lllllllll

30. The reasons are well known to the members of
the international community. In the first place, the
Pretoria rkgime resents our oft-expressed abhorrence,
in line with the whole of civilized mankind, of the
obnoxious policy of apartheid. They hope to intimidate US into dissociating ourselves from the world-wide
condemnation of the policy of apartheid and from
offering moral support to the oppressed people of
South Africa in their struggle for justice, freedom
and equality. They resent our membership in the
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference, whose main objective is to reduce our undue
economic dependence on South Africa-an objective
that would give us greater freedom of action. They
are opposed to our membership in OAU and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In short, South
Africa is against the very existence of a sovereign and
independent
African State within its geographic
boundaries which will not do its bidding.

25. Concerning
the acts of sabotage allegedly
committed in South Africa by refugees resident in
Lesotho, two are said to have occurred in Cape Town
-some 1,000 miles or so from Lesotho. Other acts
are alleged to have taken place in Port Elizabeth and
East London, towns also a long distance away from
Lesotho on the south-eastern coast of South Africa.
Not a single obvious across-the-border incident has
been alleged, let alone proved, against us, in contrast
with numerous occasions when mortars have been
launched from South African territory into Lesotho.
26. In numerous
political
trials held in South
Africa involving ANC freedom fighters, not once has
it been alleged that any were based in or operated
from Lesotho. In the course of all these trials, arms
of all kinds have been exhibited. There has never
been a single occasion when arms of Chinese origin
were shown. It was therefore most surprising when
the South Africans at a press conference suddenly
exhibited weapons which they alleged were of Chinese
origin and had been found in Lesotho. This was part
of the campaign to prove that South Africa was faced
with an onslaught by the communist/socialist
world.

3 I. It is a fact well known to the Pretoria rkgime that
the few ANC freedom fighters who have occasionally
retreated into Lesotho from South Africa have, when
found to be in possession of weapons, always been
promptly dealt with in accordance with our laws and
international
obligations.
South Africa would wish
us to hand over these people. Lesotho is not prepared
to do this, and we appear here today to seek the unanimous support of the international community through
the Council +

27. All manner of accusations have been hurled at
us by the racist Pretoria rCgime in preparation for
their aggression
against Lesotho.
A completely
unacceptable demand is made of us to abandon our
international
obligation
of giving asylum to political
refugees from South Africa. When, with the assistance
of HCR, we have facilitated the departure of these
refugees from Lesotho, we have been accused of
acting as a clearing-house for people on their way to
military training in bases abroad.

32. It is well known that South Africa does not
want genuine peace and freedom in southern Africa.
Apartheid affects not only black citizens of South
Africa but also affects with equal force all black people,
irrespective of their country of origin. It is for this
reason that we maintain that South Africa has been
fanning the flames of trouble in the region. South
Africa’s defiance of international opinion has heightened, and its zeal for incursions into neighbouring
States has increased. Hence our contention that
apartheid is a threat to international peace and security ,

28. The Basotho nation, unlike other nationalities
in the region, won and maintained its independence,
albeit on a greatly reduced portion of its original territory, by diplomacy,
peaceful coexistence and goodneighbourliness,
rather than by war. It emerged from
a motley assemblage of national groups welded together by our wise founder and leader Moshoeshoe I.
In a word, it is essentially a nation of refugees. Against
this background,
we accept present-day refugees as
a matter of course. As a nation whose very existence
is founded upon diplomacy
and peaceful co-operation
and coexistence,
we. expect of our neighbours the
kind of co-operation
and partnership that would, in
the first place, make them find it imperative to apprise
Us of situations which cause them concern, whereupon
we would both seek common solutions. Lesotho
has repeatedly called upon South Africa genuinely
to commit itself to this policy.

33. We plead that those members of the Council
that have influence over the rulers in Pretoria be called
upon to exert pressure on South Africa to desist from
its present policies of wholesale destruction and
terrorism, Some permanent members of the Council
have traditional bonds of friendship with South Africa,
a situation which should enable them to contribute to
the maintenance of peace by curbing South Africa’s
adventurism. It is not enough to condemn South
Africa in resolutions destined to gather dust in the
3
.i

/
1

archives of the United Nations; there have been
enough condemnations
in numerous forums, It is
positive action we are asking for from the Council.
34. In its attempts to stave off the inevitable conflict
that is impending within its own borders, South Africa
has decided to make itself the imperialist Power in the
whole subregion. It is out to destabilize neighbouring
African States as an initial step in an attempt to install
its agents in their Governments and, failing that, to
overrun and rule them as its colonies. This expansionist policy, which it has recently arrogantly equated
with the Monroe Doctrine, seems, regrettably, to be
encouraged by those of its powerful friends with
vested economic interests in South Africa.
35. It has not escaped our attention that repeated
threats by South Africa to invade its neighbours have
met with no condemnation in certain quarters.
36. The question we ask is why, when its policy
is so patently the gravest threat to international
peace
and security, it receives open support and encouragement from those countries which were themseIves
founded on the principles of freedom, liberty and
equality and which claim to espouse a policy of dktente
and world peace. On behalf of our Government
and
people, we appeal to our friends, the peace-loving

Members of this Organization that is committed to the
maintenance of world peace, to expose and condemn
this covert support for South Africa’s policy of expansionism.
37. We appeal to the Council, which has set itself
the noble task of maintaining world peace, to restrain
South Africa from flouting the Charter of the United
Nations, from violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States of the Organization
and
from pursuing a strategy of naked terrorism against
a whole subcontinent.
38. The PRESIDENT:
I thank King Moshoeshoe
for the important statement he has just made and for
the kind words he addressed to me.

NOTES
I United Nations.
Trecrry Swings, vol.
2 Il7id.. vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.

189, No. 2545:

p. 137.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes. New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et tes agences
ti : Nations

dtpositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccidn
de Ventas,

8%60989-October

1989-2.050
