S/2015/227

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2149
(2014), by which the Council established the United Nations Multidime nsional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) until
30 April and requested me to report to the Council every four months starting on
1 August 2014. The report provides an update on the situation in the Central African
Republic since my last report of 28 November 2014 ( S/2014/857). It also provides
an update on the implementation of the mandate of MINUSCA and
recommendations for the Security Council’s consideration in advance of the expiry
of the mandate of MINUSCA on 30 April.

II. Major developments
A.

Security, human rights and humanitarian developments
2.
While there was a continued relative improvement in the security situation in
the Central African Republic, many parts of the country remained highly volatile.
High rates of criminality and clashes involving anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka elements
continued, particularly in the central part of the country. The period under review
also saw heightened tensions and violence against civilians related to the seasonal
migration of Fulani (Peuhl) cattle herders. Illicit activities aimed mostly at
controlling the country’s natural resources and territory increased in various parts of
the country. Enclaves of vulnerable populations, particularly Muslim communities,
remained under direct threat despite increased protection and assistance efforts by
humanitarian actors and the international forces including MINUSCA, the French
Operation Sangaris and the European Union Force in the C entral African Republic.
Throughout the country, the dire humanitarian situation continued to affect
2.7 million people who rely on international assistance, representing more than half
of the population.
3.
The human rights situation remained grave, with numerous reports of
violations and abuses, including killings, looting and destruction of property,
violations of physical integrity, and restrictions on freedom of movement. On
15 January, the Commission of Inquiry on the Central African Republic , established

15-04520 (E)

020415

*1504520*

S/2015/227

pursuant to Security Council resolution 2127 (2013), issued its final report. The
Commission concluded that the main parties to the conflict — the Central African
armed forces (FACA), ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka — perpetrated systematic
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law since 1 January 2013,
amounting to war crimes and crimes against humanity, including, in the case of the
anti-Balaka, ethnic cleansing.
4.
In Bangui, anti-Balaka factions continued to pose the principal security threat.
The persistent threat posed by some 2,000 ex-Séléka combatants and their families
who remain regrouped in three military camps known as RDOT, Béal and BSS, with
access to large stocks of unsecured ordnance and ammunition, as well as large scale
criminal activities by other armed elements, including an increased incidence of
carjacking, also continued to put the capital at risk of further instability.
5.
MINUSCA arrested a prominent anti-Balaka leader, Rodrigue Nagibona, also
known as Andilo, on 17 January. The arrest triggered several reprisals in Bangui by
anti-Balaka groups: the kidnapping of a French humanitarian worker on 19 January
who was later released on 23 January; the kidnapping of an international MINUSCA
staff member on 20 January, who was released the same day; and, the abduction of
the Central African Minister of Youth and Sport, Armel Sayo, on 25 January.
Minister Sayo was released on 10 February.
6.
Outside Bangui, armed groups continued to assert control in different parts of
the country with anti-Balaka factions dominating the west, rival ex-Séléka groups in
control of areas in the north and east, and clashes between and among the two
engaging the international forces in the centre of the country. The country also faced
continued threats from other armed groups such as the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA), Revolution and Justice and the Democratic Front of the Central African
People. The unconfirmed reports regarding the presence of Boko Haram elements in
the border area with Cameroon enhanced the threat of a possible spillover of Boko
Haram activities from the Lake Chad Basin region into the Central African
Republic. Many armed groups continued to levy illegal taxes on the population and
oversee illicit mining activities.
7.
In the west, a number of areas were under regular threat from criminal
activities attributed mainly to anti-Balaka factions. Inter-communal tensions in these
areas were associated with the presence of Muslim community enclaves and clashes
linked to the seasonal migration of Fulani (Peuhl) cattle herders. On 4 December
2014, a group of Fulani reportedly attacked Bondiba in Nana -Mambéré prefecture
and burned down 30 houses. Similar confrontations reportedly took place in the
Batangafo and Bouca areas in Ouham prefecture, leading to the displacement of
some 10,000 civilians. The security and humanitarian situations remained critical in
and around Muslim community enclaves, notably Berberati, Boda, Carnot, PK5 in
Bangui and Yaloké. Following operations by MINUSCA at the end of December
2014 in Carnot and Nola, local anti-Balaka leaders were arrested and their groups
weakened.
8.
In the centre and east, ex-Séléka factions vied for control of towns and
resources. The Front Populaire pour la Renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC), led
by Noureddine Adam and based in Kaga Bandoro, spread its influence to Bria under
the military command of Arda Hackouma, pushing out the Rassemblement
Patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC) led by Zacharia Damane.
The Union pour la Paix en Centrafrique (UPC), a Peuhl-based group in Bambari led

2/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

by Ali Darassa, increased its criminal activity during the reporting period while
engaging in skirmishes with anti-Balaka groups and ex-Séléka FPRC and RPRC
factions, mainly over the protection of economic interests.
9.
In December 2014, clashes between Fulani cattle herders and anti -Balaka
elements reportedly took place in Kouango in Ouaka prefecture, prompting an
estimated 20,000 civilians to flee to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Further
east, following his surrender on 6 January in the Central African Republic, Dominic
Ongwen, a senior LRA commander, was transferred to the International Criminal
Court in The Hague on 20 January with the support of MINUSCA and other
partners. LRA attacks on civilians, however, continued in the south-eastern part of
the country.
10. On 10 February, MINUSCA and Sangaris forces launched an operation in Bria,
Haute Kotto, that successfully expelled armed ex-Séléka elements from all
administrative buildings under their occupation. Six ex-Séléka elements were killed
during the operation, several were wounded and at least 16 others were detained.
The following day, MINUSCA and Sangaris forces facilitated the deployment of
30 national gendarmes to Bria alongside a joint visit by Prime Minister Mahamat
Kamoun to reassure the local population that State authority would rapidly be
restored.
11. On 15 March, the European Union Force in the Central African Republic
completed its mandate and the withdrawal of 750 uniformed personnel. On
16 March, the European Union Military Advisory Mission became operational with
the aim of supporting the Central African authorities in the area of security sector
reform, particularly with respect to the strategic restructuring of the Central African
armed forces.
12. The humanitarian situation deteriorated, with new displacements observed in
the central and eastern part of the country. Over 50,000 people were displaced since
the beginning of the year, particularly in the areas o f Bambari, Batangafo and Kaga
Bandoro, bringing the total number of displaced inside the country up to some
436,000. Insecurity limited the ability to provide humanitarian assistance to the
threatened populations, with an increased number of kidnappings re ported since the
beginning of the year. At the same time, the total number of Central African
refugees in neighbouring countries also increased to above 425,000. The 2015
humanitarian response plan remained underfunded and urgently requires
$612 million.
13. Some 500 Fulani (Peuhl) remained stranded in Yaloké following anti-Balaka
attacks against them; 43 Fulani in Yaloké have died since their arrival in April 2014.
Notwithstanding some progress on family reunification and enhanced protection
efforts by MINUSCA and humanitarian partners, local authorities continued to
prevent relocation in violation of international human rights and humanitarian law,
legally binding principles on internal displacement, and Central African law.

B.

Political developments and the peace process
14. On 22 December 2014, the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) Mediator for the crisis in the Central African Republic, President of the
Republic of Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, formally agreed to extend the countr y’s

15-04520

3/19

S/2015/227

transition until August at the request of the Transitional Authorities. On
26 December 2014, Prime Minister Mahamat Kamoun announced a revised calendar
for the electoral process, which foresaw a constitutional referendum in May and
legislative and presidential elections in July and August.
15. On 16 January, the Office of the Head of State of the Transition announced
limited changes to the composition of the government. Five ministers changed
portfolios and four ministers were removed. The two highest -ranking members of
the cabinet, Marie-Noelle Koyara and Aristide Sokambi, assumed the new roles of
Minister of Defence and Minister of Justice, respectively.
16. On 23 January, Catherine Samba-Panza addressed the nation to mark the end
of her first year as Head of State of the Transition. Ms. Samba-Panza cited criticism
by political stakeholders, destabilization attempts and control of territory by arme d
groups as impediments to the government efforts to carry out the transition road
map. She called on all political actors and civil society to remain fully engaged in
normalizing the situation in the country.
17. On 17 February, the National Transitional Council adopted an initial draft of
the revised constitution, amending it to include the establishment of a Senate. The
National Transitional Council deferred deliberation on the electoral code and the
draft law on the establishment of the Special Criminal Court.
18. On 16 March, the International Contact Group on the Central African Republic
met in Brazzaville under the co-chairmanship of the African Union and the Republic
of Congo. The meeting demonstrated continuing international support to the
transition process and recognized progress made by the Transitional Authorities to
advance the political process, but did not result in new pledges to bridge significant
gaps in funding for the electoral process or to support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. Participants urged the Transitional
Authorities to accelerate election preparations, include a review of the legal
framework in order to identify options to simplify the process and respect the
eligibility clause in the Constitutional Charter that prohibits high -level transitional
government officials from standing for office. The final communiqué reiterated the
timeline for the transition with the end date of 15 August.
Follow-up to the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, Local Popular Consultations
and the Bangui Forum
19. The Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, signed on 23 July 2014 in Brazzaville
under the auspices of President Sassou Nguesso in his role as Mediator, initiated a
political process in the Central African Republic, including nationwide popular
consultations and a Bangui Forum meeting on reconciliation, among politic al
stakeholders and armed groups to end violence and return stability to the country.
However, the Cessation of Hostilities implementation mechanisms, including the
Follow-up Commission and the Technical Committee, have not adequately
monitored or prevented frequent violations of the agreement. On 16 January and
19 February, respectively, the Follow-up Commission and the Technical Committee
met to review their work during 2014 and discuss a possible reorganization.
20. The local popular consultations began across the country in January. Despite
significant logistical and security challenges, particularly in ex -Séléka controlled
areas, the local consultations were successfully completed with MINUSCA support

4/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

in 64 locations out of 71 planned. They took place in all 16 prefectures, Bangui’s
8 districts and internally displaced persons camps, and with refugee and diaspora
communities in Cameroon, Chad and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Approximately 4,000 Central Africans participated in the local consu ltations, with
35 to 40 per cent women and 30 per cent youth participation.
21. In preparation for the Bangui Forum, its Preparatory Commission began work
on 19 January. Led by Commission President Beatrice Epaye, a respected former
minister, civil society leader and current member of the National Transitional
Council, the Commission established four thematic working groups in the areas of
peace and security, justice and reconciliation, governance and development. A team
of international and national experts support the work of the Commission, including
on specific thematic areas, which will also draw on the results of the local
consultations.
External mediation initiatives in Nairobi and Rome
22. In December 2014, informal discussions initiated at the request of the
Mediator, President Sassou Nguesso, by the Government of Kenya in Nairobi led to
the reported initialling of agreements involving former Head of State of the
Transition Michel Djotodia and former President François Bozizé. On 29 January,
the Head of State of the Transition issued a communiqué rejecting the Nairobi
discussions and calling on the Mediator to maintain support for the ongoing political
process. On 31 January, a meeting of the ECCAS Heads of State and Government,
held on the margins of the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa issued a
communiqué underlining that any agreement signed outside the framework of the
Brazzaville process would be considered null and void.
23. On 27 February, a group of leading Central African Republic po liticians
travelled to Rome under the auspices of the Community of Sant’Egidio and
negotiated an appeal addressed to Central Africans and the international community.
The document reiterates the commitment of its signatories to the Brazzaville
process, including the Bangui Forum. The signatories called for the international
community’s financial support to the electoral process and for all citizens to respect
the results of the elections.

C.

Preparations for the elections
24. The National Electoral Authority established 88 out of 142 local branch offices
and completed the assessment of 70 out of an estimated 3,300 polling sites. On
11 March, agreements were signed with the European Union on the disbursement of
an initial instalment of $8 million in support of the elections. The contribution,
combined with those from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and France, as well as the pledge of $500,000 from the African Union, will facilitate
the launch of the voter registration process.
25. On 27 December 2014, an amended electoral law was adopted combining the
presidential and legislative elections and promoting non-biometric voter
registration. The law has yet to be promulgated, owing to a decision on 16 January
by the Constitutional Court regarding the harmonization of the provisions of the
electoral code and the participation of internally displaced population and refugees
in the process.

15-04520

5/19

S/2015/227

26. On 9 February, during a meeting involving the National Electoral Authority,
other national electoral stakeholders and international partners, the Authority
briefed participants on the constraints and challenges in the electoral process and
called for the disbursement of pledges by partners and greater national ownership.
Representatives of some political parties raised concerns about the security
situation, the eligibility criteria and the high number of potential candidates.

D.

Socioeconomic developments
27. The economy of the Central African Republic in 2014 remained stagnant with
a growth rate of 1 per cent. The Transitional Authorities, with the assistance of the
United Nations and international partners, put in place mechanisms to ensure the
sustainability of public financial management in accordance with agreements
reached with the International Monetary Fund. These include a public treasury
monitoring committee presided over by the Prime Minister; a national commission
to monitor the use of national resources in collaboration with international partners
to ensure transparency in the allocation of the national budget; and, a steering
committee, chaired by the Minister of Finance, to oversee the verification and
control of the civil service payroll, which will work in collaboration with UNDP and
the World Bank.
28. The implementation of structural adjustment programmes to improve income
receipts and better management of expenses are yet to achieve concrete results.
Inflation reached 15.3 per cent in 2014, owing to the rise in food prices. As a result,
the food security situation deteriorated. Agricultural programmes, funded by
international partners, sustained approximately 111,750 households in 2014.
However, in 2014 internal revenue receipts totalled $92 million against a projected
$103 million, although a 70 per cent increase is projected for 2015.

III. Implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic
A.

Support to the political process
29. Through the good offices of my Special Representative in the Centr al African
Republic, Babacar Gaye, along with my Special Representative for Central Africa,
Abdoulaye Bathily, the United Nations, in coordination with other key international
partners, worked closely with the signatories of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement to encourage their commitment to the Brazzaville process. In his
capacity as United Nations representative in the international mediation team,
Special Representative Bathily continued to work closely with African Union
representative Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga in supporting and providing advice to
President Sassou Nguesso. Special Representative Bathily emphasized the
importance of refocusing the political process around the Brazzaville process at the
regional and national levels. MINUSCA continued to provide secretariat support to
regular weekly meetings with international partners, including France, the Republic
of Congo, the United States of America, ECCAS, the Mediator’s team, MINUSCA,
the World Bank and the European Union, collectively known as the Group of 8 or

6/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

G-8. The G-8 conducted regular joint visits with the Transitional Authorities to
various prefectures to assess the situation and encourage all parties to support the
local consultations and abide by the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement.
30. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team played a vital role in
supporting the Transitional Authorities to hold the local popular consultations. Prior
to launching the process, from 14 to 16 January, MINUSCA and UNDP, in
partnership with the Ministry of Reconciliation, held training workshops for the
28 facilitation teams in Bangui. MINUSCA, with support of the international forces,
also provided significant logistical and security support for the conduct of the
consultations throughout the country.
31. In preparation for the Bangui Forum and at the request of the Preparatory
Commission, MINUSCA provided advice and coordinated support to the
Commission in close collaboration with ECCAS, the Centre for Humanitarian
Dialogue and other organizations active in reconciliation and dialogue support
initiatives in the Central African Republic. MINUSCA and UNDP also provided
technical support to the thematic groups established by the Commission, including a
substantive briefing organized at the request of the Commission on 27 February on
key themes for the Forum, as well as on planning of cross-sectoral and public
awareness activities for the Forum.
32. With support from the Peacebuilding Fund, UNDP and the International
Organization for Migration, in close coordination with MINUSCA, continued to
carry out projects supporting reconciliation initiatives, including the Bangui Forum
and local consultations, the implementation of the National Reconciliation Strategy
and the voluntary relocation of the ex-Séléka elements from their camps in Bangui
to their communities of origin or choice. To date, over 850 ex-Séléka elements in
the RDOT, BSS and Beal camps in Bangui have been relocated to the east.
MINUSCA, in close coordination with the Transitional Authorities and the United
Nations country team, also initiated labour-intensive income generating projects for
youths at risk in communities affected by armed groups. Pilot projects began in
Bambari, Bouar, Bria, and Kaga Bandoro involving the employment of youth from
armed groups and local communities in non-skilled work to rehabilitate local
infrastructure.

B.

Support to the preparations for the elections
33. Providing support to the electoral process remained a high priority for
MINUSCA and UNDP. In close coordination with national stakeholders, MINUSCA
and UNDP, with support from the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support, developed a multi-disciplinary operational plan and concept of
operations to support the Transitional Authorities on the el ectoral process.
34. The plan outlines efforts in relation to the creation of a conducive environment
for the elections, public awareness and sensitization, technical assistance,
monitoring, and capacity-building. It also outlines detailed logistics planning in
relation to the voter registration process, voting, and post -electoral support to the
National Electoral Authority and the national internal security forces. The plan
further includes measures aimed at ensuring the participation of women, refugees,
and internally displaced persons. In this connection, MINUSCA established an
ad hoc committee and organized a symposium to increase awareness among national

15-04520

7/19

S/2015/227

actors on women’s candidacies and effective participation in the Bangui Forum and
the elections.
35. The One United Nations Elections Task Force, chaired by MINUSCA and
composed of all relevant components of MINUSCA and the United Nations country
team, continued to meet regularly to coordinate the provision of integrated electoral
support to the Transitional Authorities. UNDP approved an electoral support project
in the amount of $43,483,745 and established a basket fund for international
partners’ contributions. The Fund Steering Committee held its first meeting on
9 February to discuss funding for the electoral process. As at February 2015, the
funding gap of the UNDP project amounted to approximately 38 per cent or
$16,608,745.

C.

Protection of civilians
36. In accordance with the MINUSCA protection of civilians strategy, the
MINUSCA integrated protection of civilians coordination mechanisms have
continued to operate on a weekly basis at the strategic, operational and tactical
levels and include the Senior Humanitarian Coordinator and country representatives
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Children’s
Fund. Senior Management Groups on Protection are now in place in Bangui, Bouar,
Bria and Kaga Bandoro, which enable joint threat assessments and coordinated
response planning with humanitarian partners.
37. In the context of the revision of MINUSCA concepts of operations, MINUSCA
deployment plans were recalibrated in order to ensure the continued presence of
uniformed personnel in priority protection areas, while maintaining quick reaction
forces to prevent and respond to protection threats and temporary operating bases in
places such as in PK5 or Boye Rabe in Bangui. Midterm deployment and
contingency protection plans also take into account risks to civilians that may result
from the progressive departure of other international forces, particularly in Bangui.
38. The establishment of community-based early warning analysis and rapidresponse tools is ongoing. Joint protection missions were deployed to initiate the
development of community-level protection plans in priority areas such as Baoro,
Berberati, Bozum and Kuango. In addition, 24 Community Liaison Assistants were
under recruitment to support the MINUSCA military components on eng agement
with communities, humanitarian actors and local authorities. Induction training for
MINUSCA civilian and uniformed personnel on the protection of civilians was
conducted regularly in Bangui, including to support the establishment of standard
alert and rapid-response processes.
39. MINUSCA continued to regularly update its forward-looking threat
assessment to identify areas where preventative or responsive action was required to
protect civilians. Over the reporting period, specific action was initi ated in Bangui,
Batangafo, Kaga Bandoro, Mbrès and the Kouango — Bambari — Bangassou
triangle.

8/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

D.

Promotion and protection of human rights
40. The human rights situation remained of serious concern. MINUSCA
documented cases of extra judicial killings, arbitrary arrest and detention,
harassment, intimidation, abduction, physical assault, looting and destruction of
property as well as sexual violence against internally displaced people and other
civilians committed mostly by ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka elements. Victims of
human rights violations or abuses, mainly civilians, continued to face serious
challenges relating to access to justice. In some areas under their control, armed
elements took on police and gendarmerie roles and practiced “popular justice ”,
sometimes leading to acts of torture or even death of individuals accused of
witchcraft. During the reporting period, MINUSCA investigated 85 new incidents of
human rights violations that affected 142 persons committed mainly by ex -Séléka
and anti-Balaka elements, 39 of which were verified and confirmed.
41. From 3 to 14 February, the Independent Expert on the situation of human
rights in the Central African Republic conducted her fourth mission to the country.
The Independent Expert called for continued efforts to fight impunity, and expressed
concern regarding the rights of minorities and internally displaced persons, notably
Muslim communities, as well as about the Christian population under threat in
Muslim populated areas or in areas controlled by ex-Séléka elements.
42. MINUSCA conducted induction training for MINUSCA personnel and trained
personnel from 50 Central African human rights organizations on human rights
monitoring, investigation and reporting. On 12 and 13 December 2014, MINUSCA
and the Ministry of National Reconciliation, Dialogue and the Promotion of Civic
Culture held a joint workshop on human rights, including transitional justice, for
representatives of the transitional government, civil society organizations, opinion
leaders, members of the Bangui Bar Association and other national institutions.
Participants exchanged views on mechanisms that could be established aimed at
ensuring justice, truth, reparations and non-recurrence of violations.

E.

Child protection
43. Despite a slight decline in the number of reported child rights’ violations
committed by the parties to the conflict, children have continued to be victims of
abuses committed by armed elements of the ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka and LRA.
On 7 February, 17 children were reportedly abducted together with adults by armed
Sudanese poachers, near Mbrès, Nana Grébizi.
44. The military leader of one of the factions of the ex-Séléka, UPC, Ali Darassa,
issued an order prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers, which resulted
in the initial separation, on 27 November 2014, of 46 boys aged 12 to 16 years from
an ex-Séléka group in Bambari. The children have since been reunified with their
families. In preparation for the Bangui Forum, youth in various parts of the count ry
participated in the local consultation process. MINUSCA and UNICEF provided
support to the holding of a children’s forum on 12 and 13 March, prior to the Bangui
Forum, with the aim of ensuring that children’s concerns are part of the national
dialogue.

15-04520

9/19

S/2015/227

F.

Conflict-related sexual violence
45. Through its working group on conflict-related sexual violence and the
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements in the Central African Republic,
MINUSCA supported the Transitional Authorities to develop a national strategy for
monitoring, investigating and reporting on conflict-related sexual violence and
providing assistance to survivors. On 8 January, the Head of State of the Transition
issued a decree for the creation of a national police and gendarmerie unit to fight
sexual violence. MINUSCA provided support to the unit to build its capacity to
respond to alerts, reports, threats and ongoing incidents of sexual violence.

G.

Extension of State authority
46. MINUSCA, in cooperation with the United Nations country team, took
decisive steps to restore and extend State authority beyond Bangui. The Ministry of
Territorial Administration, MINUSCA, UNDP, France and the European Union
initiated a joint effort to develop a national strategy and a short -term action plan in
support of the deployment of State authorities to provide basic services in the areas
of security, basic rehabilitation, including the repair of administrative buildings,
public service delivery and community dialogue. From 13 to 25 November 2014,
the Peacebuilding Support Office, UNDP, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the World Bank undertook a joint mission to the Central African
Republic and agreed to increase collaboration in support of the extension of State
authority in the country. The United Nations country team has also taken steps to
mainstream human security and encourage the transitional government to include
human security in its policies and actions. With the exception of Vakaga and
Bamingui-Bangoran prefectures, the Prefects returned to all other 14 prefectures. In
addition, 50 of 71 Sub-Prefects have resumed their functions.

H.

Justice and the rule of law
47. MINUSCA and UNDP, working jointly under the Global Focal Point
arrangement for police, justice and corrections, provided support to the Ministry of
Justice in developing a national strategy to gradually reopen courts and detention
facilities and deploy national magistrates and prison personnel outside Bangui in
places where the security situation has improved. Several courts resumed operations
in Bangui and some magistrates were deployed to 12 of a total of 28 courts
throughout the country. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team also
provided support and coordinated international assistance for the orga nization of
criminal court sessions in Bangui, the first to be held in the Central African
Republic since 2010.
48. MINUSCA deployed all 20 authorized United Nations corrections officers and
additional MINUSCA staff in Bangui to support the reform of the national prison
system. In terms of prison management, search and control methods and the
treatment of juveniles improved somewhat following a series of training courses
provided by MINUSCA on security and respect for prisoners’ rights to nearly
100 penitentiary and military personnel working in prisons. MINUSCA also
provided support to reinforce the security and general conditions in the Bimbo and
Ngaragba prisons and secured funding for the rehabilitation of the Camp de Roux

10/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

maximum security centre in Bangui. Once completed, this facility will be suitable
for the detention of those accused of the most serious crimes.

I.

Implementation of urgent temporary measures and support to the
establishment of the Special Criminal Court
49. In accordance with paragraph 40 of resolution 2149 (2014), MINUSCA, in
support of the Transitional Authorities and in coordination with the international
forces, arrested a total of 283 suspects, among whom 24 have allegedly committed
serious crimes (for example, murder, rape, war crimes and crimes against
humanity). All of these individuals were handed over to national police or
gendarmerie, and about 80 of them have been detained in the Bangui Central Prison
in Ngaragba. MINUSCA advocated for legal proceedings against the in dividuals
arrested to begin in accordance with international standards and provided advice to
national magistrates examining the most serious crimes. The overcrowding of the
Bangui Central Prison and the severe lack of operating correction facilities outsi de
of Bangui was one of the main challenges faced by the Transitional Authorities and
MINUSCA in the implementation of urgent temporary measures.
50. The draft law establishing a national Special Criminal Court with competence
over crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide was approved by the
Council of Ministers on 6 February and submitted to the National Transitional
Council. The Council law commission began consideration of the draft law on
16 March during the Council’s ordinary session, which b egan on 2 March. This
version of the draft law largely complies with the memorandum of intent of August
2014 signed between MINUSCA and the Transitional Authorities, in particular by
excluding the application of the death penalty.

J.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
51. MINUSCA began preparatory planning for a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. Eligibility criteria and a mapping of
armed groups were presented to the National Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration and Security Sector Reform chaired by the Prime
Minister. Proposals on the structure and format of the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme were also presented to national and
international counterparts for discussion. In addition, MINUSCA started to engage
with potential partners for the reintegration phase. For those not eligible to
participate in the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, MINUSCA is developing community violence reduction projects to be
implemented in high-risk areas and targeting youth at risk. These projects will be a
vital contribution to efforts to absorb armed elements, which are not part of
traditionally structured armed movements.

K.

Security sector reform and vetting
52. MINUSCA enhanced its efforts in the area of security sector reform and
vetting. It supported the National Committee on Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration and Security Sector Reform and the security sector reform technic al

15-04520

11/19

S/2015/227

committee in preparing strategic principles for the reform of the Central African
armed forces and principles for the integration of ex-combatants into the security
and defence forces, including in advance of discussions on this issue in the context
of the Bangui Forum. In addition, MINUSCA continued to provide advice to the
national authorities on the establishment of a reconstituted battalion of the Central
African armed forces for the provision of static protection and the development of
selection criteria for its personnel in line with international humanitarian law and
human rights standards and with the aim of putting in place a professional,
representative and balanced army. As at the end of February, 615 Central African
armed forces personnel had been verified through this process. On 25 February, the
Head of State of the Transition, in the presence of my Special Representative for the
Central African Republic, officially reinstated the first unit of the first Territorial
Infantry Battalion.

L.

Coordination of international assistance
53. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team continued to support the
Transitional Authorities in the implementation of the New Deal programme for the
country’s peacebuilding and rehabilitation efforts. On 23 F ebruary, in Yaoundé, a
meeting of the International Partners’ Forum organized in coordination with the
Transitional Authorities and attended by several Central African Republic Ministers
and the President of the National Electoral Authority discussed prepa rations for the
elections and financing gaps. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team
continued to support the development of a common aid management and tracking
system.

M.

Assisting the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic
and monitoring the implementation of Security Council resolution
2196 (2015)
54. In cooperation with the Panel of Experts, MINUSCA initiated the collection of
data on the origin and status of small arms and light weapons, and developed
procedures for handling seized weapons. To date, a total of 1,829 weapons have
been individually checked and safely stored. MINUSCA continued to share
information with the Panel of Experts and provided security support during
inspections of arms or related materials. MINUSCA also sought to enhance its
capacity for the prevention of transnational crimes, including the illicit transfers of
weapons, and began providing strategic advice to the Transitional Authorities on the
need to prevent armed groups from profiting from the illicit expl oitation of natural
resources.

N.

Weapons and ammunitions management
55. The MINUSCA weapons and explosive hazard management section identified
and stored a total of 2,494 weapons found in former military camps and others
seized in ground operations, and assessed 4.1 tons of ammunition and weapons in
Camp Béal and Camp RDOT for future relocation or destruction. MINUSCA
assessed 27 stockpile locations, among them 19 police and gendarmerie stations, in

12/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

addition to Bangui’s main prison. In Camp Kassai in Bangui, a temporary
ammunition depot for storing 80 tons of ammunition away from the population was
under construction, as endorsed by the Minister of Defence, as well as a permanent
armoury for small caliber ammunition. MINUSCA completed weapons and
ammunition management field visits in three locations outside of Bangui, resulting
in the assessment of national defence and security forces locations. MINUSCA also
organized risk education “training of trainers” sessions for 29 individuals
representing five local and international humanitarian organizations.

O.

Safety and security of United Nations staff
56. United Nations personnel and other humanitarian personnel faced increasing
security threats related to armed conflict and criminality throughout the country,
including a surge of hostage-taking by anti-Balaka armed elements in Bangui and
other parts of the country. The number of serious security incidents involving
United Nations personnel totaled 22 incidents from December 2014 to March 2015.
On 20 January, a female MINUSCA staff member was taken from a marked United
Nations vehicle and kidnapped on her way to work; she was released unharmed the
same day. The overall security threat levels for United Nations civilian personnel
remained substantial in various parts of the country where armed groups were
present.

IV. Update on the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic
57. As at early March, some 8,216 military troops, or approximately 82 per cent of
the MINUSCA total authorized military strength of 10,000 troops, and 1,205 police,
or approximately 67 per cent of the total authorized police strength of 1,800, were
deployed. Approximately 75 per cent (328) of the 440 staff officers and military
observers, and more than 50 per cent (204) of the 400 individual police officers
were also deployed. These figures include the deployment of 9 out of 10 infantry
battalions and the ongoing deployment of necessary enablers for the militar y
component, as well as 7 fully deployed and 2 advanced parties of 10 formed police
units. Former MISCA troop- and police-contributing countries have continued to
face delays to upgrade the contingent-owned equipment to United Nations
standards. It is anticipated that MINUSCA will reach full operational capability with
90 per cent of its authorized strength deployed by April, including 10 infantry
battalions and 9 formed police units, with the exception of those units and air assets
for which pledges have yet to be received or which have not been made available by
troop- and police-contributing countries.
58. The military enabling units were operational, including two of the three
level II medical facilities, one transport company, one of two military helic opter
units, one of three signals units and three engineering units. To ensure effective
operational capacity, MINUSCA air assets included three commercial rotary wing
and two fixed-wing aircraft operating internal routes in the mission area. To enhance
strategic communications, MINUSCA expanded the reach of Radio Guira from
Bangui including in Bambari, Bria and Kaga Bandoro.

15-04520

13/19

S/2015/227

59. In December 2014, 90 per cent of MINUSCA authorized civilian personnel
were under recruitment. An additional 666 civilian personnel and 72 additional
electoral posts were authorized, respectively, in January and February 2015,
bringing the total civilian authorized personnel to 1,546. As at 31 March,
approximately 36 per cent of all MINUSCA authorized posts were filled, with an
additional 15 per cent under recruitment. Women comprise 30 per cent of the
current strength of civilian personnel, with 26 per cent at mid -management and
senior levels.

V. Review of the Mission, military, police and support concepts
60. In my letter addressed to the President of the Security Council dated
29 January (S/2015/85), I submitted a formal request for the authorization of an
increase of 750 military personnel and 280 police personnel for MINUSCA, i n order
to enable the deployment of an additional infantry battalion and two formed police
units, as well as 20 corrections officers. Subsequently, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations dispatched a multidisciplinary review team to the Central
African Republic from 2 to 17 February, to support MINUSCA to revise its mission
concept, as well as to review the military and police concept of operations and the
support concept.
61. In its findings, the review team noted that while the security situation in
Bangui has improved, MINUSCA deployed an additional infantry battalion to
secure Bangui and partly committed its Force reserve battalion of 450 troops
following the violence in the capital in October 2014. The review team noted that
the threats in Bangui had also spread to the immediate vicinity of the city,
necessitating the extension of the operational area of the Bangui Task Force. With
the current authorized strength of uniformed personnel, the review team concluded
that the Task Force cannot adequately cover the outlying areas of Bangui while
maintaining its planned deployment throughout the country. The importance of
securing Bangui in the coming months was such that, without an additional
battalion, MINUSCA would be obliged to revise its previously pla nned deployment,
which would result in a vacuum in the northeast. This in turn would entail
significant risks to support the provision of security in the context of the elections
and to the extension of State authority. The review team also found a need fo r an
increase of 40 military staff officers and military observers within the authorized
troop ceiling, bringing the total number to 480.
62. Regarding police, the team confirmed that an increase in 280 police
personnel — or the equivalent of two formed police units — was needed, as two
formed police units were currently dedicated to the provision of protection and
support to senior Central African Republic officials and key installations. The
review team noted further that MINUSCA police would be stretch ed to the limit in
performing election-related tasks and in supporting internal security forces, rule of
law activities, the implementation of urgent temporary measures and support to the
Special Criminal Court, and the extension of State authority beyond Bangui, within
existing capabilities.
63. A key planning principle underpinning the deployment of uniformed personnel
in MINUSCA, which was also validated by the team, is that as security conditions
improve and security sector reform and disarmament, demo bilization and

14/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

reintegration and community violence reduction processes progress, the requirement
for police personnel will increase, while the requirement for military personnel
should decrease. The findings of the review team were reflected in draft revi sions of
the Mission Concept and military, police and support concepts of operations. The
findings also informed the development of the operational plan in support of the
elections.

VI. Observations
64. Despite a continued relative improvement, the security situation in the Central
African Republic remains volatile and its people subject to high levels of violence
from armed groups, heightened criminality, and inter-community conflicts that
remain ethnically and religiously charged. The increasingly bl urred lines between
criminal and politically instigated acts of violence pose a constant threat to the
civilian population and undermine efforts to ensure that the transition remains on
track. I remain deeply concerned about the continued serious human rig hts
violations and abuses, including acts of sexual- and gender-based violence,
perpetrated against civilians with impunity. I strongly urge all parties to recommit to
and implement the 23 July 2014 Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and to take
concrete steps, with the support of the international community, to ensure the
protection of civilians and to create the conditions for displaced persons to return to
their homes.
65. The transition is at a critical stage. The Central African Republic and its
citizens have achieved an important milestone with the completion of the local
popular consultation process conducted throughout the country, with the support of
MINUSCA. I encourage all national stakeholders, with the support of regional and
international partners, to seize the opportunity of the Bangui Forum to advance
peace and stability and ensure that the outcomes of the local consultations and the
Forum yield agreement and national consensus on key issues at the heart of the
crisis. These include political and economic governance; the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration or repatriation of members of armed groups and
children among their ranks; security sector reform, including the reconstitution of
the Central African armed forces and security services; justice and the fight against
impunity; and, reconciliation, including formal and transitional justice mechanisms.
The integration of women’s perspectives and priorities in all these areas will be
important to secure a long-lasting and sustainable peace.
66. The Bangui Forum and inclusive credible elections will be key events towards
the successful conclusion of the transition. It is critical to avoid parallel efforts and
ensure the continued integrity of the political process and an inclusive and
participatory dialogue. At the same time, I wish to underline that individuals
and entities, as well as their supporters, who act to undermine peace, stability and
security, have been and can be designated for targeted measures pursuant to
resolution 2196 (2015).
67. MINUSCA and United Nations partners have developed a comprehensive plan
to provide technical, logistical and security support to the Transitional Authorities to
conduct the electoral process, which includes a planned constitutional referendum
and presidential and legislative elections. I must re-emphasize that the operational
tasks are enormous and the logistical challenges are daunting given the challenging

15-04520

15/19

S/2015/227

security environment and the continued lack of State authority and public
administration in many parts of the country. National ownership and strengthened
political will are needed for the timely conduct of the polls, including with regard to
the adoption of a revised electoral legal code. I urge all actors in the electoral
process, including the Transitional Authorities and the National Electoral Authority,
to accelerate the preparations for the holding of free, fair, transparent and inclusive
presidential and legislative elections. I wish to thank those partners, including the
African Union, the European Union, France and UNDP, which are providing
resources for the elections, and urge other international partners to provide
additional and timely support to the electoral process, particularly through financing
the UNDP multi-donor basket fund for elections.
68. Ending impunity is a key objective and a necessary prerequisite in improving
the security situation, advancing the political process and providing justice to the
victims of violations. The arrests of perpetrators of crime by, or with the support of,
MINUSCA and other international forces will need to be complemented by fair
trials and safe and secure detention under humane conditions. I encourage the
national authorities to accelerate the adoption of the draft law on the establishment
of the national Special Criminal Court that is in line with international standards. It
will also be vital for regional and international partners to provide financial and
other support to assist the Transitional Authorities in establishing and
operationalizing the Court. I urge Member States to consider secondment or other
arrangements to assist the authorities in appointing internationally-recruited
magistrates to serve on the national Special Criminal Court. Consideration will also
need to be given to the protection of magistrates working on these cases, as well as
victims and witnesses. In addition, I encourage the national authorities to develop,
through an inclusive and participatory process, a wider strategy to combat impunity
and ensure justice for the victims of crimes committed in the Central African
Republic in line with broader transitional justice efforts.
69. Alongside efforts to fight impunity and improve the protection of civilians,
credible and sustainable alternatives need to be found for thos e who have taken up
arms. Community violence reduction projects in high-risk areas are being initiated
and should be expanded to involve unemployed youth and create a conducive
environment for reconciliation. At the same time, there is a pressing need to r each
agreement on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and repatriation as part
of the political process and to launch a national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. Such an agreement should address the underlying causes
of conflict and define peace dividends for relevant parties. In addition, it will be
important for the citizens of the Central African Republic to agree on a vision,
principles and a strategic approach towards a balanced security sector, including for
reformed, inclusive and professional national armed forces and police and
gendarmerie, as the foundation for a wider security sector reform process. I
welcome, in this regard, the launching of the European Union Military Advisory
Mission in the Central African Republic, which will work closely with MINUSCA
and other partners.
70. I encourage national stakeholders to find consensus on the way forward in
these critical areas in the context of the Bangui Forum, and for regional and
international partners to provide the requisite resources in support of implementing
these important initiatives. The Bangui Forum should also aim to yield agreement

16/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

and national consensus on the individual integration of former combatants on the
basis of rigorous eligibility criteria.
71. Widespread and extreme poverty, inequality, political and social exclusion,
competition for the illegal exploitation of natural resources, long -standing impunity
and a weak State remain the main ingredients of the recurring crises in the Central
African Republic. Addressing the root causes of the current crisis requires sustained
regional and international support to see through the country’s transition and
beyond, as well as mutual accountability in order to lead the country towards
economic recovery and sustainable development in line with the country’s high
economic potential. I encourage the Transitional Authorities to promote improved
governance and ensure a framework for the international community to continue to
provide budget support, while strengthening efforts to build national capacity for
improving transparent national public financial management and accountability.
72. I am deeply concerned about the continued dire humanitarian consequences of
the ongoing violence, which has resulted in a complex and protracted protection
crisis with regional ramifications; 2,700,000 Central Africans require humanitarian
assistance, nearly half a million refugees remain in exile in neighbouring countries
and minorities continue to be targeted and exposed to extreme violence. While more
efforts must be made to promote reconciliation and return, I strongly urge the
Transitional Authorities to uphold the Central African Republic’s obligations under
international human rights law to guarantee the freedom of movement of all
populations without discrimination. I am also concerned that humanitarian efforts
are being increasingly curtailed by volatile security conditions and direct attacks
against humanitarian workers, which prevent assistance from reaching those in most
need. Considering the extreme vulnerability of the civilian population, I wish to
reiterate the need for timely and sustained support to the humanitarian response
plans.
73. MINUSCA has achieved 80 per cent deployment of uniformed personnel and
will, by April, achieve its full operating capability. In addition, the security situation
and upcoming elections prompted me, in my letter to the President of the Security
Council on 29 January, to recommend to the Council to authorize a limited increase
of 750 military personnel and 280 police personnel for MINUSCA, in order to
enable the deployment of an additional infantry battalion and two formed police
units, as well as an additional 20 corrections officers. I welcome the Council’s
adoption, on 26 March, of resolution 2212 (2015) authorizing these additional
capabilities, which will be rapidly deployed in the coming months.
74. In anticipation of the expiry of the initial mandate of MINUSCA on 30 April,
it is important to recall the progress that has been achieved in the Central African
Republic in the past year. The political process, despite some delays and
distractions, is on track and moving forward following a successful national popular
consultation process. The security situation, though still volatile, has seen a relative
improvement in the year since the deployment of MINUSCA alongside the
European Union Force in the Central African Republic and Operation Sangaris.
Though significant challenges remain, civilian protection is gradually improving as
a result of coordinated and targeted protection efforts. High profile arrests are
beginning to make a difference in the massive effort needed to end impunity.
75. In order to sustain and build on these achievements, I recommend an extension
of the current mandate of MINUSCA for one year at the authorized level of

15-04520

17/19

S/2015/227

10,750 military personnel, including 480 staff officers and military observers,
2,080 police personnel, including 400 individual police officers, and 40 corrections
officers. While continuing to prioritize the protection of civilians, I encourage the
Security Council to consider requesting MINUSCA to also prioritize the provision
of strategic policy advice and coordination of international efforts in the area of
security sector reform during the coming period. A renewal of the mandate of
MINUSCA in the area of elections will also be vital, and should emphasize the
supporting role of the Mission with regard to the provision of technical, operational
and logistical support, including creating a conducive security environment;
providing good offices and support to the political aspects of the electoral process
and monitoring and reporting human rights violations before, during and after the
elections; and the lead role of MINUSCA in the coordination of internat ional
electoral support to the Transitional Authorities.
76. In the light of the positive contribution that arrests by MINUSCA have made
in the fight against impunity, the urgent temporary measures mandate of MINUSCA
should also be renewed. In this connection and further to its mandate to support
national and international justice and the rule of law, I recommend a distinct
mandate to assist the Transitional Authorities, along with other international
partners, in the establishment and operationalization o f the national Special
Criminal Court.
77. I also encourage my Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and my Special Representative for Central Africa to continue to work closely to
address the threat posed by LRA following the transfer of Dominic Ongwen from
the Central African Republic to the International Criminal Court, which will allow
for the first international trial of an LRA commander.
78. I am grateful to my Special Representative in the Central African Republic and
Head of MINUSCA, Babacar Gaye, for his tireless efforts. I am deeply appreciative
of the work being done by the personnel of MINUSCA, the United Nations country
team and the humanitarian country team in a dangerous and unpredictable
environment. I express my deepest condolences to the countries and families of
United Nations staff and humanitarian workers who lost their lives in the line of
duty in the Central African Republic. I am grateful to my Special Representative for
Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, for his role in the international mediation on the
Central African Republic. I also thank the African Union, troop - and policecontributing countries, ECCAS, the European Union, donor countries and
multilateral and non-governmental organizations for their continued efforts to bring
an end to the suffering of Central Africans.

18/19

15-04520

S/2015/227

15-04520

19/19
