S/PV.9316

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9316

th meeting
Thursday, 4 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cassis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Ms. Hackman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-12652 (E)
*2312652*

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

was pleased to learn that the New Agenda for Peace
of Secretary-General Guterres was discussed here
yesterday (see S/PV.9315). Both the United Nations and
the OSCE should stand together and resolutely work
on ways to promote and safeguard peace, because no
organization can do it alone. Only through collaboration
and mutual support can we create a world that is safe,
secure and prosperous for all.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Bujar Osmani,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of North Macedonia, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Osmani.
Mr. Osmani: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Switzerland on its first presidency of the
Security Council, at a time when we face dramatic
situations across the world. I take this opportunity
to wish you, Mr. President, success during your
presidency. Additionally, I would like to extend my
gratitude for the invitation to brief the members of the
Security Council about the political vision, priorities
and undertakings of the 2023 Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) chairpersonship of
North Macedonia.
My address as a OSCE Chairperson-in-Office will
be a call for action, a call for an immediate quest for
peace. A terrible war rages in our back yard, in Europe
and in the OSCE area. The possible consequences of that
war are grave enough to endanger peace and stability
globally. This Organization, the United Nations, was
created to save future generations from the scourge
of war. The OSCE is aimed at reinforcing stability
and cooperation by enhancing trust and meaningful
dialogue from Vancouver to Vladivostok. The question
that appears relevant is: where do we stand now? Have
we lived up to the principles and values to which we have
committed? Stability has been shattered, confidence is
lost, and cooperation hardly exists. Dialogue, if there is
still any, is becoming more and more poisoned.
Thirty years ago, former United Nations SecretaryGeneral Boutros-Ghali offered his vision for the absence
of war, but above all, the existence of durable peace. I
2/18

04/05/2023

As OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, I call upon the
synergy between the United Nations and the OSCE for
achieving peace for our generation and those to come.
As security challenges continue to evolve, the nature of
OSCE cooperation with the United Nations must evolve
as well. We must become more pragmatic and action
oriented. In the 30 years that have elapsed, the United
Nations and the OSCE have built a significant relationship
and coordinated very closely in operational terms.
We need to tighten those relations even more now.
North Macedonia assumed the chairpersonship of
the OSCE as of 1 January this year, in the most difficult
and challenging times. As Council members know, our
motto is “It’s about people”. Allow me to say a couple of
words about why we have chosen this approach. Politics
is not about winning or losing. It is about the people we
represent: their lives, their hopes and their dreams. As
leaders, we have a solemn responsibility to serve them,
to protect them and to ensure that their voices are heard.
The world is facing unprecedented challenges, and the
people are paying the price. It is time for us to step
up and take decisive action. We cannot afford to wait
any longer while the suffering of the people continues.
It has never been less about ideology, geopolitics or
personal gain. It has never been more important to put
the well-being of the people at the forefront. We cannot
ignore the cries for justice, freedom and dignity. We
cannot turn a blind eye to human suffering or deny
basic human rights. Collective action is needed now.
The OSCE has been confronting a number of
challenges over recent years that have come to a head
in the current full-scale Russian aggression. This
aggression erodes the foundations of the organization
by violating the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act.
The Russian Federation blatantly violated fundamental
principles of international law agreed upon by all. As
I started my address with a call for immediate action
for peace, I take this opportunity to urge Russia once
again to end this war and withdraw its troops from
the sovereign territory of Ukraine. Immense damage
has already been done, and every additional day of
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

aggression prolongs the human suffering. I witnessed
people’s hardship first-hand in Borodyanka, near
Kyiv, on my first trip abroad in my capacity as OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office. I visited a nearby camp housing
the war-affected and displaced population, most of
them innocent civilians, elderly people or children. I
have heard their distressing stories and experiences.
They do not deserve this destiny and need to be freed
from the fear of war. Moreover, they deserve justice.
Accountability today is a moral imperative, as it is the
most effective means to avoid this happening again in
any other place.
In our programme for the 2023 OSCE
chairpersonship, the protracted conflicts and the
work of the OSCE field operations are another area of
high priority. In this regard, earlier this year I visited
the Republic of Moldova, as the situation with the
Transnistria settlement process needs further OSCE
attention. As Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE, I
have offered my readiness to support ideas that can
have a positive impact on the process.
A brief assessment from my recent visits to the
South Caucasus, another area of protracted conflict,
is that the overall situation needs support for the
initiatives that facilitate dialogue towards lasting peace
and leading to the normalization of relations between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. As Chair, we aim for the
peaceful, comprehensive and sustainable settlement of
the disagreements that afflict and concern Azerbaijanis
and Armenians. As on the previous occasion, and
while I was there, I also addressed the humanitarian
concerns over the Lachin corridor and, in particular, the
consequences that directly affect the local population.
In the light of recent developments, I would like again
to emphasize our commitment to the OSCE as a venue
for resolving differences in the South Caucasus and
call on all parties to rely on genuine dialogue and good
faith negotiation.
With regard to Georgia, I welcome the latest round
of the Geneva International Discussions, held two
weeks ago. As the OSCE chair, North Macedonia fully
supports the continuation of this key venue for dialogue
under the joint leadership of the United Nations, OSCE
and European Union. These channels and diplomatic
processes must remain open, not only to avoid further
escalation, but also to deal with the consequences of the
2008 conflict. It was particularly significant to visit the
Odzisi crossing and see first-hand the condition of the
dividing lines and the consequences of the long-term

S/PV.9316

closure of the crossing. It is unfortunate to witness that
in the twenty-first century there is yet another wall of
separation that divides the population affected by the
conflict. The completely blocked freedom of movement
of people in this area is unsustainable and contrary to the
basic principles of the OSCE and civilization’s ideals.
In the upcoming weeks I am planning to visit the
OSCE field missions in South-East Europe. The visits
are taking place at a crucial juncture for developments
in the region. In particular, I would like to commend the
progress reached between Kosovo and Serbia in Ohrid,
North Macedonia, under the auspices of the European
Union. One encouraging fact is the readiness expressed
by both sides to carry out their responsibilities related
to the implementation of the annex to the agreement
reached in Brussels.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, I will continue to
promote the unity of voice and unity of purpose concept
and reinforce the reconciliation and trust-building
portfolio. The other priorities that are incorporated
in our programme for the 2023 chairpersonship will
largely depend on security developments. Despite all
difficulties, we will continue to promote human security
through support for sustainable economic growth and
environmental cooperation, uphold basic human rights
and promote tolerance and non-discrimination as
prerequisites for comprehensive security. With all that
said, I would like to add that we will spare no efforts nor
energy to support a functional and flexible OSCE. The
challenges facing the OSCE are significant, but they
are not insurmountable. We will remain committed to
the organization and work together to address the issues
that threaten its effectiveness. This includes providing
adequate funding, strengthening its institutions and
ensuring that it has the support of member States.
Let us remember that the OSCE is not just a platform
for dialogue for non-like-minded countries — it is
a community of nations that is supposed to share a
common vision of peace and stability. We must work
together in solidarity and unity to ensure that this
vision became becomes a reality.
Human lives are the most precious thing. As a
medical doctor myself by profession, I have worked to
save lives on a daily basis. I have seen the suffering
provoked by illness and witnessed the natural fight of
a human being for life. I would like to believe that war
is not an inherent component of human nature. It is a
manmade disaster that takes hundreds, even thousands,
of lives in a moment. War is neither necessity nor destiny.

23-126523/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

In most cases, it is a deliberate human choice — the
most wrong and terrible one — and it is our duty to
repair this and do things right. Peace is the driving
force of multilateralism and the most precious ideal of
humankind. Therefore, we must join forces around our
joint pursuit for peace. After all, it is all about people.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Osmani for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Councillor and Head of the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.
At the outset, I would like to once again thank
His Excellency Mr. Bujar Osmani for his briefing.
Mr. Chairperson-in-Office, Switzerland fully supports
you in this difficult task for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) this year.
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine
represents the greatest challenge to our cooperative
security in Europe and Central Asia. I reiterate here the
call to the Russian Federation to stop this aggression
and to immediately withdraw its troops from Ukrainian
territory. This war has already caused far too much
suffering and too much damage. My thoughts are with
the millions of victims — the dead, the wounded and
the separated families forced to flee their homes. I
am also thinking of the indirect victims elsewhere
in the world, who are bearing the brunt of the social,
economic and environmental effects of this conflict.
These people, already vulnerable before the war, are
now in an appalling situation. That is unacceptable.
The motto chosen by the current OSCE
chairpersonship, “It’s about people”, is more relevant
now than ever. Our primary responsibility is to protect
civilians. That responsibility is the essence of the link
between the OSCE and the United Nations. As we
celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the partnership
between the United Nations and the OSCE, we must
reaffirm our commitment to strengthening that
cooperation. Let me remind the Council of a few facts.
First, at the political and military levels, the
OSCE is the largest regional security organization in
the world. Its presence on the ground in 13 countries
has a stabilizing effect in regions such as the Western
Balkans, the Caucasus and Central Asia. Through
its missions, the OSCE creates and maintains strong
partnerships with local and national authorities and
institutions, civil society and other international
4/18

04/05/2023

organizations. Its activities promoting minority rights,
election observation and institutional reform are
therefore based directly on those countries’ needs.
Secondly, in its human dimension, the OSCE has
mechanisms that document the most serious human
rights violations, for example the Moscow Mechanism,
currently being invoked in Ukraine. Peace cannot be
won without justice for the victims and their families.
Thirdly, in the economic and environmental
contexts, the OSCE is actively addressing challenges
that have an impact on all of us. It is doing crucial
work to combat the adverse effects of climate change,
including sustainable water resource management and
conflict prevention.
Our debate today, as well as the open debate held
under the Swiss presidency of the Security Council
yesterday (see S/PV.9315), is also relevant to regions
beyond Europe. The OSCE, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, shares the
objectives of many other regional organizations.
By focusing on prevention and on creating lasting
peace, those organizations can make an important
collective contribution to the implementation of the
New Agenda for Peace proposed by Secretary-General
António Guterres.
In conclusion, while the war in Ukraine is indeed
a serious setback for the OSCE, which was founded to
ensure security in Europe, its inclusive nature means
that it will remain vital because of the trust we discussed
yesterday that must bind its member States, and because
of the fundamental synergies it creates with the United
Nations. As we approach the fiftieth anniversary of the
Helsinki Accords, they must remain our benchmark for
the common peace and security architecture in Europe.
It is also up to all of us to preserve the OSCE’s capacity
for action, and Switzerland is ready to do its part.
We must not allow the future of Europe to be decided
by the law of force, and Switzerland is committed to
using the force of the law to counter it. We encourage
everyone here today to do the same, because, once
again, while it is certainly about security, above all “It’s
about people”.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We are very pleased to
welcome Mr. Bujar Osmani, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of North Macedonia, in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and to thank him
for his important remarks. I would like to commend
him for his efforts and the work done since he took
on that important responsibility, despite the very
challenging circumstances.
Yesterday, as you recalled, Mr. President, we had
an open debate on trust as a means to achieve sustained
peace (S/PV.9315). There is hardly a more meaningful
and successful case to recall than that of North
Macedonia, which has been transformed precisely by
investing in trust and cooperation, with an unparalleled
positive impact on the country’s stability, development
and prosperity. We listened very carefully to the
Minister’s briefing and would like to put on record our
full support for the chairpersonship’s priorities — a
functional and flexible OSCE, the promotion of human
security, upholding human rights and promoting
tolerance and non-discrimination, as prerequisites for
comprehensive security.
Today’s meeting marks the thirtieth anniversary
of the signing of the Framework for Cooperation and
Coordination between the United Nations and the
OSCE. As an important pillar of the international
rules-based order, the OSCE plays an essential role
in addressing many of the challenges on the Council’s
agenda. The cooperation, collaboration and partnership
between the two organizations is therefore meaningful
and should be strengthened. While we could reasonably
claim that a lot has been achieved over the past three
decades, the fact is that the security situation in the
OSCE area remains very precarious, and since last
year it has been put in serious danger. One of the major
historic and transformative events for Europe and the
world was the end of the Cold War. It put an end to
a divided continent and to a climate of fear, mistrust
and instability, and enabled greater cooperation and
dialogue among nations, based on agreed principles
and shared values. It was what I might call a second
European renaissance, and the OSCE has been an
important platform for discussing issues related to
comprehensive security, as well as confidence- and
security-building measures. Despite the current cynical
efforts to undermine and diminish its role, the OSCE
remains as relevant as when it was created.

S/PV.9316

But while the Cold War is over, its spirit has been
forcefully brought back through Russia’s imperial
appetite, dreams and plans. The continued barbaric
attacks on Ukraine, such as the latest on Kherson,
the extreme rhetoric by former and current officials,
including repeated nuclear sabre-rattling, and the
escalatory and irresponsible decision to station tactical
nuclear weapons in Belarus are only a few of the actions
that testify to a flagrant, deliberate policy aimed at
destabilizing the OSCE area, reviving fears about major
confrontations and bringing back debates that many of
us had hoped and believed were a thing of the past.
We reiterate our condemnation, in the strongest
terms, of the ongoing unprovoked, unjust and unjustified
military aggression by Russia against Ukraine.
After 16 months, the war is still going on with tragic
consequences, significant human and humanitarian
costs, the daily loss of innocent civilians, the widespread
destruction of critical civilian infrastructure, huge
economic setbacks and a devastating impact on the
country, the region and more widely. Shocking war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including torture
and rape, have been committed in Ukraine and are
being duly documented by the United Nations and
also by the OSCE, through invocations of the Moscow
Mechanism. Crimes cannot be let go with impunity and
evidence will be used in courts of law. Accountability
and justice are being established and will be pursued.
As we all know, the International Criminal Court has
already issued two arrest warrants at the highest level.
As the Chairperson-in-Office outlined, the OSCE
area is also facing other challenges. A number of
unresolved conflicts continue to be a source of concern,
such as the continuing situations in Transnistria and
Georgia. The quest for negotiated solutions to those
conflicts must remain an urgent matter. On the positive
side, we welcome the talks initiated in Washington
by Secretary of State Blinken at the ministerial level
between Azerbaijan and Armenia. Furthermore, the
agreement reached in Ohrid between Kosovo and
Serbia, with the facilitation of the European Union and
other partners, is of historic magnitude and should be
implemented without delay.
Let me mention one additional worry. Our
increasing reliance on digital technology and digital
communication — an undeniably powerful driver of
development — has also brought new security challenges
to the OSCE area. Cyberattacks and cybercrime are
growing threats, with potential implications for critical

23-126525/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

infrastructure, Government systems and the private
sector, especially when they are conducted by State
actors. That is why, to address all those challenges,
we need the OSCE and its mechanisms so that we can
work together to implement policies and initiatives
that promote security and stability in its area, in line
with the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris.
That includes efforts to promote disarmament, conflict
prevention and crisis management, as well as initiatives
aimed at strengthening democratic institutions, human
rights and the rule of law. The OSCE cannot and will not
be undermined, because our common desire for peace
and cooperation is way stronger than anyone’s appetite
for destabilization and confrontation, and because — as
was rightly said of the OSCE, “It’s about people”.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Foreign Minister Osmani for his briefing.
For almost 50 years, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has played a vital
role in promoting peace, stability and security in
Europe, and it remains a critical institution for European
and Euro-Atlantic security. In a challenging period for
multilateralism, we welcome the positive role played
by the OSCE in supporting the Security Council in its
work on international peace and security. I would like
to highlight three areas in particular.
First, the OSCE makes a vital contribution through
its autonomous bodies such as the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights and its field missions
in Central Asia, the Western Balkans and Moldova.
We also support its efforts to facilitate a peaceful
resolution of the conflicts in Georgia, Moldova and
Nagorno-Karabakh.
Secondly, the OSCE’s work across all dimensions
underpins our common security and prosperity.
That includes its actions on economic development,
environmental protection and climate change, which
have our full support.
Thirdly, we welcome the OSCE’s ongoing work
through the Moscow Mechanism to expose violations
and abuses of international humanitarian and human
rights law. That includes reporting on the brutal
crackdown on political and media freedoms in Belarus
and holding Russia to account for its actions in Ukraine.
When Russia launched its unprovoked, full-scale
invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, it transgressed
all of the OSCE’s core principles — sovereignty, respect
6/18

04/05/2023

for territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The publication
today of the OSCE’s Moscow Mechanism report on the
deportation of Ukrainian children once again highlights
the immense suffering caused by Russia’s war. It
outlines the grave human rights violations and abuses
that Russia has committed and supports the growing
evidence that several thousand Ukrainian children have
been removed from their families, friends and homes
and forcibly transferred out of the country.
In these times of crisis, we need functioning and
effective regional organizations to address our shared
problems and uphold the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act. The
OSCE has an important role to play, but in order to
fulfil it, it relies on participating States fulfilling their
commitments. Instead, Russia is choosing to obstruct
the organization. It is doing so by delaying key decisions
on its budget, blocking leadership appointments and
frustrating the work of its human rights institutions.
We urge all 57 OSCE participating States, including
Russia, to support the organization and ensure that it
is fully functional and adequately funded to deliver
on its important work. The United Kingdom remains
steadfast in its appreciation for the work of the OSCE
and its support for North Macedonia’s chairpersonship.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Mr. Osmani,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his informative
and detailed briefing. Brazil follows the activities of
the organization and acknowledges its work in conflict
prevention. We are supportive of an active engagement
between the United Nations and the OSCE, based on
the 1993 Framework for Cooperation and Coordination.
Throughout its history, the OSCE has offered a
platform for open discussions on security in Europe,
helping in many instances to ease tensions between
East and West and prevent the outbreak of armed
confrontations. More recently, it has played an
important role in monitoring ceasefires in the Balkans,
the Caucasus and other areas of the post-Soviet space.
Brazil also appreciates the OSCE’s efforts to combat
transnational organized crime and strengthen the rule
of law. In that regard, we welcomed the holding in April
of the twenty-third Conference of the Alliance against
Trafficking in Persons and echo the participants’
call for decisive policies countering the actions of
criminal groups.
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Although the OSCE has not always been successful
in preventing resorting to the use of arms, as evidenced
by the collapse of the Minsk agreements, it would be
regrettable if the platform ceased to be a forum for
frank dialogue on issues of common interest. We lament
the incident in the parliamentary session in February
and hope that the impasse on the organization’s
chairpersonship in 2024 can be overcome. The
seriousness of the crises in Europe and Central Asia
demands that the members of the OSCE restore its
traditional spirit of cooperation. Mr. Osmani’s recent
interactions in Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan
provided him with an opportunity to assess the existing
threats to the stability of the South Caucasus.
We want to take this opportunity to express
Brazil’s concern about the escalation of tensions
between Armenia and Azerbaijan, as well as the signs
of a deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Lachin
corridor. The establishment of a checkpoint could
exacerbate the complexity of the situation and hinder
the prospects for its peaceful resolution. The unimpeded
movement of people and goods through the Lachin
corridor is vital for preventing a collapse of the already
precarious humanitarian situation. We encourage the
Governments of both countries to refrain from rhetoric
that is conducive to violence and to engage in dialogue
with a view to arriving at a peaceful settlement of
their differences.
Brazil believes that the OSCE could play a
constructive role in a settlement of the conflict in
Ukraine. To do so, however, it will be necessary for its
members to abandon a logic of isolation and engage in
a sincere effort in favour of dialogue.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would like to warmly
welcome Mr. Osmani, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
North Macedonia, in his capacity as Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), and to thank him for his informative
and insightful briefing. We applaud North Macedonia
for choosing to put a special focus on the people during
its chairpersonship. Malta has full trust in its leadership
and reaffirms its full support for the OSCE.
In a volatile European security context, Malta
continues to attach great value to multilateralism and
strongly supports enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE. That cooperation enables
us to deliver more efficient and effective solutions. The
OSCE’s unique concept of a comprehensive approach to

S/PV.9316

security continues to retain its relevance to adequately
addressing the multidimensional challenges at hand. As
a unique forum for political and security dialogue from
Vancouver to Vladivostok, the OSCE has provided a
platform for confidence-building measures by focusing
on conflict prevention, as well as crisis management,
through diplomacy. We also welcome the steps that
the OSCE has taken to embrace issues relating to
economic and environmental cooperation, including
climate change.
We reaffirm our support for the OSCE’s human
dimension, autonomous institutions and instruments,
as well as for all efforts that lead to peace and dialogue,
defuse tensions and boost trust and confidence in the
region. The work of the OSCE has been and continues
to be crucial in situations that are on the international
peace and security agenda, such as the conflicts
in Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia, Abkhazia
and the Transnistria region. Malta highly values
the OSCE’s mediation efforts and its good offices
through its deployment of field missions and special
representatives. We welcomed the latest visit by the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office to Georgia, Azerbaijan
and Armenia, and we support the continued efforts
to address security challenges and efforts towards
sustainable peace, as well as to promote and strengthen
cooperation between the OSCE and its participating
States in the region. We remain fully committed to
contributing to the dialogue between Armenia and
Azerbaijan and to peace and stability in the South
Caucasus. In that regard, we would like to underline
our ongoing concern about the dire humanitarian
consequences that have resulted from the blockade of
the Lachin corridor. We urge all the relevant parties to
cease any action impeding humanitarian access, given
the very urgent situation.
While all the OSCE participating States have
reaffirmed their commitment to using peaceful means
to settle all disputes, both individually and collectively
and based on cooperation and respect for one another,
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law continue in the region.
The reality is that Russia continues to blatantly violate
the Charter of the United Nations and the founding
principles of the OSCE, as enshrined the Helsinki
Final Act and subsequent key documents, including
the Charter of Paris. Russia’s unprovoked aggression
against Ukraine is undermining the European security
architecture and threatening peace and stability on

23-126527/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the continent and beyond, while shattering alreadyweakened confidence and trust. Such actions are having
lasting consequences that are adversely affecting not
only Ukraine and the region but millions of people all
over the world. On this occasion, we once again urge
the Russian Federation to stop the war, withdraw its
military forces from the entire territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders, and turn
to dialogue and diplomacy, the tools that can restore
peace, security and stability in the region. We also
reiterate our call to Russia to implement without delay
the recommendations of the most recent report of the
Moscow Mechanism, take all necessary measures to
enable the return of displaced and forcibly displaced
children to Ukraine and their families and prevent any
further transfers.
In conclusion, we believe that strengthening the
long-standing and fruitful cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE will only enhance our
ability to address the complex security challenges in
the OSCE area.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Foreign Minister and Chairperson-inOffice Osmani for his insightful remarks.
The current situation on the European continent
should encourage us all to reflect on what the
international community has learned since the end of the
Second World War. It should also lead us to recommit
to the very principles that are mirrored in both the
Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act, adopted by the predecessor of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Those
principles are respect for the sovereignty of all nations,
the peaceful resolution of disputes and the prohibition
of the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State.
The United Nations benefits significantly from
working with regional organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in order to maintain international peace and security.
The work of the United Nations with the OSCE is a
good example of the way in which both organizations
can leverage their respective strengths to prevent crises,
promote diplomatic solutions, monitor agreements and
avoid the recurrence of conflict. That function remains
more essential than ever in the current context, a time
when the OSCE is facing a fundamental challenge
owing to the war in Ukraine. The ongoing conflict
8/18

04/05/2023

has shattered countless lives and uprooted more than
8 million people, the vast majority of whom have sought
refuge in OSCE States. However, that is not exclusively
a European issue. The conflict has exacerbated food
insecurity, nuclear risks and polarization across the
globe. It has also caused deep divisions within the
OSCE area and among its participating States.
At the same time, in the Western Balkans,
the encouraging dynamics that led to a European
Union-facilitated agreement between Kosovo and
Serbia in February must be reinforced and built
upon. As we have seen recently, more work needs to
be done to implement those commitments. In Bosnia
and Herzegovina, hate speech continues to undermine
peaceful coexistence and tolerance, which remain
essential pillars for diverse and resilient societies and
could help the country move forward. Whether it is
facilitating cooperation, encouraging diplomatic action
and dialogue or seeking to de-escalate tensions, the goal
of multilateral institutions is clear. It is to collectively
and constructively address common challenges. The
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
has served for decades as an important forum for
strengthening understanding and promoting such
dialogue in Europe. Since its establishment in 1990,
the OSCE has played an important role in addressing
conflicts on the continent thanks to the constructive
engagement of its wide membership. That must remain
at the heart of the organization if the OSCE is to continue
playing that role today. Its diplomacy and de-escalation
efforts are needed more than ever.
In the 1970s, the Helsinki process contributed to
building confidence and de-escalating tensions during
the post-Second World War era. There is a clear need
today to encourage the same spirit of substantive
dialogue and mutual trust in order to promote a return
to stability in Europe. For its part, the United Arab
Emirates will remain a partner in the effort to build
bridges and maintain trust, as we strive to maintain
international peace and security.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I join others in
warmly welcoming His Excellency Mr. Osmani,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of North Macedonia
and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to the
Security Council. I thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and active chairmanship, which is centred on
a commitment to bettering the lives and improving the
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

human security of the more than 1 billion people within
the 57 participating States of the OSCE.
For the past three decades the close and expanding
relations of the United Nations with the OSCE, built on
the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, have contributed extensively to the Security
Council’s core mandate of promoting and maintaining
international peace and security. The OSCE’s
comprehensive concept of security, including its
political, military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions, has maintained its utility in upholding
the European security order and ensuring sustainable
peace and development. However, the global context in
which we are called on to maintain peace and security
today is increasingly complex and fragile, especially
for the European region. Therefore, as we mark the
thirtieth anniversary this month of the signing of the
Framework for Cooperation and Coordination between
the United Nations and the OSCE, our attention should
turn to seeking new and creative ways to strengthen
our collective capacities to address present and future
security threats in the region.
Ghana remains considerably concerned about the
heightened security situation in Europe, headlined by
the Russian Federation’s war of aggression against
Ukraine. Now in its fifteenth month, the war has
become the epicentre of a global political upheaval,
while the resulting food, energy and fuel crises continue
at record levels. We are alarmed by the recent findings
of independent research suggesting that military
expenditure, especially in Europe, has surged to Cold
War levels, further worsening the volatile security
situation. We have also witnessed actions by some
nuclear-possessor States that are peeling away from
the non-proliferation arrangements that have served
as a bulwark against nuclear war. Those developments
fuel uncertainty and have heightened our fears about
the waning appeal of multilateral cooperation and
the peaceful settlement of disputes on which the two
organizations are founded.
We strongly reassert the need for an immediate
cessation of the hostilities in Ukraine and firmly believe
that dialogue and diplomacy offer the best chances for
a lasting and comprehensive political solution. With
regard to the OSCE’s support for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, we believe that it must reassert
itself as a credible interlocutor in the process of finding
a lasting solution to the conflict between the Russian
Federation and Ukraine and in the wider conversation

S/PV.9316

about the future of Europe’s security architecture. We
welcome the ongoing commitments to the humanitarian
aspects of the issue and appreciate the activities of
project teams in the areas of demining operations,
combating human trafficking, improving disaster risk
reduction and addressing the environmental impact of
the war.
Elsewhere in Europe, tensions persist as peace
efforts have either been rolled back or stalled by the
actions of conflicting States. We therefore appreciate
the high-level contacts made by the Chairperson-inOffice with the authorities in Moldova, Armenia,
Azerbaijan and Georgia in order to offer support for
ongoing dialogues and settlement arrangements.
We also note the continuing efforts of the OSCE
missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. We
underline the importance of keeping those channels of
engagement and other mediation formats open to help
defuse tensions, build trust and make progress towards
the region’s shared objectives of stability, peace
and democracy.
Given the interlinkages between security issues
across regions, we believe that the OSCE should extend
its engagements with other regional bodies, especially
in Africa, to build synergies and harmonize efforts on
cross-cutting issues, including migration, terrorism,
arms proliferation, cybersecurity, human rights,
climate and the environment. We also believe that
women’s effective and meaningful participation across
the spectrum of conflict prevention and resolution,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace must be ensured
through appropriate action and mechanisms. We
therefore welcome the chairpersonship’s commitment
to promoting the effective participation of women
in public and political life and commend its aims of
eradicating violence against women, including women
journalists and public figures.
The widening political fissures on the European
continent are a result of a lack of mutual trust and
confidence among States. Moving towards a more
peaceful and stable future demands that the OSCE’s
participating States renew their commitments to the
foundational principles enshrined in the Helsinki
Accords and other normative agreements of the
organization. In that context, we believe it is important
to remind the participating States of their commitments
under the general principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations to refraining from the
use of force, respecting the principles of sovereignty

23-126529/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

and territorial integrity, seeking peaceful settlements
of disputes and upholding human rights.
The challenges we have been speaking about
today have also upended the effective functioning of
the OSCE in some critical situations. If it is to remain
the foremost security organization in Europe outside
the United Nations, its members must forge past their
ideological and political differences and work to
provide it with the resources and support that it needs
to function and stay relevant in the evolving era of the
twenty-first century.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for his commitment
and his informative briefing.
The thirtieth anniversary of the partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations presents a
prime opportunity to reaffirm the fundamental nature
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in addressing the security challenges
facing the world, in the very spirit of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. In Europe, the OSCE
has proved to be a real lever for peace for its 57 member
States, even if its role and vocation as a stabilizing
entity are now under severe strain. In that pivotal role
for the security of its members, the OSCE is built
around a noble model of unique cooperation, whose
foundations are anchored in the Helsinki Final Act and
the Paris Charter. That model enshrines the primacy of
solidarity as its cornerstone, with the interoperability
of all areas contributing to the achievement of lasting
peace and security.
At the heart of the challenges facing the OSCE
today is the crisis of confidence among its member
States. That crisis seems to call into question the very
nature and scope of the social contract at the heart of
the organization, as well as the commitments made by
its member States under its founding texts. The OSCE
has no choice but to recover from that situation. The
latent tensions in Europe, particularly in the Western
Balkans and owing to the war in Ukraine, but also in a
sociopolitical context marked by nationalism and other
transnational threats, are all challenges standing in its
way. It is well within the OSCE’s reach to respond to
those challenges while preserving the guiding principles
governing mutual relations among its member States.
Those challenges are unquestionably amplified by the
war in Ukraine, not only due to the humanitarian and
10/18

04/05/2023

security consequences, including for food security,
resulting from the conflict, but also in a more insidious
way through the pressure on member States to choose
between the opposing sides.
It is more important than ever for the OSCE to
deploy its mechanisms for the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States within its territorial
jurisdiction. It must show commitment and urge the
parties involved to find a lasting solution to the border
dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan and avoid
a conflagration that could harm the entire region.
Similarly, it is called on to play a stabilizing role in
Cyprus, Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as to resolve frozen conflicts that could be reignited
by political and economic circumstances and where
the stakes are not always controllable. The OSCE has a
real ability to bring the conflicting parties — including
those to the war in Ukraine — to dialogue. It must use
it at every level to ensure that negotiation prevails over
a logic of confrontation.
We also recognize the role played by the OSCE in
terms of humanitarian response in conflict situations in
collaboration with United Nations specialized agencies.
It also undertakes many actions to support its member
States in strengthening the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the fight against environmental challenges.
The OSCE must resolve to prevent, reconcile and
promote reconstruction and peaceful coexistence. That
is a role that it will not be able to relinquish and for
which it must enhance its credibility by positioning
itself equidistant from the antagonisms of its member
States. To do so, it can rely on its specialized cooperation
bodies and forums, which have mechanisms for conflict
prevention, protection of national minorities and
conciliation or arbitration between the parties.
It is essential that the OSCE be able to fulfil its
entire mandate, a significant part of which consists of
field missions through humanitarian support, training
and other capacity-building missions, including actions
within the framework of the women and peace and
security agenda. The contribution of this agenda to the
restoration of peace and post-conflict reconstruction
is now recognized more than ever. We call on member
States to refrain from any initiative or attitude that would
impede the normal functioning of the organization.
I would like to conclude by stressing the importance
of cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations and by urging OSCE member States to preserve
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the achievements of the past 50 years by focusing on
dialogue, promoting preventive diplomacy and uniting
in the pursuit of security and stability, in the spirit of
the ideals of the United Nations Charter, for the peoples
of the world.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) today is facing an unprecedented
attack on its very essence. Russia’s ongoing aggression
against Ukraine since 24 February 2022 is a flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as of all the principles and commitments of the OSCE’s
founding texts, the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter
of Paris for a New Europe.
We continue to pledge our full support to Ukraine.
We must therefore continue to build on OSCE
instruments. In that regard, I would like to welcome
the launch of the Support Programme for Ukraine in
November, to which France contributed €1.5 million in
2022 and which will be maintained as long as necessary.
I would also like to express France’s gratitude
to those who have worked within the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, as well as to pay
tribute to its personnel who have fallen victim to the
Russian aggression. We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of the Mission’s personnel still
detained by Russia and its supporters.
I would like to acknowledge the invaluable
contribution of the OSCE human rights institutions
and instruments by documenting Russia’s crimes in
Ukraine. The three reports issued since 24 February
2022, under the Moscow Mechanism, document
massive and systematic violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by Russia, including
against children.
France also fully supports the invocation, on
23 March by 38 participating States, of the Moscow
Mechanism against Belarus. France is indeed very
concerned about the continued deterioration of
the human rights situation in Belarus. It reiterates
its condemnation of the complicity of Aleksandr
Lukashenko’s regime in the illegal and unjustified
military aggression led by Russia against Ukraine.
The OSCE must be able to continue to use its
resources to prevent and resolve conflicts in the
European area, in accordance with the principles of
international law.

S/PV.9316

In an order issued on 22 February, the International
Court of Justice determined that
“since 12 December 2022, the connection between
Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia via the Lachin
corridor has been disrupted”.
France recalls that the Court’s decisions are binding.
France also supports negotiations between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. All issues must be settled
exclusively through negotiations. France believes that
the OSCE can make a useful contribution to the ongoing
processes, in particular through the implementation of
confidence-building measures.
France reiterates its unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and
Moldova and for the role of the OSCE in helping to
resolve those conflicts. It calls on Russia not to obstruct
the extension of the mandate of the OSCE Mission to
Moldova beyond 30 June.
As we celebrate this year the thirtieth anniversary
of the establishment of the Framework for Cooperation
and Coordination between the United Nations
Secretariat and the OSCE, France reaffirms its support
for cooperation between the organizations, with a view
to promoting the settlement of crises in Europe. In that
regard, France particularly commends the commitment
of Minister Osmani, alongside OSCE Secretary General
Helga Schmid.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would first like to
welcome the Foreign Minister of North Macedonia
to the Security Council as the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and thank him for his insightful and
comprehensive briefing.
As mentioned by the Chairperson and other speakers,
there are many places, unfortunately, where conflict
prevention through confidence-building measures is
urgently needed. This situation is further complicated
and aggravated by Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine, which has caused negative and, sometimes,
destabilizing effects around the world. In that context,
we would like to express our respect to the OSCE for
the important role it has played in confidence-building,
with the participation of a great number of countries
with diverse values and perspectives.
Japan became the first OSCE Partner for
Cooperation over 30 years ago, in 1992. Since then,

23-1265211/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Japan has actively participated in every OSCE summit
and Ministerial Council. Japan is proud of the longstanding partnership in addressing common global
security challenges. We have also enhanced cooperation
with the OSCE in efforts towards democratization and
regional stability.
For instance, Japan dispatched experts to the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and
has contributed financially to preventing human
trafficking in Ukraine and surrounding countries, as
well as to strengthening border control in Central Asia
and Afghanistan. That cooperation is based on the firm
belief that peace and stability in the OSCE region is
directly linked to that of the international community,
including the Asia-Pacific region.
The international community is now at a historic
turning point. The international order based on the rule
of law, which we have been consistently upholding, is
under threat. We are confronted with an unforgivable
situation, in which an OSCE member State that is also
a permanent member of the Security Council invaded
another member State. We recall the strong voice of the
General Assembly in October, calling upon the OSCE
to support the de-escalation of the current situation.
The need for comprehensive security through
confidence-building based on dialogue, which the OSCE
has been working on since its establishment, is greater
than ever. His Excellency Mr. Bujar Osmani referred to
the importance of putting people at the centre, which
Japan fully supports because we value the concept of
human security. Japan will continue to cooperate with
the OSCE in order to address the wide range of security
challenges facing the international community and to
maintain and fortify the international order based on
the rule of law.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is an outrageous
act that shakes the very foundation of the international
order in every corner of the globe, and we condemn
it again in the strongest terms. The international
community must work together to voice its opposition,
regardless of geographical boundaries, to this blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): We thank the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office and Foreign Minister of
North Macedonia, His Excellency Mr. Bujar Osmani,
for his timely and very enlightening briefing. We
take note of the priorities he outlined for his tenure.
12/18

04/05/2023

Mozambique commends the crucial role played by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in maintaining peace on the European continent since
its inception in 1975. As a regional organization at the
centre of the European security architecture for nearly
half a century, the OSCE has been instrumental in
maintaining peace and stability in Europe and actively
involved in shaping the democratic transitions that have
laid the ground for the prosperity we have witnessed in
post-Cold War Europe. In our view, the organization
remains just as relevant today in all matters related to
peace and security in Europe. It is a valid and important
interlocutor in multilateral, regional and subregional
organizations throughout the world that share the same
mandate and values.
Mozambique has paid particular attention to the
OSCE’s role in facilitating dialogue and cooperation
among its 57 member States on multiple emerging
issues, including terrorism and the violent extremism
that can lead to terrorism, transnational organized
crime, arms control and migration. Those are issues
faced by our own country as well as our various
regional and subregional organizations in Africa. We
can confidently state that as it is in Africa, silencing the
guns is at the core of the OSCE’s mandate, and in that
sense we have much to learn from and share with each
other, despite our contextual and historical specificities.
At this crucial juncture, when the international
security architecture is under immense stress and facing
multiple headwinds, the OSCE, together with other
regional organizations and the United Nations, needs
to step up and restore the necessary safeguards for a
peaceful and prosperous world. The spirit that led to
the Helsinki Final Act in 1975 and the Istanbul Summit
Declaration in 1999 and that has enhanced the OSCE’s
commitment to conflict prevention, crisis management
and combating organized crime, corruption and
terrorism, remains important and must be put to good
use. While the war in Ukraine has severely tested the
OSCE and other similar regional frameworks, we still
require renewed dialogue and diplomacy to de-escalate
the conflict and lay the ground for trust-building and
an eventual revised European security arrangement.
We are in full agreement with Mr. Osmani that war is
not a necessity or a destiny.
Looking beyond Europe, the OSCE has an important
role to play in strengthening its partnership with the
United Nations, particularly in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution. The two organizations
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

can work closely together in order to enhance the
effectiveness of their common efforts by heeding the
call of the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982).
We are happy to note that the core principles and
commitments enshrined in the OSCE founding act, such
as respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity, human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the indivisibility of
security, remain cornerstones of international peace
and security. As we look to the future, we remain
confident that the OSCE will continue to be an essential
partner in efforts to promote peace, stability, security
and cooperation in Europe and beyond.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I listened carefully to the briefing by His Excellency
Mr. Osmani, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of North Macedonia.
China has always supported cooperation between
the Security Council and regional organizations,
including the OSCE, consistent with the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
in addressing challenges in the area of international
peace and security. In that process, it is imperative to
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
which promote the settlement of disputes through
peaceful means. The security situation in Europe at the
moment is facing mounting risks and challenges. China
expects the OSCE to make greater efforts to enhance
mutual trust among member States, prevent and
mediate conflicts and address non-traditional security
threats, and to play a positive and constructive role in
maintaining peace and stability in Europe.
We must underscore the importance of cooperative
security. The OSCE has a wealth of experience in
conflict prevention and resolution and should make
good use of its existing mechanisms, scale up efforts
to promote peace talks and mediation, balance the
interests and concerns of all parties, encourage member
States to abandon the zero-sum Cold War mindset
and bloc politics, build mutual trust through dialogue
and consultation, resolve disputes through peaceful
negotiations and achieve security through cooperation
rather than confrontation.
We must adhere to the goal of common security.
The principle of the indivisibility of security established
in the Helsinki Final Act in 1975 should be upheld and
put into practice. Only by taking seriously the security

S/PV.9316

of others and safeguarding the security of all can
we truly ensure our own security. The OSCE should
promote member States’ respect for one another’s
legitimate security concerns and explore building a
balanced, effective and sustainable European security
architecture, with a view to achieving common security.
We must insist on achieving sustainable security.
Security can be solid and sustainable only if it is based
on the international rule of law, grounded in morality
and sound concepts. Together with the international
community, the OSCE should adhere to genuine
multilateralism and uphold the international system,
with the United Nations at its core, the international
order, based on international law, and the basic norms
governing international relations, in line with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. It should jointly
promote the democratization of international relations
and the rule of law at the international level and work
to achieve sustainable security in Europe.
China’s position on the situation in Ukraine
remains consistent and clear. We always hold that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be protected, the purposes and principles of the
Charter should be adhered to, the legitimate security
concerns of all the parties should be taken seriously,
and all efforts conducive to a peaceful resolution of the
crisis should be supported. President Xi Jinping has
recently engaged intensively with the leaders of Russia,
Ukraine, Europe and developing countries, explaining
China’s position and propositions in depth and playing
a constructive role in promoting peace talks.
Conflicts and wars have no winners. Dialogue and
negotiations are the only way out. Given the recent rising
tensions on the battlefield, all parties should remain
calm, exercise restraint, refrain from any actions that
might further escalate tensions and confrontation and
bring together the conditions conducive to a political
settlement of the crisis. The international community
should persist on the course of peace talks as the right
way forward and help parties to the conflict to open
the door to a political settlement of the crisis as soon
as possible. We encourage the OSCE to leverage its
strengths and create the conditions and environment
necessary to support of the resumption of negotiations
between Russia and Ukraine. The Government of China
will send a special representative on Eurasian affairs
to visit Ukraine and other countries and continue to
contribute to an early cessation of hostilities and a
restoration of peace.

23-1265213/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

There are no simple solutions to complex problems.
The Ukraine crisis is the culmination of security
tensions accumulated over a long time in Europe, and
a final settlement of the crisis can be achieved only
on the basis of cooperative security, common security
and sustainable security. I hope that all the parties will
reflect deeply on their joint efforts and work together
for long-term peace and stability in Europe through
dialogue and consultations.
Today Mr. Osmani and many Council members
mentioned the dispute between Armenia and
Azerbaijan. China’s position on that issue has not
changed. It is our consistent position that Armenia
and Azerbaijan should, in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, solve
the issue between them peacefully through diplomatic
means, namely dialogue and negotiations, and jointly
safeguard regional peace and stability.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to welcome Mr. Bujar Osmani, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of North Macedonia and
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2023, whom I
thank for his detailed, informative briefing and wish
success during his mandate, which is taking place
during critical times for European and global security
and stability.
Ecuador supports the deepening of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and beyond. In that regard, we welcome
the fact that since the establishment of the framework
for cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the OSCE in 1993, that partnership has
expanded to address the various thematic issues,
challenges and conflicts that affect Europe and could
have an impact on the world.
We appreciate the joint efforts with regard to
progress on reconciliation in the Western Balkans,
the Geneva International Discussions on Georgia,
implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia and the
Nagorno-Karabakh and Republic of Moldova conflicts.
My delegation welcomes North Macedonia’s outlining
of its priorities under the motto “It’s about them. It’s
about people”. Several of those priorities coincide with
those of the United Nations and, in particular, those of
the Council.
14/18

04/05/2023

We also recognize the significant role that the
OSCE was playing, before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
through its Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
and within the framework of the Trilateral Contact
Group, in promoting security and a political solution
in a challenging context. While the OSCE’s efforts
in the context of the implementation of the Minsk
agreements were overtaken by force of circumstance,
its contribution remains key, including in today’s more
complex context.
We also welcome the fact that one of the priorities
of the current OSCE chairpersonship is to try to resolve
existing conflicts with a human-centred approach.
Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
is essential for ensuring sustainable security. We
encourage the OSCE member States to cooperate in
good faith with the organization’s institutions and field
operations, while emphasizing the human element. We
further encourage the OSCE chairpersonship to carry
out its intention to focus on other security issues such as
border security management and combating terrorism
and transnational crime, as well as cybersecurity and
the nexus between climate change and security.
Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the OSCE’s
efforts to promote and integrate gender equality into the
various dimensions of its work. We call for the OSCE
to strengthen its activities on the women and peace
and security agenda and to ensure the participation of
women at all levels, including in the armed forces and
in conflict-resolution processes and efforts.
We call on the OSCE to deepen its conflict-prevention
efforts in the management of host communities and its
efforts with regard to internally displaced persons, a
situation that particularly affects women and girls. We
also highlight the joint work that is being carried out by
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We call on the OSCE and
its members to expand their efforts in arms control,
non-proliferation and, especially, disarmament, with a
view to contributing to the United Nations efforts for a
world free from nuclear weapons and all other weapons
of mass destruction.
Just yesterday, we met in the Chamber to discuss
futureproofing trust for sustainable peace (see
S/PV.9315). Indeed, the challenges we are facing today
call for closer cooperation, in which the OSCE must
continue to play a constructive role.
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you, Mr. Councillor,
in the President’s chair. We also welcome to today’s
meeting Mr. Bujar Osmani, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
North Macedonia.
I think it will come as no surprise to anyone
if I begin my statement by making the point that,
for many years, the United States and its allies have
taken systematic and consistent actions to create a
Russophobic, nationalist and neo-Nazi entity on our
borders, triggering a profound crisis of the international
relations system. And while Washington, London,
Brussels and a number of other capitals continue their
frenzied rhetoric about Russia’s allegedly unprovoked
aggression, the true causes of the tectonic shifts that
we are witnessing are very clear to any minimally
knowledgeable observer.
Those causes include the anti-constitutional coup
in Kyiv in 2014 and the condoning by the regime, for
eight years, of the crimes committed against civilians in
southern and eastern Ukraine, in addition to the West’s
collective rejection of the principle of the indivisibility
of security in favour of NATO expansion. The question
of where we are headed and what the renewed system
of international relations will look like remains open
today. One thing is clear: the world will no longer be
unipolar, and Western domination, or American-style
peace, is on its way out. The question of the place and
role of international organizations in such an objective
process also remains open. Each individual organization
deals with that challenge differently. Despite the West’s
domination of its structures and desperate attempts by
Western countries to impose a Russophobic agenda
on every Member State, the United Nations, which is
essentially a bastion of multilateralism, continues to be
sought out as a platform for dialogue and international
cooperation. The Council of Europe, on the other hand,
has been unable to withstand such pressure and has
steadily slid into political oblivion, while becoming an
atrophied appendage of NATO and the European Union
(EU) and endorsing their every decision.
In that regard, there have been many expectations
of the OSCE, which is the successor of the forum that
played a key role in establishing a dialogue between
East and West during the Cold War. Today provides us
with an excellent opportunity to analyse to what extent
such expectations were justified.

S/PV.9316

We are compelled to acknowledge that, faced
with the challenges that I just mentioned, the OSCE is
undergoing its most severe crisis since it was established
almost 50 years ago, which has been exacerbated by
attempts by a well-known group of States to use the
organization to serve their own political interests and
turn it into a tool of a Western crusade, unleashed
against Russia. That transformation did not happen
overnight. The system of regional security, built within
the framework of the OSCE and based on the principles
of indivisible security from Vancouver to Vladivostok
was truly unique in its nature. The OSCE succeeded
in meeting the challenges of the times, and the efforts
of its good faith participants in the process allowed
for agreements to be reached on any urgent matter. A
striking example was the signing in Istanbul in 1999 of
a number of important documents, such as the Charter
for European Security and the Agreement on adaptation
of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
(CFE) — a fundamental instrument for ensuring
European security and military predictability.
However, the will to strengthen security in a
changing world was not shared by all. As we know,
the United States, which sought to maintain NATO’s
dominance, on the basis of the previous version of the
CFE, forbade its allies from ratifying the revised version
of the Treaty. Washington’s subsequent actions — its
withdrawal from the Treaty between the United States
of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems
and the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty
and its dismissal of the Treaty on Open Skies, with
the complicity of European countries — led to an even
greater erosion of global and regional security.
However, even amid attempts to turn the organization
into a kind of supervisory body for the policies of
States to the east of Vienna, the OSCE continued to
be needed. Its activities raised hopes for an improved
environment in Europe and a transition to mutually
beneficial cooperation and development. Its mediation
potential was also sought out. The OSCE was called
upon to play an important role in the implementation
of the Minsk agreements between Ukraine and the
Donbas republics, against whose population the Kyiv
regime unleashed a bloody war in 2014. To that end,
a robust toolkit was provided under the aegis of the
OSCE, which provided a platform for direct dialogue
between the parties to the conflict within the Trilateral
Contact Group and its working subgroups. But Kyiv

23-1265215/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

systematically avoided participating in substantive
dialogue with representatives of the Donetsk People’s
Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic, while
continuing to shell their peaceful cities. To that end,
Kyiv received help from NATO countries, which
invested in supplying the Kyiv regime with weapons
and equipment and encouraged Ukraine’s crimes
against civilians. The OSCE leadership’s response to
all that was often highly questionable or absent. As
a result, the organization has not only failed in its
primary task to achieve peace, based on the good faith
implementation of Minsk agreements, but was actually
made the West’s accomplice, which not only does the
bidding of one side to the conflict, but also provides it
with sensitive information.
It comes as no surprise that, after the exacerbation
of the Ukrainian crisis in February 2022, the
organization unequivocally and obediently took Kyiv’s
side, while performing the task of serving the interests
of individual OSCE States and their alliances. The
entire work of the organization was subordinated to
promoting Western approaches to the situation in and
around Ukraine. The OSCE leadership’s guidelines to
act publicly in strict accordance with the consensus
position were forgotten. As a result, instead of a
platform for dialogue, it quickly become a platform
for Russophobic invective and hysterical accusations
against our country. The Ukrainization process, which
the Polish chairmanship was particularly successful
in promoting last year, has led to the lacklustre
implementation of the organization’s mandate, and its
long-standing experience and competencies are not
being used for their intended purpose.
The artificial frenzy around the Ukrainian issue
comes at the expense of dealing with other crises, of
which there are many in the OSCE area. The situation
in the Balkans continues to deteriorate. The worsening
situation in Kosovo, owing to the actions of the Pristina
authorities with the full complicity of their Western
sponsors, is causing increasing concern. Against that
background, we see the lack of a balanced response to
events by the OSCE, although the organization remains
part of the international efforts to settle the situation in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
We are compelled, unfortunately, to note the lack
of progress by the OSCE in reaching a settlement of
the Transnistrian conflict, in particular within the
framework of the 5+2 negotiation process, which has
been put on hold since October 2019. As is well known,
16/18

04/05/2023

the mission’s mandate in the Republic of Moldova was
conferred upon it 30 years ago, but apparently, this is
not enough to provide participating States with tangible
results. Of particular concern is the subversive role that
Ukraine is currently playing in Transnistria, which
demonstrates its willingness to intervene, including
with the use of force.
We regret the politicization of the Geneva
International Discussions on security and stability
in the Transcaucasus, which led to the unjustified
cancellation of two consecutive meetings and a break
in the pace of the negotiation process. We believe that
such steps reflect attempts by our Western colleagues
to cause the confrontation to spread from Ukraine to
the South Caucasus and sacrifice the Geneva format
to geopolitics. Such dangerous behaviour calls for an
immediate response by the co-chairmanship of the
United Nations, the OSCE and the EU. For our part, we
reaffirm our commitment to the Geneva International
Discussions as a unique platform designed to ensure
ongoing direct dialogue between Tbilisi, Sokhumi and
Tskhinvali. The alternative to a negotiations vacuum is
the degradation of the situation on the ground.
Owing to the actions of the United States and
France, the OSCE Minsk Group has ceased its activities.
Meanwhile, the situation involving Nagorno-Karabakh,
including in the area of responsibility of the Russian
peacekeeping contingent, the Armenian-Azerbaijani
line of contact and the dialogue between officials in
Baku and Yerevan, continues to raise serious concerns.
We reaffirm the importance of strict compliance with
the entire 2020–2022 set of agreements among the
leaders of Russia, Armenia and Azerbaijan on the
normalization of Armenian-Azerbaijani relations. The
Russian Federation stands ready to provide Azerbaijan
and Armenia, which are close to us, with all the
necessary assistance both at the political level and on
the ground, with the participation of the commanders
of the Russian peacekeeping contingent. Unfortunately,
the current North Macedonian OSCE chairmanship has
yet to successfully create a unifying agenda and cannot
afford to adhere to status-neutral approaches. For
example, the Foreign Minister of Northern Macedonia
was hardly shy in taking part in a political spectacle
commemorating the anniversary of the staging in
Bucha, thereby grossly violating the mandate of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.
At the same time, the Chairperson-in-Office and the
secretariat of the organization remain shamefully silent
23-12652

04/05/2023

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

about the politically motivated persecution by the Kyiv
regime of the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church, in
exactly the same way they remained shamefully silent
with regard to the atrocities committed by the Maidan
authorities and the crimes by Ukrainian nationalists,
who burned people alive in the Trade Union House in
Odesa, exactly nine years ago. The tragedy is repeating
itself today, and the pressure by Ukrainian State
institutions and its security services on the Church and
their interference in the lives of religious communities
and freedom of religion are not being scrutinized,
despite Ukraine’s blatant violations of its international
legal commitments, including those undertaken under
the OSCE. We demand that the Chair-in-Office take
meaningful steps to protect religious freedom in Ukraine
in accordance with OSCE principles and commitments.
The short-sighted confrontational policy of the
Western alliance of States, led by the United States, is
not only provoking an acute crisis in the OSCE area,
but is also essentially forcing the organization itself
to make a critical choice: either it will take up the
crucial task of forming a sustainable European security
architecture based on the principle of indivisibility,
enshrined in many OSCE documents, including the
Charter for European Security of 1999, also known as
the Istanbul charter, and the Astana Commemorative
Declaration of 2010, or it will continue to do the bidding
of the West, which understands security as the limitless
expansion of the aggressive NATO alliance and the
widespread imposition of how the West conceives of
political, economic and human rights principles.
Nevertheless, we maintain our faith in the potential
of the OSCE and will not give up the attempts to hold a
dialogue on the Vienna platform. One only has to spend
a little time at the meetings of the OSCE Permanent
Council to observe the fundamental difference
between the hysterical, offensive statements of Western
delegations and the verified, factual reports of our
Vienna colleagues. We will continue to calmly convey
information on the real state of affairs — as the Bible
says, “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” The OSCE
still has a chance to play a role in bringing together
what are sometimes polarized and irreconcilable points
of view and developing a platform for dialogue and a
framework for peaceful coexistence, just as Soviet,
American and European negotiators did in the early to
mid-1970s. But for that it is essential not only to stop
demonizing one’s opponents but also to abandon a logic
of confrontation and zero-sum games.

S/PV.9316

As for the actual announced topic of our meeting
today, concerning the interaction between the two
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, we believe that cooperation
should be conducted in full transparency and
accountability to participating States. It should serve
the quest for unifying principles rather than promoting
confrontational attitudes. However, we want to point
out that the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council. It seems that some parties in Vienna may
have forgotten that in their enthusiasm for anti-Russian
projects. The sooner the OSCE returns to much-needed
calm and mutually respectful dialogue, the greater its
chances of fitting into the new world order. We would
like to believe that those in and around Vienna are fully
aware of that.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would also like to thank Foreign Minister Osmani
for his participation today and for North Macedonia’s
principled leadership at the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). His comments
about Ukraine were particularly pertinent. From the
civilians brutalized by Russia’s missiles in Uman
and other cities last Friday to the children Russia has
forcibly transferred and deported, the human cost of
Russia’s aggression is immeasurable and the damage
to Ukraine’s infrastructure massive. As Mr. Osmani
highlighted, the OSCE has been at the forefront of
the international community’s efforts to shine a light
on the actions of the Russian Federation’s military
forces in Ukraine through the superb fact-finding
and reporting resulting from repeated invocations of
the OSCE’s Moscow Mechanism by as many as 45
participating States.
The rapporteurs who prepared those reports are
professionals in their fields, scrupulous in documenting
findings of brutality and disregard for innocent lives.
The Moscow Mechanism rapporteurs have likewise
revealed the violence of the Belarusian regime’s efforts
to suppress dissent and the Kremlin’s crackdown on
all voices critical of its policies, as well as its efforts
to strangle free media. A Moscow Mechanism report
on the forcible transfer or deportation of Ukrainian
children to Ukrainian territory temporarily occupied
by Russian forces or to the Russian Federation itself is
being presented in Vienna today. A further report on
Belarus is in progress. We hope that everyone will read
those reports, given the grave human rights crisis in

23-1265217/18

S/PV.9316

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Belarus and the unconscionable actions of the Russian
Federation, which will inevitably have implications for
regional security.
We believe that regional organizations and their
cooperation with the United Nations are more important
than ever in helping to maintain international peace
and security. As the world’s largest regional security
organization, the OSCE’s close cooperation with the
United Nations is essential to ensuring that the Council
can deliver on its mandate for international peace and
security. The United States welcomes the cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE as they
work together to prevent any resurgence of violence
in post-conflict situations, including through the close
cooperation of OSCE field operations with United
Nations agencies and missions. One such example is
the OSCE mission in Kosovo, which is a partner of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo.
Despite Russia’s efforts to obstruct the OSCE and
sabotage its budget, the OSCE has continued to operate,
contributing to regional peace and security, including
with the donor-funded support programme for Ukraine
to replace the Special Monitoring Mission forced to
close by Russia.
The United States values the OSCE as a vehicle
for effective multilateralism and for promoting respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, arms
control, regional stability, post-conflict reconciliation,
confidence and security-building measures, economic
prosperity and sustainable environmental policies. We
hope that through continued cooperation with the OSCE
on shared agenda items such as those, the United Nations
and, by extension, the entire international community
can leverage strengths and realize lasting benefits.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Osmani to respond to the comments made
at this meeting.

18/18

04/05/2023

Mr. Osmani: Let me thank you once again,
Mr. President, for giving me an opportunity to
address the Security Council on North Macedonia’s
chairpersonship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has coincided
with the thirtieth anniversary of the establishment
of cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the OSCE. I would also like to thank
the representatives of the Security Council members
for their kind words of support. They represent the
wind at our back in boldly continuing to steward the
organization during this challenging time.
However, I would like to just briefly comment on
some of the remarks by the representative of the Russian
Federation regarding our non-status neutral position as
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE.
The OSCE is indeed a platform for dialogue among
non-like-minded countries. Our role as Chairperson-inOffice is to be an honest broker of that dialogue.
However, that dialogue takes place within the framework
established by the principles and commitments of the
organization, which we have voluntarily agreed to
uphold and obey. They are non-negotiable. Our role as
Chairperson-in-Office is to safeguard those principles
and commitments. We will therefore function as an
honest broker enabling a conducive atmosphere for
dialogue in order to achieve and uphold those principles
and commitments. Those commitments are related to
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
participating States of the OSCE, and to refraining
from the violation of borders and the use of force to
achieve political gains. That is how we will proceed
during our chairpersonship-in-office.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Osmani for the clarifications he provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-12652
