UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26633
25 October 1993
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH/FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council,
at its 3298th meeting, held on 25 October 1993, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "The question concerning Haiti":
"The Security Council reaffirms the necessity of full compliance with
the Governors Island Agreement. It condemns the acts of the military
authorities in Haiti, who continue to hamper the full implementation of the
Agreement, in particular by permitting the development of acts of violence
in violation of their obligations under the Agreement. It gives full
support to the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Dante Caputo, to put an end to the crisis and to ensure the
return, without delay, of democracy and the rule of law in Haiti.
"The Security Council, recalling points 7 and 8 of the Governors
Island Agreement concerning the departure of the Commander-in-Chief of the
Haitian Armed Forces and the appointment of a new Commander of the police
force, insists that these provisions be implemented without further delay.
"The Security Council reiterates its support for the legitimate
Government of Haiti and recalls that it holds the military authorities
responsible for the security of that Government and of the
parliamentarians. It also continues to hold the military authorities
responsible for the safety and security of all United Nations personnel in
Haiti.
"The Security Council warns that, should the Governors Island
Agreement not be fully implemented, it will consider imposing measures
additional to those imposed by resolutions 841 (1993), 873 (1993) and
875 (1993).
"The Security Council underlines the importance of the full
implementation of the measures contained in the above-mentioned resolutions
by all States, including nearby countries.
"The Council will continue to monitor closely the situation in Haiti
in the coming days."

----93-58049 (E)

251093
