United Nations

A/RES/69/113

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 140

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2014
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/637)]

69/113. United Nations pension system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/240 of 24 December 2012, section VII of its
resolution 68/247 A of 27 December 2013 and section VIII of its resolution
68/247 B of 9 April 2014,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
for 2014, 1 including the financial statements of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund for the year ended 31 December 2013, the audit opinion and report of
the Board of Auditors thereon, the information provided on the internal audits of the
Fund and the observations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and of
the Audit Committee, the report of the Secretary-General on the investments of the
Fund and measures taken to increase the diversification of the Fund2 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3
1.
Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
for 2014,1 in particular the actions taken by the Board as set out in chapter II.B of
the report;
2.
Endorses the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
Actuarial matters
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund meeting its target annual real rate of return of 3.5 per cent over the long term;
4.
Takes note of the results of the actuarial valuation of the Fund, which
revealed a deficit of 0.72 per cent of pensionable remuneration as at 31 December
2013, which was a significant improvement over the deficit of 1.87 per cent of
pensionable remuneration revealed by the prior actuarial valuation as at
31 December 2011;
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/69/9).
A/C.5/69/2.
3
A/69/528.
2

14-66927 (E)

*1466927*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/113

United Nations pension system

5.
Welcomes the improvement in the actuarial position of the Fund, which
represents a reversal of the downward trend observed since 1999, and in this regard
emphasizes the need to ensure the sustainability of these gains;
Financial statements of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and report
of the Board of Auditors
6.
Notes that the Board of Auditors issued an unqualified audit opinion on
the financial statements of the Fund for the year ended 31 December 2013;
7.
Also notes the observation of the Board of Auditors that the adoption of
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards in 2012 had enhanced the
quality of the financial statements of the Fund;
8.
Stresses the need for the Fund to address all the weaknesses identified by
the Board of Auditors in relation to financial management and financial statement
disclosure, investment management, information system management and other
administrative processes;
Amendments to the Regulations and Administrative Rules of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund
9.
Approves the amendment to article 4 of the Regulations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, as set out in annex XI to the report of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, in order to establish clear authority and reference
to the financial rules of the Fund;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the Board promulgating financial rules
that will govern the financial management of the Fund, and in this regard looks
forward to receiving further information in the next report of the Board;
11. Takes note of paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
decides not to approve the proposed amendment to article 14 as set out in annex XI
to the report of the Board;
12. Encourages the Audit Committee of the Fund to continue to work closely
with the Board of Auditors in order to address issues of mutual interest;
13. Approves the technical changes in the Regulations of the Fund, as set out
in annex XI to the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, in
accordance with past decisions and amendments adopted by the Board and the
General Assembly;
14. Takes note of the amendments to the Administrative Rules of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, as set out in annex XII to the report of the Board,
to refine the Administrative Rules and align them with the Regulations of the Fund;
Pension adjustment system
15. Approves the amendment regarding the special adjustment for small
pensions, as set out in annex XIII to the report of the Board, to reflect the
10 per cent adjustment to small pension threshold amounts for separations on or
after 1 April 2016;
16. Concurs with the recommendation of the Board that the following
assessments be discontinued, considering the comments of the Committee of
Actuaries that the assessments were consistent with the initial estimates of the
consulting actuary and were subsumed in the overall cost of the two-track feature,
2/4

United Nations pension system

A/RES/69/113

which would continue to be monitored in conjunction with each actuarial valuation:
(a) assessment of the costs of the April 1992 modification of the cost-of-living
differential factors as applicable to the Professional and higher categories,
(b) assessment of actual savings from the reduction of the 120 per cent cap provision
to 110 per cent, effective for separations on 1 July 1995 or later and (c) assessment
of the costs and/or savings of the minimum guarantee at 80 per cent of the United
States dollar track amount;
Other matters
17. Concurs, in accordance with article 13 of the Regulations of the Fund
and with a view to securing the continuity of pension rights, with the new transfer
agreements of the Fund with the European Organization for the Exploitation of
Meteorological Satellites, the European Union Satellite Centre and the European
Union Institute for Security Studies, as approved by the Board and set out in
annex XIV to its report, which will become effective 1 January 2015;
18. Notes that the transfer agreement of the Fund with the African
Development Bank has been withdrawn, because the Bank has not signed the
approved agreement;
19. Recalls paragraph 10 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
welcomes the initiative taken by the High-level Committee on Management to
establish a working group on after-service health insurance and looks forward to
receiving information on its findings at the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, pursuant to Assembly resolution 68/244 of 27 December 2013;
20. Also recalls paragraph 13 of section VII of resolution 68/247 A and
paragraph 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Board to
inform the General Assembly of the outcome of the revision of the memorandum of
understanding between the Office of Human Resources Management of the
Secretariat and the Fund in the context of its next report to the Assembly;
21. Notes with concern the observation of the Board of Auditors regarding
performance evaluations not having been completed for Fund staff for the cycle
ended 31 March 2013, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue
his effort to ensure that the performance of all staff members of the Fund is properly
evaluated in a timely manner;
Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
22. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the investments of
the Fund and measures taken to increase the diversification of the Fund2 and the
observations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board as set out in its report;
23.

Reaffirms its resolution 33/121 B of 19 December 1978;

24. Notes the overall improved investment performance of the Fund for the
year ended 31 December 2013 as compared with its performance benchmarks for
the same period in 2012, and commends its success in meeting its investment
objectives;
25. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this
regard commends the Fund for its success in meeting its long-term investment
objectives over the past 10, 15, 20, 25 and 50 years;
26. Emphasizes the importance of the policy of the Fund of broad
diversification of its investments by currency, type of asset class and geographical
3/4

A/RES/69/113

United Nations pension system

area as a reliable method of improving the risk-return profile of its portfolio over
long periods of time;
27. Requests the Secretary-General, as fiduciary for the investment of the
assets of the Fund, to continue to diversify its investments between developed,
developing and emerging markets, wherever this serves the interests of the
participants and the beneficiaries of the Fund, and also requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that decisions concerning the investments of the Fund in any
country are implemented prudently, taking fully into account the four main criteria
for investment, namely, safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility, under
volatile market conditions;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General, as fiduciary for the investment of the
assets of the Fund, to continue to explore prospects in all markets, taking into
account risk-return profiles and always applying sound risk management techniques,
and taking fully into account the four main criteria for investments of the Fund;
29. Recognizes the importance of the use of in-house expertise, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all measures to ensure that
the costs for non-discretionary advisory fees are reduced and to report thereon in the
context of future reports.
68th plenary meeting
10 December 2014

4/4
