S/PRST/2001/32

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4404th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 October 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
East Timor”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s report of 18
October 2001 (S/2001/983 and Corr.1).
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in East Timor and to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) for their efforts in
developing detailed plans for the future United Nations presence in East Timor.
“The Security Council welcomes the political progress achieved to date
towards establishing an independent East Timorese state and endorses the
recommendation by the Constituent Assembly that independence be declared
on 20 May 2002.
“The Security Council recalls resolutions 1272 (1999) of 25 October
1999 and 1338 (2001) of 31 January 2001 and other relevant resolutions. It
agrees with the Secretary-General’s assessment that premature withdrawal of
the international presence could have a destabilizing effect in a number of
crucial areas. It further agrees with the Secretary-General’s assessment that the
United Nations should remain engaged in East Timor to protect the major
achievements so far realized by UNTAET, to build upon those achievements in
cooperation with other actors, and to assist the East Timorese government in
ensuring security and stability.
“The Security Council takes note of the Secretary-General’s observation
that the mandate of UNTAET should be extended until independence and
endorses his plans for adjusting the size and configuration of UNTAET in the
months prior to independence.
“The
Security
Council
endorses
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations for a continued and appropriately reduced United Nations
integrated mission in the post-independence period, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue planning and preparation for this mission, in consultation
with the East Timorese people, and to submit further and more detailed
recommendations to the Council. The Council agrees that the successor
mission would be headed by a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
01-61401 (E) 311001

*0161401*

S/PRST/2001/32

and comprise of a military component, a civilian police component and a
civilian component, including experts who would provide crucial assistance to
the emergent East Timorese administration. The Council notes that a core
number of civilian positions will be critical to the stability of the independent
East Timorese government and agrees that these limited positions will require
assessed funding for a period of between six months and two years after
independence. The Council agrees that the new mission should be based on the
premise that operational responsibilities should be devolved to the East
Timorese authorities as soon as this is feasible, and it supports a continuing
process of assessment and downsizing over a period of two years, starting from
independence. In this regard, the Council recognizes the essential role of the
General Assembly in peace-building and expresses its intention to continue
planning for peace-building in close cooperation with the General Assembly.
The Council acknowledges the importance of a strong focus on justice and
human rights in the successor mission and, where appropriate, in other
assistance provided to East Timor.
“The Security Council agrees with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that it will be vital that the United Nations contribution is supplemented by
multilateral and bilateral arrangements. The Council looks forward to
receiving information on the financial implications of the follow-on mission
and a detailed assessment of shared responsibilities among the principal
interacting players i.e. the United Nations system, international financial
institutions, regional mechanisms and national donors in their efforts to assist
East Timor in its unprecedented transition to self-government.”

2
