United Nations

S/PV.6097

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6097th meeting
Monday, 23 March 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Ms. Pierce
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/149)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27620 (E)

*0927620*

S/PV.6097

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/149)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia in which he requests that
the President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic
of Serbia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni.
It is so decided.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Hyseni to take a seat
at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and

2

Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Zannier to take a seat
at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them document S/2009/149, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Zannier: The report that the Council has
before it today (S/2009/149) details the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) during the period from 1 November
2008 to 9 March 2009. This has been a very dynamic
period for UNMIK and for Kosovo, one rife with
challenges and milestones. In general, I am pleased to
be able to report to the Council that the situation in
Kosovo remained substantially stable in spite of the
potential for volatility presented by the developments
of the past quarter.
Nevertheless, ethnic tensions persist at several
traditional flashpoints, particularly in and around
northern Mitrovica, and the past few weeks have seen
an alarming escalation of incidents involving the use of
firearms and explosive devices. Fortunately, those
incidents have so far only resulted in property damage,
but there is reason for serious concern. While UNMIK
has continued its efforts to mediate between the
communities, local community leaders need to make
greater efforts to defuse tensions and promote
coexistence and reconciliation.
The last time I was before this Council, on
26 November (6025th meeting), the Council issued a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44) welcoming
the
Secretary-General’s
24
November
report
(S/2008/692), which envisaged the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) throughout Kosovo under a status-neutral
United Nations umbrella; the reconfiguration of

09-27620

S/PV.6097

UNMIK’s rule of law functions and continuing
consultations with all relevant parties on technical
issues of importance for the peaceful coexistence of
Kosovo’s communities. Accordingly, EULEX assumed
full operational responsibility in the rule of law area on
9 December, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and under the overall authority and within the
status-neutral framework of the United Nations.
Thanks to the close cooperation with UNMIK and
EULEX staff, the deployment of EULEX police
throughout Kosovo and the concomitant stand-down of
UNMIK police was completed smoothly and efficiently
so as to avoid potential conflicts of competencies. On
9 December, as EULEX police deployed throughout
Kosovo, they started to exercise their policing
functions. EULEX judges, prosecutors and other
justice
personnel
also
took
on
operational
responsibilities as of the same date.
As a result of the deployment of EULEX,
UNMIK was able to step up its reconfiguration and
adjust its structure and profile to allow for an efficient
use of resources in the implementation of its mandate
in the light of the changed circumstances on the
ground. With EULEX having assumed responsibility
for the police and justice functions under resolution
1244 (1999), UNMIK will now be able to effectively
carry out its reconfigured functions with a much lighter
footprint.
Out of a total of 1,288 UNMIK police personnel
on the ground at the beginning of December, 49
UNMIK police officers currently remain in Kosovo,
handling liaison and external representation functions.
There are no longer UNMIK judges or prosecutors
exercising functions in Kosovo courts. However,
UNMIK staff remains actively involved in supporting
the talks regarding the Mitrovica courthouse, which
currently continues to operate on a limited basis with
EULEX international judges and prosecutors.
As anticipated in the November report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/692), a central element of
the reconfigured UNMIK remains the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission
in Kosovo. After the downsizing of UNMIK in the
field, the OSCE, through its extensive field presence,
assumed the responsibility for comprehensive
monitoring throughout Kosovo. In particular, the
OSCE’s role in building capacities of local institutions
is crucial in contributing to the effective protection of

09-27620

all people living in Kosovo and thus to fostering
Kosovo’s multi-ethnic character.
I am pleased to report that UNMIK has succeeded
in effecting the reconfiguration of its rule of law
elements as envisioned in the Secretary-General’s
November report. Furthermore, following the
assumption of operational responsibilities in the rule of
law area by EULEX acting under resolution 1244
(1999), by 1 July 2009, UNMIK will have refocused its
staff on the tasks set out in the Secretary-General’s
12 June report (S/2008/354).
I owe a special debt of gratitude to all of
UNMIK’s staff — those who will continue to work for
UNMIK after the 30 June and, in particular, those
whose tenure with UNMIK has ended or will end
during the next three months — for the dedication,
professionalism
and
commitment
they
have
demonstrated during their tenure with UNMIK.
A centrepiece of UNMIK’s reconfigured role, in
line with the Secretary-General’s report on Kosovo,
has consisted of consultations with the various
stakeholders on matters affecting the lives of all of
Kosovo’s communities.
For instance, during the past three months,
UNMIK representatives have met formally and
informally with relevant stakeholders to discuss
cultural and religious heritage issues. These meetings
revealed that, while Pristina and Belgrade have
different understandings of the nature of the
mechanisms that should serve to protect and preserve
the cultural heritage and patrimony of the Serbian
Orthodox Church in Kosovo, their objectives largely
coincide.
UNMIK has also engaged, together with EULEX,
in further technical consultations with other
stakeholders on issues related to the functioning of the
justice system in northern Kosovo. Opportunities for
reintroducing local judges in court proceedings have
been identified, beginning, in the first instance, with
judges who had been appointed by UNMIK. Positive
practical steps have also been registered in the area of
policing.
However, while progress is continuing on many
fronts, a number of challenges remain.
The process of return of internally displaced
persons saw a very sharp decline in the number of
voluntary returns by members of minority communities

3

S/PV.6097

in 2008, with only 664 persons belonging to minority
communities returning to Kosovo last year. While the
international community has been fully supportive of
the returns process, the role of authorities in Pristina
and Belgrade in this respect remains key.
There are still too many missing persons from the
conflict. Notwithstanding our continuing efforts, the
pace of identifications has considerably slowed over
the past few years, from a high of 722 cases in 2005 to
43 cases last year and just one missing person case
closed so far this year. Clearly, much more must be
done. The Pristina-Belgrade technical dialogue
working group on missing persons, chaired by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, is one of the
very few forums where Pristina’s and Belgrade’s
experts meet regularly face to face in an effort to move
a painful and difficult issue forward. However,
cooperation must improve, and politics should be put
aside with the common goal of fulfilling the right of
the families of all missing persons to know the fate of
their loved ones.
The issue of electric power supply continues to
plague the everyday lives of all of Kosovo’s residents.
The problem is mainly due to non-payment by many
consumers, including wholesale non-payment by the
Kosovo Serb community. Recently, in an effort to
induce payment, the Kosovo Energy Corporation
(KEK) has allowed breakdowns in the electric power
supply to go unrepaired for periods of a week or more.
Although this policy is affecting all ethnic groups to
different degrees, the issue has been politicized,
leading to demonstrations by angry residents of
Kosovo Serb-inhabited villages, who have recently
clashed with the Kosovo Police when protesters tried
to block traffic on main thoroughfares. UNMIK and
OSCE staff personnel have actively engaged with
village leaders, with municipal officials and with KEK
to calm the situation and promote dialogue, but a
viable and sustainable solution must be found. For this
purpose, the Pristina-Belgrade technical dialogue
working group on energy, which has largely been
dormant for the past two years, should re-engage.
Over the past few weeks, a number of Belgrade
officials have been denied entry into Kosovo by the
Kosovo authorities. This is an issue that, if left
unresolved, is bound to unnecessarily increase
tensions. Constructive engagement by all is necessary
to address and resolve this matter without delay.

4

When I first addressed the Security Council in
July 2008 (see S/PV.5944), one month after assuming
my duties as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for UNMIK, I stated my fervent hope that the
path we had taken to ensure the continued effectiveness
of UNMIK would allow the United Nations to protect
its legacy in Kosovo while adapting to the changing
needs on the ground in order to ensure conditions for a
peaceful and normal life for all the inhabitants of
Kosovo, as required by UNMIK’s mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999). I am satisfied that UNMIK has
managed to recalibrate its structure and profile in line
with the new challenges posed by the situation in
Kosovo and pleased by the progress that has been made
towards advancing the European perspective of the
Western Balkans with the deployment of EULEX.
Yet, much remains to be done. The situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively peaceful during the
past eight months and, while both Pristina and
Belgrade have made noteworthy attempts to maintain
the peace in the face of potentially destabilizing
situations, both have also stopped short of where we
need to be in order to feel confident that Kosovo is
well and truly launched on the path of lasting peace
and prosperity. That goal will only be reached if both
Pristina and Belgrade look first of all to the interests of
all of Kosovo’s communities, and beyond their own
legitimate larger political considerations. For its part,
counting on the continued support of the Council,
UNMIK will carry on working together with Belgrade
and Pristina, and with the international community, to
ensure that this goal is reached.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia.
President Tadić (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting of the
Security Council to once again debate the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. I also pleased to acknowledge
the presence here of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier, with whom I
recently had a productive meeting in Belgrade.
Tomorrow, 24 March, will be the tenth
anniversary of the start of NATO’s bombing of my
country. I would like to recall that that tragic event,
which lasted a full 78 days, was not undertaken with

09-27620

S/PV.6097

the approval of this body. During a three-month period
in which cities and villages were bombed every day,
2,500 civilians were killed, including 89 children, and
12,500 more were injured. The number of victims does
not include those who subsequently succumbed to
leukemia and other deadly diseases caused by the
depleted-uranium-coated bombs that were dropped on
my country.
As a result of 2,300 air strikes throughout Serbia,
148 residential buildings and 62 bridges were
destroyed, while 300 schools, hospitals and other
public buildings were damaged, as were 176 cultural
heritage sites. One third of the country’s electrical
capacity was destroyed, as were two major oil
refineries. According to studies conducted by
economists, the direct damage to my nation’s economy
has been estimated to be approximately $30 billion; the
indirect damage was much greater.
We were collectively accused, and then
collectively bombed for, as it was then claimed, the
expulsion of 800,000 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo
and Metohija. A result of that tragic war, which
produced an awful catalogue of casualties among the
sides and whose end was marked by the establishment
of an international administration, was the exodus from
the province of more than 200,000 ethnic Serbs and
Roma. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s report
(S/2009/149) includes the sad observation that even
today, 10 years later, those people cannot return to their
homes.
I would like to underline one further counterintuitive fact. Serbs were punished 10 years ago with
bombs, but 10 years later, in the wake of the mass
expulsion of Serbs and the firebombing of their homes
and holy sites, Kosovo Albanians have been rewarded
by having their illegal declaration of independence
recognized by more than 50 countries.
Just as for Serbia the lesson of the tragic military
campaign of 1999 is that never again should a situation
be created in which its citizens are punished and killed,
so must the lesson for the international community be
that innocent civilians should never have to pay for a
wrongful policy with their lives.
The Republic of Serbia condemns every war
crime as a matter of principle and affirms that all
accused must be brought to justice. Our principled
position is that every indictee is an individual with a
particular name and surname and that the doctrine of

09-27620

collective responsibility of nations or States cannot
legitimately exist. The recent decisions by the Hague
Tribunal against particular individuals in the Kosovo
case — involving four former officials of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and one Serbian official —
demonstrate that the State’s collective responsibility, or
that of its citizens, does not exist.
It is possible to debate whether the sentences
were too harsh, especially in the light of the not-guilty
verdict handed down in the case of a leader of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, Ramoush Haradinaj. I note
that, according to a statement by the then Prosecutor of
the Tribunal, witnesses were not only intimidated but
also even physically liquidated. However, one thing is
certain: specific individuals were convicted for specific
crimes. That is precisely the reason why Serbia will
continue to fully cooperate with the Hague Tribunal,
and why we will keep doing everything in our power to
arrest and bring before the Court the two remaining
indictees at large, namely, Goran Hadzic and Ratko
Mladic.
Today, nine years after the fall of Milosevic,
Serbia is a modern European democracy that poses no
threat to anyone. The country of which I am President
has repeated time and again that joining the European
Union is its most important strategic goal. We will
continue to be dedicated, as a matter of principle, to
resolving outstanding problems exclusively through
peaceful dialogue and without recourse to force.
The attempt at secession by ethnic Albanian
authorities of our southern province of Kosovo and
Metohija that took place on 17 February 2008, nine
years after the bombing of Serbia, is a direct violation
of the United Nations Charter, the Helsinki Final Act
and resolution 1244 (1999). Pristina’s unilateral and
illegal declaration of independence represents an
attempt to forcibly partition a Member State of the
United Nations, against its will, and without the
consent of the Security Council. Unfortunately, that
was supported by a certain number of countries,
primarily because of the constant threat of violence if
Kosovo’s ethnic Albanian community’s secessionist
demands were not met.
Even today, Serbs in Kosovo have no security,
freedom of movement, rule of law, electricity or water.
In short, respect for the basic norms of civilization is
denied to them. That is why I would like to underline
my disagreement with the optimistic views expressed

5

S/PV.6097

in the report. The aggression committed against the
Serbian residents of the village of Silovo is a case in
point. The village was without power for weeks in the
middle of winter because of a condition set by
authorities in Pristina for the signing of written
contracts that would have meant indirect recognition
on the part of the residents of the illegal construct
known as the Republic of Kosovo. That illustrates how
Serbs are the most endangered community in all of
civilized Europe.
Let us recall that, in the March 2004 pogrom,
more than 50,000 ethnic Albanian extremists
participated in an organized campaign of violence in
which 19 were killed, 950 were injured and more than
4,000 Serbs were expelled. Additionally, more than 900
buildings were destroyed and 35 Christian churches
and monasteries set ablaze, shelled or otherwise
destroyed. Many of those structures dated to the
fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Five years later, not
a single individual remains behind bars for the
organized burning down of a church in Kosovo.
That is why I have called on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) to take the necessary measures to
ensure that justice is done for every resident of Kosovo
and Metohija, irrespective of ethnicity or religious
affiliation. Every crime, especially hate crimes, must
be thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. Those
accused must be tried before a just and impartial court.
We expect the United Nations and European Union
peacekeeping missions to establish the rule of law and
provide the preconditions for a peaceful life. They
must prevent the release of perpetrators as was recently
done in the case of one who had been sentenced by
UNMIK’s court to a 40-year sentence for the terrorist
attack of booby-trapping a bus, in which nine Serbs
lost their lives.
I would now like to refer to some of the attacks
on Kosovo Serbs that have taken place in the past
month. Two houses, in which lived returnees to the
village of Drsnik, near Klina, were burned to the
ground on 14 March. On the same day, shots were fired
at the home of Dragoljub Budzevic in the village of
Ljug, near Istok. Mr. Budzevic had returned to his
village in Kosovo three years ago, together with 45
other Serbs. Before their return, they had lived as
internally displaced persons in other parts of Serbia
since their expulsion in the summer of 1999. In another

6

part of Kosovo, the village of Silovo, 14 Kosovo Serbs
were injured due to the excessive use of force by ethnic
Albanian police.
It is obvious to everyone today that, 13 months
after the illegal unilateral declaration of independence,
Kosovo is no State. There is minimal protection of
human rights, as demonstrated by the small number of
Kosovo Serbs and other non-Albanian who have
returned to the province. Serbia, along with a number
of European Union member States, faces tremendous
problems arising out of the activities of the ethnic
Albanian mafia in Kosovo, which specializes in the
trafficking of narcotics, human beings and weapons.
We want to see life return to normal in our
southern province. I am convinced that Albanians and
Serbs can live side by side. That is why the United
Nations and EULEX have to work hard to discharge
the mandate in full.
Here and on this occasion, I would like to
underline that it is of exceptional importance for
UNMIK and EULEX to ensure freedom of movement
throughout Kosovo for the democratically chosen
officials of the Republic of Serbia. They must not be
turned back at the Administrative Boundary Line by
the Pristina authorities. Such provocations can only
serve to deeply distress the Serbian population of the
province.
The legal aspect of the Kosovo case, as we all
know, finds itself before the International Court of
Justice. The principal judicial organ of the United
Nations will provide an advisory opinion on the
following question: Is the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Provisional Institutions of Selfgovernment of Kosovo in accordance with
international law?
I believe that all United Nations Member States
should respect the fact that the International Court of
Justice will decide the issue and that no one should in
any way prejudge its deliberations. Therefore, we
expect no encouragement for further recognitions. I
call on all United Nations Member States that have not
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence
to stay the course while the Court conducts its work.
The Republic of Serbia supports new negotiations
on Kosovo’s future status. That is the only way to find
a just compromise and a mutually acceptable solution.
Serbia will never recognize the independence of

09-27620

S/PV.6097

Kosovo, either directly or indirectly, and we will
continue the diplomatic, legal and peaceful defence of
our integrity. We are persuaded that the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice will be
immensely useful for the international system in its
entirety, because we believe that its answer to the
question posed by the General Assembly will prevent
the Kosovo issue from serving as a deeply dangerous
precedent.
Serbia will remain a good-faith partner to the
international community in the interim administration
of our southern province. The role of the European
Union is of great significance. Now, as a result of the
fact that the Security Council has welcomed the
November
report
of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2008/692), in which the mandate of EULEX is
clearly defined as fully respecting resolution 1244
(1999) and operating in a strictly status-neutral manner
under the auspices of the United Nations, our
cooperative partnership with EULEX and UNMIK
should continue in order to implement the provisions
of the November report, namely, the six points that
provide for the continuation of the dialogue with
Belgrade.
Serbia has and will continue to contribute
constructively and seriously to finding mechanisms to
fully implement the six points in the context of the
negotiating process. We have made concrete proposals
on the issues of the judiciary and the safeguarding of
Serbian patrimony in Kosovo. We remain open to
further talks with the aim of implementing the six
points, in line with resolution 1244 (1999).
What has always been a crucial condition for our
acceptance of reconfiguration was a clear and binding
commitment by the European Union, confirmed by the
Security Council, to be fully status-neutral and to
completely anchor its presence in Kosovo under the
authority of the United Nations, with full respect for
resolution 1244 (1999).
I am pleased that those reasonable conditions
have been met. The precisely formulated text of the
November 2008 report, welcomed by the Security
Council and reaffirmed in the report (S/2009/149)
before the Council today, defines the status-neutrality
of EULEX’s engagement, which is a guarantee that no
part of its mandate can be devoted to the
implementation of the Ahtisaari plan for Kosovo’s
independence, which was rejected by the Republic of

09-27620

Serbia and was not endorsed by the Security Council,
in the words of a previous report. However, it is of
great significance that the implementation of the six
points, as well as the full deployment of EULEX, shall
be put into operation, notwithstanding the existence of
some problems, and that this shall be done in
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, most
importantly with the Republic of Serbia.
I call on the authorities in Pristina not to obstruct
the will of the international community. The Republic
of Serbia is ready to continue to cooperate with
EULEX in our southern province, because it has been
confirmed by the United Nations that EULEX is
welcome in Kosovo and Metohija.
I would like to repeat that it is of great
significance for us that UNMIK continue its mission
and mandate and remain fully and ably present on the
ground throughout Kosovo and that its budget not be
reduced. Without UNMIK, it would not be possible to
fulfil the requirements of either resolution 1244 (1999)
or of the Secretary-General’s six-point plan. I would
like to underscore UNMIK’s duty to be part of the
Pristina delegation at all international and regional
meetings, where it must be identified and heard under
the name UNMIK/Kosovo. Serbia will continue to
contribute to such cooperation.
I conclude by quoting from the SecretaryGeneral’s report: UNMIK must “continue to play a
crucial role in maintaining peace and stability on the
ground” (S/2009/149, para. 35). Serbia will remain a
factor for peace and stability, a partner to the
international community in seeking a sustainable
solution and a country that has its future in the
European Union.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
President Tadić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: As always, it is an honour to speak
before the Council about my country’s achievements.
The Republic of Kosovo has continued its steady
progress in all areas since my last statement to the
Security Council, in November 2008 (see S/PV.6025).
Last month, on 17 February, the people of
Kosovo celebrated peacefully and in a very dignified
manner the first anniversary of their country’s
independence. In spite of a grave provocation and
challenge to the security situation, incited by a

7

S/PV.6097

considerable number of members of the parliament of
the Republic of Serbia, who joined some kind of
session in Zveçan, the situation remained peaceful and
calm during our national day festivities.
Independence day was also an appropriate
occasion to look back and to take stock of
achievements, progress, key events and developments
in Kosovo during one year of its independence. And its
achievements are huge. Recognition of Kosovo as an
independent and sovereign State has continued. Since
my last Security Council address, another four
countries around the world have recognized the
independence of my country. I wish to extend our
profound thanks and appreciation to the peoples and
Governments of Panama, Micronesia, Maldives and
Palau for supporting the right of the people of Kosovo
to freedom and independence.
Internally, since the last Security Council debate
on this subject, Kosovo has seen a number of very
positive developments. Reconfiguration of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has continued, and the European Union’s
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) deployed
throughout the Republic of Kosovo on 9 December. We
greatly welcomed the deployment of EULEX. As
EULEX achieves full operational capability, for very
practical and pragmatic reasons we request the
conclusion of the mission and the mandate of UNMIK.
Deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo is in
accordance with the mandate that derives from the
Kosovo independence declaration, the Ahtisaari
package, the constitution of the Republic of Kosovo,
the laws of the Republic of Kosovo, the European
Union joint action plan of 4 February 2008 and the
invitations of the President of 17 February and
8 August.
Kosovo has also continued its steady progress on
other fronts.
In its sessions held on 15 and 16 December, the
parliament of Kosovo adopted a number of important
laws, including the laws on the Constitutional Court,
the Foreign Service and the Consular Service of
Diplomatic and Consular Missions of the Republic of
Kosovo. In addition to the first already functional
embassies, the establishment of another 12 diplomatic
missions and nine consular missions of the Republic is
well under way.

8

State institution-building based on European
standards has continued with the launching of the
Kosovo Security Force in January. With the help of
NATO, we are developing our civilian-controlled
Security Force. The Kosovo Security Force is of great
benefit to our neighbours as well as to our country. It
will be a democratically controlled, multi-ethnic,
apolitical, NATO-interoperable force focused primarily
on emergency response and generally on activities to
promote development and regional stability.
Two other very important institutions of the
Republic were launched in February. The Kosovo
Security Council was established, chaired by the Prime
Minister, and the Director of the Kosovo intelligence
service was appointed. The Government of the
Republic of Kosovo has been working around the clock
to address the many issues of the utmost importance to
our country, especially in the areas of the economy,
justice and security, as well as in the fight against
crime, corruption and cross-border criminal activity.
The Government is careful in managing the
financial assistance that many nations have given to
Kosovo. Substantial improvements in the school and
road infrastructure are obvious. Huge progress has
been achieved in other areas as well. Our Government
has continued to seek ways to improve conditions in
minority-community areas, especially in Serb-majority
areas.
I have to say, however, that the Republic of
Serbia has not been at all helpful in that regard, as it
has continued to encourage and support the illegal and
criminal structures in the north of Kosovo. Serbia is
working actively to prevent Serb citizens of Kosovo
from cooperating with institutions that are seeking to
protect their rights and to help them solve their
problems and improve their lives. The Serbian
Government supports illegal parallel structures that
exploit our Serb citizens but never deliver appropriate
assistance or any solutions to their problems.
The situation in the north remains an issue of the
utmost concern. Lawlessness, with evident support of
the leadership in Belgrade, has turned that part of
Kosovo into a safe haven for all kinds of criminal and
illegal economic activities. The institutions of the
Republic of Kosovo are committed to cooperating and
working very closely with the International Civilian
Office and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) to restore law and order in the north

09-27620

S/PV.6097

and to improve the situation and living conditions in
Serb-majority areas.
The Republic of Kosovo has made cooperation
with all of its neighbours a high priority. Belgrade is
trying to impede our cooperation with neighbours and
the international community by blocking our
participation in regional and wider international
bodies. Belgrade is blocking our exports to Serbia. Our
Government has refrained from reciprocal measures,
which would only hurt people and businesses on both
sides. We hope that the Republic of Serbia will
appreciate the necessity of joining the efforts of other
nations in the Western Balkans to establish an
environment of cooperation and understanding in the
region, including by normalizing relations with the
Republic of Kosovo. My Government stands ready to
engage in talks with Serbia, as two independent and
sovereign States, on a wide range of issues of mutual
interest. Dialogue would help to ease tensions and
normalize relations between our two countries.
In the new Kosovo, there will be no room for
hatred and violence. Kosovo’s institutions are
committed to building a multi-ethnic democracy at
peace with its neighbours and contributing to regional
and global cooperation and stability.
We are committed also to pursuing the goal of
full membership in the European Union (EU) as soon
as feasible and are implementing the reforms required.
The
European
Commission’s
conclusion
of
5 November 2008 that Kosovo has a clear European
perspective in line with the rest of the Western Balkans
and that a feasibility study will be presented to advance
Kosovo’s EU perspective is an encouragement to us to
intensify our efforts to meet all necessary
requirements. The future of all nations of the Western
Balkans lies in European integration, and Kosovo
intends to pursue that goal very vigorously.
In attaining all the objectives that I have
mentioned, the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo
will continue their close cooperation with the European
Union, the United States and NATO. Close cooperation
with our international partners is indispensable as we
implement the Ahtisaari plan and as we work to build a
multi-ethnic Kosovo based on democratic values and
the highest international standards.
In conclusion, let me emphasize Kosovo’s
commitment to become a contributing member of the
international community. The Republic of Kosovo

09-27620

looks forward to working with all members of the
Security Council to promote the shared goals of
international peace and safety. Once again, I wish to
thank the Council for the opportunity to present the
views of the Republic of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Boris Tadić, President of
the Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kosovo, for their presence. We listened very
attentively to both of them. I should also like to
commend the activities of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and
his team, who have effectively and pragmatically
implemented the reconfiguration of the international
presence decided upon by the Secretary-General with
the support of the Security Council.
Last month, Kosovo celebrated the first
anniversary of its declaration of independence. Today’s
Security Council meeting is the occasion for a first
assessment, which we regard as mostly positive. As we
had hoped, independence has helped to ease tensions
within Kosovo and in the Balkans, and Kosovo’s new
authorities have displayed responsibility and honoured
their commitments. The establishment of a constitution
that conforms to European standards and values and
the adoption of a law promoting the participation of
minorities are both important steps towards a rule of
law that serves all communities, with the support of,
inter alia, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). The increasing number of States,
including States of the region, that have recognized
Kosovo are contributing to the new State’s emergence
on the international scene and to the stability of the
Balkans. This first anniversary attests to the path
traversed by Kosovo and the region; it should also be
an encouragement to continue. The building of the rule
of law must continue.
The reorganization of the international presence
is being carried out in favourable conditions. The
European Union is providing essential support with the
deployment of the EULEX mission, which is assisting
in the establishment of institutions and the rule of law
in Kosovo. EULEX is operating within the framework

9

S/PV.6097

of resolution 1244 (1999) under overall United Nations
authority. Through the deployment of EULEX and the
appointment of a Special Representative, the European
Union is seeking to contribute to the building of a
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. Protecting
minorities’ rights is a priority for EULEX, which will
endeavour to fully implement the agreements signed by
Kosovar authorities in this area.
As EULEX has been deployed, the inhabitants of
Kosovo progressively realized that, in spite of the
negative propaganda of some extremist groups, the
European Mission’s efforts were benefiting the entire
population and every community. However, we have
noted with concern the recent attacks against EULEX,
which seem to be perpetrated by individuals with ties
to criminal networks seeking to preserve the conditions
that enable them to act with impunity.
The Secretary-General believed that the
reconfiguration of the international presence should be
included in the dialogue involving all concerned
parties. This dialogue is essential to ensuring the
stability of Kosovo and the region. That is why, over
recent months, the European Union has pursued and
intensified the dialogue, addressing first of all, of
course, the Kosovo authorities and communities, as
well as neighbouring countries.
Serbia is an essential stakeholder among those
countries, and its cooperation is indispensable to the
success of EULEX. It is in this spirit that the EULEX
Head of Mission, Mr. De Kermabon, has just arrived in
Belgrade. We welcome the fact that he thus has an
opportunity to seek out practical solutions to the
concrete problems that arise, for example, in terms of
customs and legal cooperation.
We have taken note of the positions expressed by
President Tadić, and I would note above all his strong
reaffirmation of the will of the Serbian Government to
join the European Union, which would be an important
factor in stabilizing the entire Balkan region. By
supporting the initiatives of the European Union to
contribute to the peace and stability of the region, the
Serbian authorities are participating in the efforts to
laying the groundwork for a shared European future for
the western Balkans.
We also listened closely to Mr. Hyseni. The rule
of law, the wish to build a multi-ethnic State that
respects minorities, the desire to have friendly relations
with Kosovo’s neighbours and the pro-European

10

commitment of the Kosovo authorities are major
commitments that we should welcome.
Beyond the persistent differences of opinion
expressed by President Tadić and Minister Hyseni, we
note with satisfaction their common wish to preserve
stability in the region and safeguard the conditions
necessary to a shared future within Europe. We
therefore encourage Belgrade and Pristina to renew
direct dialogue as soon as possible.
The European Union is fully conscious of its
responsibilities in overcoming the obstacles on the path
towards a stable and prosperous future for the western
Balkans. It is in this spirit that we will strive for
progress in the coming months on the path of a shared
future for the Serb and Kosovar people in the European
Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We appreciate the
presence of President Boris Tadić of Serbia and thank
him for his speech. We are also very grateful for the
opportunity to listen to the views of Mr. Skender
Hyseni, Foreign Minister of the Republic of Kosovo.
Allow me to also express our deep appreciation for the
work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and for his ongoing efforts to
facilitate dialogue among all actors in a period of
change and adaptation. In this regard, we also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General before us today
(S/2009/149).
The meeting of the Council in November last
year paved the way for the reconfiguration of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and an enhanced United Nations
engagement. Since then, we witnessed the successful
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) throughout Kosovo on
9 December. The first EULEX report before us today
bears witness to this success.
We are content to see that, due in part to the
constructive attitude of Serbia in cooperating with
EULEX, the Mission has already been able to make an
important contribution helping the authorities of
Kosovo in forming a multi-ethnic State based on the
principles of democracy and the rule of law. We are
convinced that the recent establishment of an European
Union (EU) liaison office in Belgrade will further
facilitate and strengthen this cooperation.

09-27620

S/PV.6097

We believe that Kosovo has made significant
progress over the past year. In continuously
implementing the Ahtisaari proposals and the new
Constitution, the Kosovo authorities have laid the
foundations for a stable, democratic and multi-ethnic
State. We encourage all ethnic groups to actively
participate in the structures of Kosovo and so ensure
that multi-ethnicity becomes an integral part of
everyday life.
Austria has made continuous efforts to foster
peace and stability in the western Balkans by bringing
together all sides in dialogue. In 2005 and 2006, we
organized two seminars that were instrumental in
designing a law on the status and the protection of
religious communities in Kosovo, and we were glad to
host the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the future status process for Kosovo in
Vienna and to actively support its efforts.
Austria also contributes some 650 troops to the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR). Ours
is thus the biggest non-NATO contingent in KFOR, and
we currently exercise command over the KFOR
Multinational Task Force South. Furthermore, we
provide 27 police officers, judges and prison officers to
EULEX. We believe that the core responsibility of the
international community in Kosovo is the protection of
all ethnic groups, in particular minorities.
Austria is concerned about reports of inter-ethnic
violence in the Mitrovica region and warmly welcomes
the agreement of the police commanders of both parts
of Mitrovica to organize joint police patrols. This could
be an essential element in securing peace and stability.
We also deplore the fact that the number of voluntary
minority returns has declined compared to 2006 and
2007, and we express our hope that Kosovo’s recently
launched return project and the survey of internally
displaced persons from Kosovo, to be conducted by
Serbia together with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, will prove to be
effective and facilitate returns to Kosovo.
We share the Secretary-General’s observation that
the efforts of all sides, with the support of the
international community, need to continue to further
implement the temporary arrangements laid out in his
most recent report. We are convinced that pragmatism
and a sense of responsibility will lead to tangible
results in finding solutions to the outstanding practical
issues. Bridging these differences and coming to a

09-27620

productive working relationship will benefit all people
in the region.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) continues to play a crucial role in
Kosovo, and it has our full support. Under the
leadership of Ambassador Almhofer, the OSCE mission
in Kosovo fulfils an important role in guaranteeing a
democratic and multi-ethnic future for Kosovo, in
particular in building and monitoring Kosovo’s
democratic institutions and its support for human rights
and for the preservation of minority rights. The
stability in the Balkans is a goal shared by the United
Nations, the European Union and the OSCE. We are
looking forward to continued OSCE engagement there.
Although it has been said many times before,
allow me to stress that: the future of all the peoples of
the western Balkans, including Serbia and Kosovo, lies
in the European Union. This is a perspective to which
my country has always been committed, and the
realization of this perspective, in our view, offers the
best long- and medium-term chance to find lasting
solutions to many of the problems that we are
discussing today. The European Council has reiterated
this perspective a number of times, and EU member
States fully support it. Austria is convinced that a very
large majority of the inhabitants of Serbia and of
Kosovo clearly see the benefits of European integration
for their futures and the future of their families and
their countries. Austria will continue to strive to
achieve this goal.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to add the
United Kingdom’s voice of welcome to those of
Security Council colleagues to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. Zannier, to President Tadić
of Serbia, and to the Foreign Minister of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni, over a year after Kosovo became
independent. I would also like to express our thanks to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
Kosovo over the period during which Kosovo passed
its first anniversary as an independent State
(S/2009/149).
As we have heard this morning, there have been
several positive developments over the period. The
Government of Kosovo has continued to establish the
legal and administrative apparatus of the State, in line
with Kosovo’s Constitution. They are preparing to
devolve some government competencies to local
municipalities, including Kosovo Serb municipalities,

11

S/PV.6097

and to establish new municipalities. These will help to
protect the interests of all of Kosovo’s minority
communities.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has taken up its mandate and is
progressing towards full operational capacity. It is
fulfilling its tasks of mentoring, monitoring and
advising Kosovo’s Police, judiciary and Customs, and
that is helping to maintain law and order. That is
essential to allow all of Kosovo’s citizens to pursue
their daily business. EULEX has also encouraged the
establishment of an ethnically mixed Kosovo Police
unit in northern Mitrovica. EULEX has helped to
ensure an effective response by the Police to the few
instances of criminal and inter-ethnic violence that
have occurred, ensuring their quick suppression.
We welcome the start of the technical dialogue
between EULEX and Belgrade over the transitional
arrangements set out in the Secretary-General’s
November 2008 report to the Council (S/2008/692),
and we urge the Governments of Serbia and Kosovo to
engage constructively with EULEX over the
implementation of those arrangements and to promote
the benefits of positive engagement to all of Kosovo’s
communities.
The Kosovo Security Force has been established
and the Kosovo Protection Corps has stood down, in
line with commitments made with the Kosovo
Government and the international community. The
Kosovo Security Force will provide Kosovo with an
appropriately sized, lightly armed, multi-ethnic and
civilian-led internal security and civil protection
capability. I would like to repeat once again that the
Kosovo Security Force does not constitute any sort of
threat to any of Kosovo’s neighbours.
Progress on returns, property, adjudication and
reconstruction of cultural and religious heritage sites
has continued. The European Union (EU) remains
committed to fostering the European perspective of
Kosovo in the context of the Stabilization and
Association Process and to encouraging Kosovo’s full
involvement in regional initiatives and international
forums in a constructive manner.
For anyone’s European perspective to be
advanced, we need an even greater acceleration from
the Kosovo Government, especially with regard to the
rule of law and to returns, property and the
reconstruction of the religious and cultural heritage

12

sites. We need greater outreach to all communities. It
must be visibly clear and practically demonstrated that
all citizens of Kosovo will be treated equally. They
deserve access to its services on an equal basis, and we
look to the Kosovo Government to give us such
assurances.
We heard a number of statements this morning
from President Tadić with which my Government does
not agree. For example, we do not accept his
description of the remit of the EU mission in Kosovo.
With regard to the tenth anniversary of the NATO
bombing of Serbia, I think we should spend a moment
reflecting on why that was necessary. That NATO
action was an intervention to avert an overwhelming
humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo. When an attempt
was made at the United Nations to condemn NATO’s
action, only three countries voted in favour of
condemnation. Serbia ignored several Chapter VII
Security Council resolutions to negotiate and to cease
its repression. That repression saw the Racak massacre,
800,000 people expelled and 10,000 people killed,
according to United Nations figures. It does Serbia no
credit to ignore those facts from 1998 and 1999.
That is not to belittle subsequent violence. The
United Kingdom unreservedly condemns what
happened to Kosovo’s Serb communities in 2004. I
have been to Obilić and have seen the Kosovo Serbs
who were driven from their homes. But there is a world
of difference between those acts of violence in 2004
and the deliberate policies of the then Serbian
Government towards Kosovo Albanians in 1998 and
1999. We do not hold the present Government of
Serbia — still less President Tadić — responsible for
those events. But the Government does have a
responsibility to educate their citizens about the crimes
committed in Serbia’s name by Milosevic and others
indicted by the Hague Tribunal.
My Government’s position on the independence
of Kosovo is well known. Kosovo’s independence is a
fact. It is irreversible, and recognitions are continuing.
We want to see both Kosovo and Serbia enter the
European Union as neighbours on good terms with
each other and with the rest of the European Union. We
welcome the statement by President Tadić today that
joining the EU is Serbia’s strategic goal. We will do
everything we can to help Serbia realize that goal.
But it is worth recalling that the route to Europe
lies through reconciliation, not retribution. It lies in

09-27620

S/PV.6097

acknowledging and overcoming the past and moving
on.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Mr. Zannier, for
his presentation of the Secretary-General’s report on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2009/149). The Russian
Federation has carefully analyzed this document. We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of the
President of Serbia, Mr. Tadić. We are grateful for his
assessments, and we share them.
We have also listened to the statement of
Mr. Hyseni, although it is not objective. Attempts to
accuse Belgrade in all the problems facing Kosovo just
underline the need to reintegrate the country into
Serbia.
Today’s meeting coincides with a number of
tragic anniversaries in Kosovo’s history. First and
foremost, it is ten years since the start of NATO’s
bombardment of Yugoslavia, which was undertaken
without the sanction of the Security Council. Our
British colleague gave us a very detailed presentation
of the history of events, but it was selective in nature.
For example, nothing was said regarding the terrorist
activities of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army,
which carried out activities over ten years and led to
the tragic events of March 1999.
During the 78-day bombardment, it was mainly
civilian facilities that were destroyed — power plants,
bridges, other pieces of infrastructure. The Belgrade
television station was bombed merely because it had
made the wrong interpretation of the situation; it was
not enraptured at the destruction of its own country. A
passenger train was attacked for no known reasons.
The outcome was thousands of civilian deaths.
It was during the period of NATO bombardment
that the world spoke of a humanitarian disaster. The
political consequence was a marked decline of the
image of that regional organization in the eyes of the
international community, and I am referring to the
North Atlantic alliance. Even worse, it shook the very
foundation of international law. It provided a strong
push to Kosovar separatism.
Bloodshed was ended only as a result of
painstaking diplomatic efforts, substantially as a result
of Russia’s involvement. The Security Council adopted

09-27620

the well-known resolution 1244 (1999), which remains
fully in force. According to it, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo, which he heads, should
continue to discharge their mandated functions,
including ensuring the rights and security of national
minorities and achieving in the country the democratic
standards established by the international community.
In this regard, we cannot overlook another
sorrowful date: the fifth anniversary of the anti-Serb
pogroms in Kosovo that represented a brazen attempt
to expel the Serb population and eradicate its cultural
and religious heritage. As a result, thousands of Serbs
became refugees and many Orthodox monasteries and
churches, some under UNESCO protection, were
destroyed.
It is legitimate to recall these events in the light
of the recent scandalous ruling of the judges of the
European Court of Appeals, which freed a Kosovo
Albanian terrorist who had been sentenced by an
UNMIK court in June 2008 to 40 years in prison for
blowing up a bus in 2001. The judges considered either
that the evidence and testimony of witnesses were
insufficient, or that there were not enough bodies.
Eleven people died and 22 were injured in the incident.
We will demand information from the European
presence and the UNMIK leadership regarding the
measures that have been taken to punish those guilty of
that terrorist act.
Regrettably, United Nations demands that the
Kosovo Albanian authorities begin guaranteeing the
rights and security of Serbs remain unimplemented in
practice. The priority concern for standards for
minorities has been proactively replaced by priority
concern for the status of the province. Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence and the support
it enjoyed from a group of States were a reward for
extremism that, like it or not, set a very dangerous
precedent.
The year that has elapsed since Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence has confirmed
our concerns. It is clear that it will not be easy to
extricate the province from its socio-economic
collapse, but quasi-statehood has only exacerbated the
problems. Unemployment is rising, economic
indicators are stagnant, the province’s internal
integration links have been torn to shreds, and the
social sphere remains a disaster. What is flourishing are

13

S/PV.6097

lawlessness and criminals; the struggle for power has
led to clan frictions and radicals are again raising their
heads.
It is especially lamentable that the task of
strengthening Kosovo’s multi-ethnic nature has been
consigned to oblivion. Despite the implementation of
so-called democratic laws, in practice the rights and
security of Serbs and other national communities in the
province are ignored. As a result, the number of
returning Kosovo Serb refugees has decreased from
that of previous years. This fact is reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report. Unfortunately, however, the
report is silent on the reasons behind this phenomenon,
principal among which is the obvious lack of the most
basic security conditions.
The only possibility of redressing the situation is
to keep UNMIK in Kosovo and, under its aegis and
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), to
reorganize the activities of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, European Union
and NATO presences. To that end, UNMIK must retain
not only its coordination and political, but also its
administrative functions. That objective will be
achieved only if the Security Council retains control of
the situation in the province through dialogue between
Belgrade and the United Nations.
We welcome the ongoing consultations between
Belgrade and the United Nations on six technical
issues to ensure the viability of the Serb community in
the province. It needs to be said that this topic is not
reflected comprehensively enough in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. No one expected a rapid
breakthrough, but the mere resumption and
constructive development of dialogue are worthy of
support. The negotiations clearly enjoy good prospects,
including on the most complex topics, such customs
and courts. It is important to pursue dialogue between
Belgrade and the United Nations to protect the Serb
cultural and religious heritage in the province.
We have found an acceptable formula for
involvement in the consultations of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) under
United Nations auspices. At the same time, the nature
of EULEX’s practical activities is far from being
status-neutral, in contradiction of the provisions of the
Secretary-General’s report of November 2008, which
was endorsed by the Security Council. Incidentally, the
EULEX report, contained in annex I of the report

14

before us, contains not one reference to the fact that it
is acting on a status-neutral basis.
We will continue carefully to ensure that the
Security Council plays the leading role in Kosovo’s
affairs on the basis of compliance with existing norms
of international law, the United Nations Charter and the
decisions of this Council.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to start by
thanking Special Representative Lamberto Zannier for
his comprehensive briefing this morning. I also
welcome the presence of the very high-level Serbian
delegation, led by His Excellency President Tadić. We
are also grateful to Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo
for his statement.
Thirteen months have passed since the
declaration of independence by the Republic of
Kosovo. In our view, the situation in the region since
then has been calm and stable. We welcome the fact
that Kosovo has built its national institutions,
ministries and agencies under the Constitution. We
hope that Kosovo will continue to strengthen its
ownership and governance capabilities.
The security situation in Kosovo has been
generally stable, although sporadic incidents arising
from ethnic discord have been noted in certain areas.
We recognize that this success is largely due to the
support of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). In particular, it is important
that EULEX has begun its deployment and expanded
its presence successfully throughout Kosovo.
We also welcome the fact that KFOR is
continuing its operations to maintain security in
Kosovo. Japan highly values cooperation among the
United Nations, the European Union, Serbia and
Kosovo, including the adoption of the presidential
statement of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).
We need to support Kosovo in the area of rule of law,
including police and customs. Such support is essential
to developing Kosovo as a multi-ethnic and democratic
State and to promoting its economic development.
Japan urges all parties in Kosovo, including the
Kosovo Serbs, to cooperate fully with EULEX. We
should consider carefully the future role and size of
UNMIK in the light of progress made in State-building
in Kosovo and the deployment of EULEX.

09-27620

S/PV.6097

I should like to stress the importance of an early
commencement of dialogue on the six items. Only
through direct dialogue among the parties concerned
can mutual interests be ensured and equitable solutions
found to outstanding issues, such as the protection of
the human rights of minorities, the normalization of
trade and transportation with Kosovo’s neighbours, and
economic development. All international actors on the
ground should support UNMIK-led dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that connection, we are
concerned about the decrease, as noted in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/149), in voluntary
returns of minorities and about Serbia’s refusal to
allow products carrying a Kosovo “certificate of
origin” stamp to enter or transit through Serbia.
Public services should be provided to all
populations
without
discrimination.
Inadequate
protection of human rights and limited economic
opportunities for minorities will hinder stable
development in Kosovo and neighbouring countries.
Kosovo is a test case for proving the validity of the
human security approach to providing every individual,
irrespective of religion or ethnicity, with freedom from
fear and from want. Japan has been active in
addressing various threats to people in Kosovo, and the
western Balkans as a whole, through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. We have
provided assistance totalling $200 million to Kosovo
for its humanitarian economic needs. All projects are
intended to enhance multi-ethnic coexistence,
reconciliation and sustainable development in the
region. Japan decided recently to extend an additional
$3 million for a multisectoral initiative for community
stabilization in northern Kosovo in order to expand
economic opportunity and human rights protection for
minority peoples there. Japan will continue to assist
Kosovo to achieve socio-economic stability through
bilateral and multilateral channels, taking into account
its specific needs.
The development of Kosovo’s multi-ethnic and
democratic State will contribute to the stability of the
entire region. We have established diplomatic relations,
and it is our intention to continue to strengthen
cooperative relations with Kosovo, as well as longstanding friendly relations with Serbia.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to welcome
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia, to
this debate and to thank him for his statement. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-

09-27620

General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. I also thank Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
We have noted the successes scored so far in the
UNMIK reconfiguration process and the eventual
process of drawing down UNMIK forces, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his previous
reports. But we have also noted the challenges the
Mission faces in fulfilling its mandate as envisaged in
resolution 1244 (1999). All efforts need to be
undertaken to ensure that the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) goes forward smoothly.
It is encouraging to note that, in line with the
statement by the President of the Security Council of
26 November (S/PRST/2008/44), EULEX has assumed
full operational responsibility in the area of rule of law
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and
under the overall authority of the United Nations. In
that regard, the acceptance of the deployment of
EULEX by the Government of Serbia and the
cooperation between UNMIK police and EULEX are
encouraging.
My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
Government of Serbia and the Kosovo authorities in
maintaining a working relationship with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We are,
however, concerned that, as pointed out in the report
(S/2009/149), the new laws passed by the Kosovo
authorities make no reference to the powers of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative. This
further increases the challenge to the functioning of
UNMIK. We therefore call upon both parties to offer
unhindered and full cooperation to UNMIK in order to
enable it to fulfil its mandate as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999).
Uganda commends UNMIK’s continued efforts in
working towards the advancement of regional stability
and prosperity, in close coordination and cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade. We
commend them for the proactive steps that have been
taken to facilitate dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. In that regard, we note that the best possible
option for addressing the Kosovo issue is for both
parties to pursue pacific methods characterized by
continued engagement, mutual respect during the

15

S/PV.6097

negotiations, and inter-party dialogue. We therefore
call upon both parties to abide by and respect the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
Although it appears that the overall security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period
remained stable, Uganda is particularly concerned
about the incidents of inter-ethnic violence involving
Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in the region of
Mitrovica. We call upon both parties to exercise
restraint, mutual respect and tolerance in order to
harmoniously live together in the interest of peace. We
salute the prompt intervention of UNMIK formed
police units and the efforts they have made to improve
security in the region, which will in the long term
provide the stability needed for the next phase of postconflict reconstruction.
Finally, we urge the Security Council and the
international community to continue to lend the
necessary support to UNMIK, which is critical to
ensuring that the Mission is successful in implementing
its reconfiguration and that it continues to play a
positive role in maintaining peace and stability on the
ground.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Permit me to welcome to
the Chamber the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, and the Foreign Minister of the
Republic of Kosovo, His Excellency Mr. Skender
Hyseni, and to thank them for their statements. I would
like also to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and to thank
him for his update.
During this reporting period, Europe’s youngest
State, Kosovo, celebrated its first anniversary. Today, a
year after proclaiming its independence, Kosovo is at
peace. The Republic of Kosovo is steadily making
headway in the international arena. Kosovo’s
parliament continues to pass necessary laws on the
basis of the constitution of the Republic of Kosovo,
and its Government is increasingly proving its capacity
to deliver to its citizens. We welcome also the
progressive building of State institutions in Kosovo.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has been deploying efficiently, for
which we commend its leadership and its contributing
countries. EULEX is reaching its full operational
capacity and will bring the expertise needed by the
Kosovo Government and its people to implement the
reforms that will bring Kosovo closer into line with

16

European Union standards. That attains a dual goal. It
is to the benefit of all of Kosovo’s people and
communities and, secondly, it begins the process
required for Kosovo’s desired European Union
integration.
In his report (S/2009/149), the Secretary-General
describes the security situation as stable and without
major security incidents, and he appropriate lists both
Pristina and Belgrade, together with all international
stakeholders, as deserving praise for this.
We believe that the only realistic way in which
the Serb community in Kosovo can protect its rights in
a sustainable way is through direct participation in the
political process, by claiming its allocated spots in the
Kosovo legislature and in the police and judiciary, and
through the use of other mechanisms that have been set
up with that goal in mind and that are in line with
Kosovo’s constitution and other laws. As many here
will remember, one of the main preconditions for
Kosovo’s international recognition by many of the
world’s leading democracies one year ago was that its
constitution and other laws address that very issue. We
call upon the Serb community in Kosovo to make full
use of all the constitutional guarantees provided for
the, for their own benefit and for the benefit of Kosovo
as a whole.
Kosovo’s second year should bring a continuation
of its integration into international financial institutions
and trade associations, which would make it possible to
attract investment and improve the business climate.
We also hope that Kosovo’s second year will allow the
remainder of Kosovo Serbs and members of other nonAlbanian communities to fully realize their civic and
democratic rights and use them to pursue a political
dialogue to improve the position of their respective
communities throughout Kosovo.
Finally, I would like to reiterate once again that
Croatia stands ready to offer its help, knowledge and
expertise with regard to the process of integration into
the European Union to Serbia, Kosovo and other
countries in South-East Europe. We keenly look
forward to their advancement on the Euro-Atlantic
integration path.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic
of Serbia, and to thank him for his statement. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-

09-27620

S/PV.6097

General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2009/149). We are also grateful to Mr. Skender
Hyseni for his statement.
A definitive solution to the issue of Kosovo is
essential in order to achieve stability in the Balkan
region.
My delegation is pleased that the report of the
Secretary-General reports on progress made in the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the consequent
reconfiguration of UNMIK under resolution 1244
(1999). We believe it important that the reconfiguration
of UNMIK and the activation of EULEX — especially
the transfer of police, justice and customs functions —
have taken place successfully and without major
incidents. The cooperation and coordination of both
missions is a good example of cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union.
Although the security environment in Kosovo has
remained stable, tensions, including incidents of
violence between communities in the region, remain
cause for concern. Therefore it is important that,
despite continuing difficulties on the ground, UNMIK
should be able to appropriately carry out the mandate
conferred upon it by the Security Council. We call on
all parties to fully cooperate with the mission.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) is the
legal framework for the search for a solution to the
situation of Kosovo, and the United Nations should be
the competent forum in which to achieve a definitive,
long-term resolution. Mexico has been a firm and
constant promoter of the principles of justice and
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as of the International Court of Justice
as the jurisdictional body, par excellence for peacefully
settling differences arising from interpretations of
international law. In that context, we await the Court’s
advisory opinion on Kosovo requested by the General
Assembly during its sixty-third session.
We express our hope that peace can be
safeguarded and stability consolidated so that Kosovo
and the Balkans region in general can move towards a
more stable, more prosperous future as an integral part
of Europe.

09-27620

Although there are positive developments in the
area of the rule of law, it should be applied uniformly
throughout Kosovo, in particular with regard to access
to justice without discrimination based on ethnicity or
location. Those principles should be the basis of a fair
and inclusive justice system that properly addresses
civil and penal issues, as well as police activities.
Moreover, other measures should be taken in
areas such as secure conditions of return for refugees
and internally displaced persons, the processes of
reconciliation and the integration of communities,
protection of heritage and the promotion of socioeconomic development.
Mexico believes it essential that the Security
Council continue supporting UNMIK in order to
facilitate dialogue between parties on issues of mutual
interest, bearing in mind regional stability and in
coordination with the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the NATO force in Kosovo.
For its part, UNMIK should strengthen the
mechanisms for settling disputes between parties with
a view to guaranteeing the political, economic and
social development of the people of Kosovo, stressing
in particular respect for the human rights of minorities.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Allow me to extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President
of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo. My delegation is happy to welcome both of
them, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, with us today.
I would like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
informative and comprehensive briefing. We greatly
appreciate his efforts and would particularly like to
acknowledge and express our appreciation for the past
and current role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
ensuring peace and stability in Kosovo. Welcoming the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) throughout Kosovo, we
support the efforts of the Special Representative to
reconfigure UNMIK to adapt it to the current
circumstances and to the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral on its future tasks. We have actively
participated in UNMIK and continue to contribute to
the Kosovo Force, and we are now providing police

17

S/PV.6097

officers to EULEX. We have continued to do all that
we can to assist both UNMIK and EULEX.
We are encouraged that the overall situation in
Kosovo is stable and that there is progress towards
consolidation of its statehood. We fully support that
process and remain ready to further contribute in any
way that we can. We note that while there are certain
concerns, there have also been positive developments
in the areas of community issues, returns, property, and
cultural and religious heritage. We look forward to
further progress on those issues.
Harmonious inter-ethnic relations are imperative
for Kosovo to be a viable, multi-ethnic democratic
State. That is of particular importance when the
complexity of the political atmosphere in the Balkans
still requires our close attention. Any major challenge
to stability in one place could be contagious. The
independence of Kosovo should also be seen in the
framework of lasting peace, stability and prosperity in
the entire region. It was the end result of a long and
unique process, and it is irreversible. That being the
case, the assistance given to Kosovo in its efforts to
integrate with the international community and
institutions should be further encouraged and
strengthened.
I must also underline that a democratic and
prosperous Serbia at peace with all of its neighbours is
crucial for regional stability and cooperation. Serbia
should not be isolated from Europe in any way. The
international community should continue to encourage
and to help Serbia in its efforts to integrate with the
European and Euro-Atlantic structures.
As for Turkey, we are determined to carry
forward our good and mutually beneficial relations
with Serbia. Being very much a part of the Balkans, we
are committed to working with all of our partners
towards ensuring a safe, stable and prosperous future
for the region. That is one of the top priorities of our
foreign policy.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to welcome Mr. Boris Tadić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Skender
Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. I thank
them for their important contributions, and
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

18

What emerges from all that we have heard this
morning, and especially from the report of the
Secretary-General, is that the overall situation a year
after the independence of Kosovo has remained stable
at the political as well as the security levels, although a
number of minor incidents persist, in particular in the
northern part of the territory.
We welcome the efforts of the Kosovo authorities
in the field of nation-building, as well as the
determination they have shown to build a stable
Kosovo that is fully integrated in the European Union.
As noted, the issue of the status of Kosovo remains at
the heart of those problems, and unfortunately there
has been no sign of compromise, as demonstrated by
the fierce opposition to the setting up of the
International Civilian Office, as provided for by the
comprehensive proposal for resolving the issue.
With regard to that fundamental problem,
Belgrade and Pristina must continue the political
dialogue to arrive at a peaceful and mutually
acceptable solution. We also urge the two communities
involved to facilitate in good faith the integration
process under way, and we encourage the United
Nations to further develop activities aimed at freedom
of movement and the intermingling of communities.
We should also further encourage and develop
opportunities for cooperation at the regional level in
the fields of culture and education in order to promote
long-term reconciliation between peoples and
hopefully rebuild the region on the basis of common
European values.
We welcome the progress achieved in the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
thank it and all its partners for their efforts despite the
difficulties faced, and we remain convinced that it will
continue to spare no effort to contribute to the
prosperity of Kosovo in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999).
We also welcome UNMIK’s efforts to ensure that
Kosovo participates in international and regional
economic initiatives, inter alia, regional transport
meetings, activities in the framework of the Regional
Cooperation Council, and the administration of
customs services. We welcome the progressive
assumption by the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo of operational functions in the field of the rule

09-27620

S/PV.6097

of law, particularly with the assent of Pristina and
Belgrade.
We have already stated and would like to reiterate
here that the establishment of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina remains of fundamental
importance. That is why we welcome initiatives to
follow up the provisions of the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692), which
have consisted of maintaining ongoing contacts at the
highest political level with the authorities in Belgrade
and Pristina. We also welcome the appointment of a
Coordinator and the creation of a team tasked with
considering technical aspects of issues with both sides.
We hope that all of these initiatives will lead to
consensus solutions.
Finally, I should like to voice our hope of seeing
Kosovo become a safe place for all of its inhabitants,
where the norms of democracy, rule of law, protection
of human rights, protection of minority rights, as well
as good governance, are fully implemented. To that
end, I congratulate and encourage all actors working in
the field for the stability of Kosovo.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the presence here of
President Tadić of the Republic of Serbia and of
Minister Hyseni of the Republic of Kosovo. I would
also to thank Mr. Zannier for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/149).
For Costa Rica, the development of the situation
in Kosovo should be seen in the context of a process
that leads to a peaceful settlement of the dispute
engendered by the declaration of independence by the
Kosovar authorities. In this sense, Costa Rica
welcomes the reconfiguration of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in accordance with the statement we adopted in
November (S/PRST/2008/44).
Likewise, the creation of the Kosovo Police, in
compliance with the constitutional precepts adopted in
June, is a step towards order that should be perceived
not as a threat towards any minority, but rather as an
opportunity to build inter-ethnic institutions that
contribute to peace.
The deployment of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and its achievement of
full operational capacity with respect to the rule of law
in the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) are

09-27620

milestones in a process that should lead to the creative
and productive coexistence of all communities in
Serbia and in Kosovo.
For my delegation, the ongoing obstacles to this
coexistence are cause for concern. The lack of
understanding between groups of different ethnic
origin can be overcome only by the efforts of both
Governments. Costa Rica avails itself of the
opportunity provided by the presence of President
Tadić and Minister Hyseni to call on the Governments
of Serbia and Kosovo to work to ease these natural
tensions arising from the painful events of recent years.
Only the development of mutual respect and the fruits
of peaceful coexistence can provide the basis for a
coexistence that benefits the communities of Serbia
and Kosovo.
I would like to conclude by recognizing once
again the work of UNMIK and the cooperation that
EUFOR provides to the international community in
order to establish a lasting peace in the Balkans. We
are certain that continued European assistance will also
contribute to the prosperity of the peoples in that
region.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to begin by thanking Mr. Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing, and to commend the effort by
him and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which he leads, to
maintain peace and stability in Kosovo and the
Balkans. We also listened carefully to the statements
made by Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, and by Mr. Hyseni.
During the past four months, the security
situation in Kosovo has remained substantially stable,
but there has still been tension in some parts of
Kosovo. In particular, there have been violent clashes
in Mitrovica. It is China’s hope that all parties will
examine the relevant issues from a broader and longerterm perspective and intensify dialogue to maintain
peace and stability in the region.
China has also noted that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/149) mentions in particular
a sharp decline in the number of voluntary returns of
members of minority communities. We are very much
concerned about that situation. China calls for the
parties concerned to coordinate their efforts to create

19

S/PV.6097

an environment favourable to the voluntary return of
the members of minority communities.
China is of the view that all parties should uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and Security Council resolutions, and respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Serbia.
China has always maintained that the best way to
resolve the issue of Kosovo is through a negotiated
settlement acceptable to both Serbia and Kosovo. We
encourage all parties to seek such a compromise
settlement through negotiations.
Almost 10 years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1244 (1999), which serves as the
legal basis for the settlement of the question of
Kosovo. During the past nine years, there have been
some changes in the situation in Kosovo, but the
foundation for implementing resolution 1244 (1999)
remains unchanged. UNMIK should continue to fulfil
its mandates. China also notes that the report of the
Secretary-General mentions that the reconfiguration of
UNMIK has been accelerated in order to enable its
functions to be adapted to the changing situation on the
ground. While valuing highly the relevant proposals by
the Secretary-General about the reconfiguration of
UNMIK, we believe that the adjustments undertaken
by the Mission should be technical in nature. It should
not touch on the status of Kosovo or compromise the
United Nations neutrality. The issue of Kosovo remains
an important item on the agenda of the Security
Council.
We have taken note of the commitment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) to comply with resolution 1244 (1999), as
well as of the fact that it has submitted a report on its
recent activities. We hope that EULEX will continue to
act pursuant to that resolution, assume its
responsibilities under the United Nations umbrella and
support the work of UNMIK in playing a positive role
to maintain peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the past four
months. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing in that connection. My delegation
also welcomes the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia, in
today’s meeting of the Security Council. We thank him

20

for his statement of the situation on the ground. We
also acknowledge the presence of Mr. Skender Hyseni
at this meeting and thank him for his statement.
We have taken note of the overall stable security
situation in and around Kosovo during the reporting
period. We are, however, concerned about the
information provided by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2009/149) that, in comparison with previous
years, the number of voluntary minority returns to
Kosovo has declined sharply and that it remains
disappointing. It is imperative to promptly and
adequately address this issue, including in particular
the non-implementation of the reintegration strategy
for forced returnees, as well as to ensure real progress
in safeguarding the rights and security of national
minorities so as to avoid exacerbating inter-ethnic
mistrust and tension, as was the case in the region of
Mitrovica.
With regard to the administration of northern
Kosovo, we commend UNMIK’s efforts to engage with
all sides to facilitate the implementation of the
Secretary-General’s six-point plan, which covers the
areas of the police, the judiciary, boundary
management, the protection of religious facilities,
transportation and customs. While, as the report
indicates, there have been some positive results with
regard to the six points, others will require greater
political will and good-faith efforts. Given the fragility
of the situation in the region, we are mindful that the
possibility of a collapse of the six-point plan remains
high and that the loss of momentum could leave the
underlying tensions between Serbs and Albanians open
to manipulation by spoilers. We therefore believe that
it is essential for UNMIK to continue its active
presence and for both Belgrade and Pristina to
implement the temporary arrangements in the six areas
until relevant follow-up mechanisms have been put in
place to maintain peace and stability on the ground.
Against that backdrop, and while reiterating Viet
Nam’s position in support of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Serbia, my delegation shares and supports the
Secretary-General’s view that UNMIK will continue to
work towards the advancement of regional stability and
prosperity, based on its continued mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999), in close coordination with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Kosovo Force and in cooperation with the
authorities in Belgrade and Pristina. Among its main
functions, the facilitation of dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade should be underscored.

09-27620

S/PV.6097

With regard to UNMIK’s reconfiguration of the
rule of law sector, we recognize its accelerated efforts
in consultation with the main stakeholders on the
ground, as well as the gradual and smooth assumption
of operational responsibility by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in that area,
in line with the Security Council’s presidential
statement of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).
We acknowledge EULEX’s readiness to participate
alongside UNMIK in the discussions related to rule of
law issues. At the same time, we wish to emphasize
that the reconfiguration of UNMIK should be
conducted with transparency and in accordance with
the United Nations position on strict neutrality with
regard to Kosovo’s status.
We would also like to underscore that the
coordinated effort being undertaken by UNMIK and
EULEX at this critical juncture, with the support of
both Belgrade and Pristina and all international
stakeholders, is of great importance to the maintenance
of peace and stability in Kosovo and to the interest of
all communities thereof. For this to become a reality,
EULEX, which works under the general framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), should continue to honour its
commitment to operate under the overall authority and
within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations and to take into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all communities.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome back to the Council President
Tadić and Foreign Minister Hyseni, as well as to thank
them for sharing their perspectives on the region with
us today. I would also like to welcome Special
Representative Zannier and to express our support for
his ongoing work to reconfigure the United Nations
mission in Kosovo in accordance with the report
(S/2008/692) of the Secretary-General of last
November. The United States commends the Special
Representative’s dedication and productive cooperation
with other multilateral and bilateral stakeholders in
Kosovo.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2009/149) indicates, Kosovo continues to expand its
institutional framework under the Constitution
promulgated in June 2008. That Constitution is second
to none in its protection of the rights of all
communities and of cultural heritage. Kosovo has
enacted more than 50 laws to put those constitutional
principles into practice, all of them consistent with the
plan proposed by former United Nations Special Envoy
Marti Ahtisaari, which has served as a blueprint for

09-27620

Kosovo’s developing democracy. Kosovo has
established a foreign ministry, a national security
council and a process to privatize major public firms to
ensure greater accountability and resources. The
United States congratulates the people and Government
of Kosovo on those achievements.
Kosovo’s independence is irreversible. Fifty-six
Members of the United Nations, including nine
members of the Security Council, have now recognized
the Republic of Kosovo as an independent State. With
the rise of a truly self-governing Kosovo, UNMIK’s
presence has been substantially reduced and the
European Union has stepped forward as Kosovo’s
primary international adviser. The United States
encourages efforts to reduce further UNMIK’s presence
in Kosovo in the light of those changes.
We welcome the important role of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and
note the encouraging progress report that it has
provided. We are particularly pleased that EULEX
police and court officials have deployed and been
accepted throughout Kosovo and that the Mission is on
track to reach its full operational capacity. The Kosovo
Government, of course, has the primary responsibility
for the rule of law, but we welcome EULEX’s efforts to
assist the Government in exercising those functions.
We all share a common goal — to see the rule of law
throughout the territory of Kosovo strengthened and
upheld in a uniform, transparent and professional
manner.
For Kosovo’s multi-ethnic democracy to succeed
fully, the cooperation and active participation of the
country’s Serbs are simply essential. We hope that
EULEX will continue to discuss practical issues —
police, justice and customs — with the representatives
of Kosovo’s Serb community, the Government of
Serbia and the Government of Kosovo. We welcome
the statements by Belgrade authorities of their
readiness to cooperate with EULEX and to continue
their dialogue with the European Union.
We note with regret, however, the continuing
support of the Government of Serbia for parallel
structures in Kosovo. We urge the Belgrade authorities
to encourage full interaction between Kosovo’s Serb
and Albanian communities, in particular by allowing
Serb police to return to their positions in the multiethnic Kosovo police force.
Security is important, and my Government
condones the continued efforts of NATO in Kosovo
both through its peacekeeping force, KFOR, and its

21

S/PV.6097

assistance in launching the Kosovo Security Force.
That new force, with a mandate to handle civilian
protection, emergency response and removal of
explosive ordinance, is open to all Kosovo’s ethnic
communities. NATO’s supervision of the Force will
help to ensure that it conducts itself according to the
highest standards worthy of a democratic, multi-ethnic
and civilian-controlled security institution.
President Tadić referred to the period March to
June 1999, when NATO countries felt obliged to take
action. The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia recently issued a 2,900-page
decision with findings regarding that period. The
decision has detailed findings that the Government of
Yugoslavia engaged in implementing a State policy of
forcing ethnic Albanians out of Kosovo by the
hundreds of thousands, killing some in the process.
That is the legacy of 1999. It will not help Serbia to
overcome the legacy by overlooking it.

supports the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in undertaking its role in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). That makes it
necessary for UNMIK to adjust its mandate to the new
changes and developments, in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999), particularly given the remark
made by the Secretary-General in paragraph 4 of his
report (S/2009/149) that many Kosovo Albanians are of
the view that UNMIK has achieved its goals.
In that regard, we welcome the acceptance by the
Serbian authorities and Kosovo Serbs of the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission. Also, we commend the reconfiguration of
UNMIK and the uneventful deployment of the
European peace mission, and we hope that all parties
will continue their cooperation with the European
mission in coordination with UNMIK, in accordance
with the presidential statement of the Security Council
of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).

We have witnessed significant changes in the
Western Balkans over the last 10 years as countries of
the region one by one move closer to taking their place
in the Euro-Atlantic community. In that regard, we
would like to commend President Tadić on the progress
that Serbia has made in advancing reforms and
removing obstacles to its path towards the European
Union. The United States supports Serbia’s aspirations
for a European future and offers our continued
cooperation in that regard.

We also welcome the readiness by the two parties
to resume dialogue and to engage in discussions at the
technical level. We also understand the positions of
each party and we hope that those efforts to implement
the temporary arrangements and the six mutual
provisions specified by the Secretary-General in his
letter to President Tadić of the Republic of Serbia of
12 June 2008 (S/2008/354, annex 1) — police, courts,
Customs, transportation and infrastructure, boundaries
and Serbian patrimony — will continue.

Finally, we know that Kosovo still faces many
challenges and that the region still needs our support.
Stability in South-Eastern Europe is a high priority for
the United States. We will continue to work with
Kosovo, Serbia and other countries in the region to
promote lasting peace and prosperity and to enhance
the European and Euro- Atlantic prospects.

We would like to emphasize the need for the
Mission to continue its dialogue with all parties on all
practical issues. While we welcome the stabilizing of
the security situation, we are concerned at the
divergence in views between the Kosovo Albanians
and the Kosovo Serbs and the series of inter-ethnic
incidents, as mentioned in paragraph 9 of the
Secretary-General’s report. That may affect the
independence of Kosovo in the long term.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
At the outset, I would like to add my voice to
those earlier speakers who welcomed His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia. I
would also like to welcome Mr. Skender Hyseni and
extend my thanks to Mr. Zannier, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
briefing that he presented on the latest developments in
Kosovo.
We realize that the situation in Kosovo has
undergone drastic changes and found a new reality that

22

Therefore, we call on all parties to exert further
efforts towards co-existence and harmony and keeping
open the channels of constructive dialogue and
cooperation and to avoid confrontation and violence.
Also, we would like to assert the need for the return of
all internally displaced persons and to protect them and
religious and cultural sites in trying to find common
ground for the maintenance of stability and peace in
the Balkan region.
I now resume my functions as president of the
Council.

09-27620

S/PV.6097

I now give the floor to His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Serbia for a further
statement.
Mr. Tadić (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I strongly
condemn all crimes committed in 1999. Today, 10
years later, every Albanian person who lived in Kosovo
still lives there. Two hundred thousand Serbian people
do not live there any longer. Is this going to be the
legacy of the policy of 1999? That is my question to
the Council.
Serbia is a democracy. After October 2000, when
we defeated the Milosevic regime, we established
democracy in our country. We respect the rule of law
and minority rights, but at the same time we are
protecting the integrity and sovereignty of our State,
like every Member State of the United Nations. For
that reason, we are going to continue our efforts to
establish the rule of law, peace, democracy and the
highest standards for all nationalities and citizens of
my country.
In response to the intervention by the
representative of the United Kingdom: I am not making
up my own definition of the remit of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX); I am only reading the
report of the Secretary-General dated 24 November
2008 (S/2008/692), which was endorsed by the
Security Council. In the report, it is crystal-clear that
UNMIK and EULEX are to work in Kosovo under
resolution 1244 (1999) and that they have to take a
neutral position regarding Kosovo’s status.
The presence of the United Nations and EULEX
in Kosovo is crucially important to Serbia. That is why
I must stress that we expect UNMIK always to be
represented at the regional meetings in which Serbia
participates. I cannot understand the logic whereby
EULEX would forbid a United Nations presence at our
meetings. That is unacceptable to Serbia. And I cannot
understand why the United Nations would accept such
a position. We must work together, not squeeze one
another out. We need each other: we want to
successfully resolve difficult problems, and in order to
solve such problems, we need each other.
Very briefly, I should like to make a few
comments. Stopping Serbian officials on the
Administrative Boundary Line is extremely dangerous
and disturbing. It must end. Today, the Mayor of
Belgrade, the capital of Serbia, was stopped and

09-27620

prevented from delivering humanitarian aid to Serbian
villages in Kosovo. If we do not find a systematic
solution to that issue, we will have many difficulties,
and we must avoid that.
In Serbia’s view, the six-point plan proposed by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon must be fully
implemented. First of all, it is a decision of the
Security Council, and secondly, it will help everyone in
Kosovo to establish normal conditions.
The Kosovo Security Force is completely
unacceptable to Serbia; it represents a paramilitary
organization that violates resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Kumanova Military-Technical Agreement. The
Force, which represents a challenge to regional
stability, should be dismantled. That is the position of
Serbia.
Serbia’s
proposal
for
Kosovo
was
demilitarization, not the creation of a new paramilitary
security force.
With regard to free trade in the region, we signed
the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA),
which defines our obligations and our cooperation in
the economic sector. We established a free trade zone
in the former Yugoslavia and the Western Balkans,
which includes Albania and Moldova. Unfortunately,
the Pristina representative has tried to mislead the
Council by saying that Serbia is blocking trade with the
province. That is simply not true. Serbia remains ready
to implement free trade commitments as defined by
CEFTA. UNMIK-Kosovo is a party to CEFTA, and we
will continue trading with it. But we cannot accept
unilaterally designed customs forms entitled “Republic
of Kosovo”; we must engage and find a solution. That
is very important to Serbia, and it is our official
position.
Finally, I thank Council members for their
presentations. Serbia will continue all its efforts to
establish peace and find a democratic solution for the
region. Serbia will be the cornerstone of stability in the
Western Balkans and make efforts to become a State
member of the European Union. But that does not
mean that Serbia will give up its legitimate interests.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
President Tadić for his statement.
I now call on Mr. Skender Hyseni, who has
requested the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Hyseni: I asked to make a second
intervention because I deem it necessary to react to
some of the points made by President Tadić.

23

S/PV.6097

Listening to Mr. Tadić, one gets the impression
that the Republic of Serbia is the sole victim of all the
wars and horrible tragedies caused throughout the
former Yugoslavia by the regime of the Republic of
Serbia. Listening to Mr. Tadić, one gets the impression
that 10,000 Croats have not been slaughtered and that
200,000 Bosnians have not been slaughtered. One gets
the impression that close to 15,000 Kosovar Albanians
have not been slaughtered and that close to 1 million
Kosovar Albanians have not been deported to
Macedonia, Albania or Montenegro. Listening to
President Tadić, one gets the impression that everyone
is to blame except the Serbian State, the Serbian
regime.
I will start by once again condemning, on behalf
of the Republic of Kosovo, the events of 17 March
2004. I invite the Council’s attention to the statement
made by the Government of the Republic of Kosovo on
17 March this year.
Hundreds of mosques and churches were
destroyed during the wars in the former Yugoslavia. In
times of conflict, religious sites very often become
either deliberate targets or targets of indiscriminate
fire. And there is no justification for any action on the
part of anyone against sacred objects or religious sites.
However, Mr. Tadić failed to take stock or to
present an account of how many mosques have been
destroyed and how many Albanian Catholic churches
have been destroyed. He failed to state how many
casualties have been caused. I would just remind the
Council of a number of key events that preceded,
triggered, prompted the NATO intervention: the
massacre of the Yashari family, the Racak massacre
and the widespread repression of the civilian Albanian
population throughout Kosovo. Hundreds of thousands
of Albanians who had socially owned jobs with
socially owned enterprises were forced out of their
jobs. All Albanian students were forced out of their
schools. President Tadić came up with the figure of
200,000 Serbs forced out of Kosovo. According to the
population censuses conducted by the Serbian regime,
at the most, there were only ever 197,000 Serbs living
in Kosovo. We still have over 130,000 Serbs living in
Kosovo.
I say this with reluctance, but to say that all
Albanians are still living in Kosovo but Serbs are not
begs the simple question: Are the 12,000 to 15,000
Albanians who were killed during the war really still
living in Kosovo? What about the 2,000 missing
Kosovar Albanians? Why is the Government of Serbia

24

not offering information to the panellists? At least
100,000 Kosovar Albanians are directly affected. Why
do they have no idea of the whereabouts of their loved
ones?
Justice is independent in Kosovo. The new
Kosovo, the Republic of Kosovo, is committed firmly
to preserving, protecting and honouring the
independence of our justice system. It is entirely up to
the courts, be it our national courts or the international
courts, to decide who will be convicted or not
convicted. I am not a judge and I am not going to
convict anyone a priori.
Kosovo is going through an important,
challenging period in many ways. Its economy is one
of the key challenges, and we are striving very hard to
build our market-oriented economy on the basis of the
highest standards known in the world.
Again, reference was made to some sort of mafia
in Kosovo. I wish to tell this Council that not
everybody in Kosovo is an angel, on any side, but the
very core of organized crime, of smuggling of all sorts,
and trafficking of all sorts is in the North because of
the lawlessness there and the support of the Serbian
authorities to those parallel structures.
Being very cognizant of the value of the
Council’s time, I will wrap up by pointing out very
clearly once again that we remain ready to work with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the International Civilian Office and the international
community in general to advance Kosovo’s prospects
for the future.
We also remain very open to talking to Serbia on
many issues of common interest. We have many issues
to discuss together, to resolve and to work on together
for the benefit of regional peace and safety and for the
benefit of our joint European perspective.
It is very easy to refer to the past, and as long as
we do so with the intention of learning lessons for
building a better future, it is worth it. But we in
Kosovo are committed to putting the past behind us
and working for the benefit of the future. We are not
going to forget the many casualties. We are not going
to forget what we have been through. My family and I,
like every other family in Kosovo, have lived through
the horrors of war, suppression, oppression and crimes
by the military, paramilitary and police forces of the
Republic of Serbia. It was a State-planned and Statesponsored crime — a crime against humanity carried
out by the State.

09-27620

S/PV.6097

The President (spoke in Arabic): Mr. Boris Tadić
has asked for the floor. I now give him the floor.
President Tadić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian;
interpretation provided by the delegation): I will be
very brief in my concluding remarks. The conflict
between the Serbs and the Albanians has a long history.
It burdened practically the entire past century and did
not begin with the advent of Milosevic to power. It did
not begin in 1999, and the request for the independence
of Kosovo did not come about because of the war in
1999 or its victims. This request dates back many
years. It was expressed in the 1960s and the 1980s,
long before the war, by the demonstrations in Pristina.
Accordingly, there was a political plan for the
establishment of the independence of Kosovo, which
was realized following a terrible humanitarian
catastrophe. That catastrophe was experienced not only
by the Albanians, but also by the Croats, Bosnians and
Serbs in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Every
nation had its victims, and I do not forget those
victims, not only among my people, but among all
peoples. That is why I am the only President in the
region to have extended my apologies to all the peoples
of the region, expecting the same apology to also be
extended to the Serbs.
We want peace and stability in the entire region,
but peace and stability will not be possible without
Serbia’s participation in the process. As a democratic
country, Serbia is resolved to pursue peace and
stability within the framework of the United Nations.
In that process, we see a role for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the deployment of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). Both UNMIK and
EULEX are welcome, and without them it would not
be possible to establish peace and stability.
For its part, Serbia will respect the values and
high standards defined by the United Nations, while
pursuing its approach to finding a solution to the future
status of Kosovo in accordance with international law.
This is the position of Serbia.
We spoke today of the cultural and historical sites
that were destroyed in the former Yugoslavia. I would
like to point out once again that each act of destruction
had its own perpetrator. There are no guilty peoples,
only guilty individuals, and that is why Serbia
continues to cooperate with The Hague Tribunal and
expects others to complete their cooperation with the
Tribunal.

09-27620

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Hyseni a second time. I do ask him,
however, to be concise.
Mr. Hyseni: I apologize, but this just came to
mind. When the Secretary-General appointed former
Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari to lead a political
process on the final status of Kosovo, this Council set a
number of objectives based on the presidential
statement of the time.
One of the key objectives was to reach a solution
on the status of Kosovo that would ensure peace, safety
and security in the whole of the region. I can assure the
Council that this objective is well on the way to being
achieved thanks not only to the overwhelming support
we are getting from the international community, but
first and foremost to our firm commitment to looking
to the future, and in that context to looking to the
future also in terms of our relationship with Serbia, our
first neighbour to the North.
We are going to seek ways — and we will not
quit, we will not give up our efforts — to reach out to
the Serb community in Kosovo. We have blueprints to
address all of the grievances of the Serb community in
Kosovo. We have carefully crafted plans for the reform
of local self-governance for the Serb-majority areas.
But it is, again and ever again, the Belgrade leadership
that is encouraging and even blackmailing and
threatening the representatives of the Serb community
who wish to work with us for their own benefit in the
first instance. So we need the Serb community to work
with us. We are ready. We do have plans and we are
committed to implementing those plans in detail.
I wish to once again make a plea here, before the
Council, to the leadership in Belgrade to talk to us on
an equal footing, because there are many issues we can
resolve together, but only as two independent and
sovereign States. Kosovo is independent. There is no
way that Kosovo will ever go back to what it was
before.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

25
