90

General AaH1Dbl1-Twenty-ddrd Se.Ion

3. Exp,esses the hope that the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
will be able to hold jointly a regional training course
in Asia in 1969;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1969 the activities specified in his report, and in particular to provide :
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Governments of developing countries ;
( b) Advisory services of experts, if requested by
developing countries, within the framework of existing
technical assistance programmes or from such voluntary
contributions as may be received for that purpose;
(e) A set of United N ations legal publications for
up to fifteen institutions in developing countries and
current United Nations legal publications for the institutions which have previously received a set of United
Nations legal publications in 1967 and 1968 under the
present Programme ;
5. Reiterates its request to Member States and
interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme and
expresses its appreciation to those Member States which
have made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
6. Approves in principie, subject to further consideration by the Advisory Committee on the United
N ations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law befare the twenty-fourth session of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme after
1969;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1969 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee,
to submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme in 1970;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fourth session an itero entitled "United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
1751st plenary meeting,
20 December 1968.

2464. (XXIII). United Natione Programme of
Aeeietance in the Teaching, Study, DiHemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2099 (XX) of 20 December 1965, 2204 (XXI) of 16 December 1966 and
2313 (XXII) of f4 December 1967 regarding the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGene.ral on the implementation of the Programme9 and
the recommendations made to the Secretary-General
by the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and \Vider Appreciation of International
Law, which are contained in that report,10
Considering that, in the conduct of the Programme,
it is desirable to use as far as possible the resources
and facilities made available by the international organizations concerned, by Member States and others,
Considering that, in the organization and conduct of
regional seminars and training courses, due regard
should be paid to reflecting United Nations efforts
towards the codification and progressive development
of international law and, in so far as appropriate, the
legal thinking of the principal legal systems of thP. world,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
for their increasing participation in the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law, particularly in the organization of regional seminars and training courses, in the preparation of
studies in international law and in the conduct of
fellowship programmes ;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretary-General
intends to continue his efforts to encourage and coordinate the activities of States and international
organizations concerned in the furtherance of the objectives of the Programme;
9 [bid., Twenty-third Session, Annexes, agenda item 89, document A/7305.
10 [bid., chapter IV.

*

*

*

Other decisions
Draft Convention on Special MiHione

(ltem 85)
At its 1746th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, 11 took the following decision:
"l. In the consideration of the item entitled 'Draft Convention on Special
Missions' by a Main Committee at the twenty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, without prejudice to the right of the Committee to consider any
changes proposed by the Drafting Committee when it co-ordinates and reviews
the drafting of the whole text, articles already adopted or rejected by the
Sixth Committee may not be reconsidered unless the Main Committee, by a
two-thirds majority of the members present and voting, so decides. Permission
to speak on a motion to reconsider will only be accorded to two speakers
1 t //,id .• agenda item 85, document A/7375, para. 248.
