11

Re1olution1 adopted on the report■ of the Fint Committee

Expressing its satisfaction to the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the International Labour Organisation,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and its Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission, and to the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization for their
participation in and contribution to the Committee's
work, as well as to the Secretary-General for his assistance,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed
and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National
Jurisdiction;
2. Invites the Committee to consider further the
questions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 2467 (XXIII) with a view to formulating recommendations on these questions, in the light of the
reports and studies to be made available to it and
taking into account the views expressed in the Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
3. Notes with interest the synthesis at the end of the
report of the Legal Sub-Committee,4 which reflects the
extent of the work done in the formulation of principles designed to promote international co-operation
in the exploration and use of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction and ensure the exploitation of their
resources for the benefit of mankind, irrespective of
the geographical location of States, taking into account
the special interests and needs of the developing countries, whether land-locked or coastal;
4. Requests the Committee to expedite its work of
preparing a comprehensive and balanced statement of
these principles and to submit a draft declaration to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
5. Takes note of the suggestions contained in the
report of the Economic and Technical Sub-Committee;11
6. Requests the Committee to formulate recommendations regarding the economic and technical conditions and the rules for the exploitation of the resources of this area in the context of the regime to be
set up.
1833rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2467 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the
Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction,6
Noting with satisfaction the study on international
machinery prepared by the Secretary-General, which
is annexed to that report, 7
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Committee that the Secretary-General should be requested
to continue this study in depth,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
further study on various types of international ma4 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 22 (A/7622 and Corr.I), part two.

II /bid., part three.
6 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 22 (A/7622 and Corr.I) and Supplement No. 22A (A/7622/Add.1).
1 Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (A/7622 and Corr.I), aDDex Il.

chinery, particularly a study covering in det>th the
status, structure, functions and powers of an mtemational machinery, having jurisdiction over the peaceful
uses of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
including the power to regulate, co-ordinate, supervise
and control all activities relating to the exploration
and exploitation of their resources, for the benefit of
mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geo~aphical
location of States, taking into account the special interests and needs of the developing countries, whether
land-locked or coastal;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
report thereon to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits
of National Jurisdiction for consideration during one
of its sessions in 1970;
3. Calls upon the Committee to submit a report on
this question to the General Assembly at its twentyfifth session.
1833rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.

D
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2467 A (XXIII) of 21 December 1968 to the effect that the exploitation of the
resources of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, and the
subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction should be carried out for the benefit of mankind
as a whole, irrespective of the geographical location of
States, taking into account the special interests and
needs of the developing countries,
Convinced that it is essential, for the achievement of
this purpose, that such activities be carried out under
an international regime including appropriate international machinery,
Noting that this matter is under consideration by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the
Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction,
Recalling its resolution 2340 (XXIl) of 18 Decemcember 1967 on the importance of preserving the seabed and the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, ~
yond the limits of national jurisdiction from actions
and uses which might be detrimental to the common
interests of mankind,
Declares that, pending the establishment of the
aforementioned international regime:
(a) States and persons, physical or juridical, are
bound to refrain from all activities of exploitation of
the resources of the area of the sea-bed and ocean floor
and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of nationai
jurisdiction;
(b) No claim to any part of that area or its resources shall be recognized.
1833rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.

2600 (XXIV). International co-operation In the
peaceful 1UN of outer apace
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2453 (XXIIl) of 20 December 1968,

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

12

Bearing in mind the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 8 especially the recommendations of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee at its sixth session with respect to the promotion
of the applications of space technology, 9
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1426 (XLVI) of 6 June 1969, in which the Council,
inter alia, expressed its conviction that international
co-operation through the United Nations should continue to play an important role in assisting the efforts
of Governments in the fields of investigation and utilization of non-agricultural natural resources,
Aware of the urgent need for a more complete understanding of man's environment,
Recognizing that space technology may make a significant contribution to this understanding,
Expressing the desire that earth resources survey
satellite programmes be available to produce information for the world community as a whole,
Wishing to encourage the study of earth resources
survey programmes, including those related to remotesensing techniques, and participation to the extent feasible and practicable in their development,
1. Invites Member States with experience in the
field of remote earth resources surveying to make such
experience available to other Member States which do
not have such experience and encourage them to become familiar with this field;
2. Invites Member States to join in exploring the
various aspects involved in the analysis of data obtained
through earth resources surveying techniques, their dissemination and application, so as to maximize the benefits to be obtained therefrom, taking into account the
particular interests and needs of developing countries;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to bring the present
resolution to the attention of all organizations within
the United Nations system whose objectives or programmes might be furthered by this developing technology;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its studies with regard to the
possibilities of further international co-operation, in
particular in the framework of the United Nations
system, in connexion with the development and use of
remote earth resources surveying techniques so as to
assure that as the practical benefits of this new technology are achieved, they are made available to both
developed and developing countries.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2601 (XXIV). International co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2453 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 10
8 Ibid., Supplement No. 21 (A/7621) and Supplement No.
21A. (A/7621/Add.1).
• lbid.1 Supplement No. 21 (A/7621), annex II, section B.
10 lbia., Supplement No. 21 (A/7621) and Supplement No.
21A. (A/7621/Add.1).

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Convinced of the need for increased efforts to promote applications of space technology for the benefit
of non-space Powers, particularly the developing countries,
Believing that the benefits of space exploration can
be extended to States at all stages of economic and
scientific development if Member States conduct their
space programmes in a manner designed to promote
the maximum international co-operation and widest
possible exchange of information in this field,
1. Endorses the recommendations and decisions11
contained in the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue to study questions relative to
the definition of outer space and the utilization of outer
space and celestial bodies, including various implicacations of space communications, as well as those comments which may be brought to the attention of the
Committee by specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency as a result of their examination
of problems that have arisen or that may arise from the
use of outer space in the fields within their competence;
3. Invites those countries which have not yet become parties to the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies and the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of
Objects Launched into Outer Space to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those agreements so
that they may have the broadest possible effect;
4. Reaffirms its belief, as expressed in its resolution 1721 D (XVI) of 20 December 1961, that communication by means of satellites should be available
to the nations of the world as soon as practicable on a
global and non-discriminatory basis, and recommends
that States parties to negotiations regarding international arrangements in the field of satellite communication should constantly bear this principle in mind so
that its ultimate realization may not be impaired;
5. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites on its
first session 12 and its second session13 and requests the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its
first 1970 session. to consider the agenda for the session
of the Working Group to be held in 1970 which is to
deal with the implications of direct broadcast satellites
in social, cultural, legal and other areas;
6. Welcomes the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to promote more energetically the applications of space technology as set out
in paragraph 15 of its report, and in paragraphs 22
to 31 of the report of the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee;14
7. Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-GeneraPII
to provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space at an early date with a report on the Secretariat arrangements in the field of outer space, bearing
Supplement No. 21 (A/7621 ), chapter IT.
Supplement No. 21 A (A/7621/ Add.I) annex III
annex IV.
'
·
14 Ibid., Supplement No. 21 (A/7621). annex II.
1 ~ lhid .. Supplement No. 21A (A/7621/Add.l), annex IT.
11 fhid.,

12 lhid.,
13 Ibid.,
