UNITED NATIONS

ECORDS

th
MEETING:

21 MAY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/236b/Rev.

1) * .,,,...,...,

6. . . . . . .*...*,....

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . .

Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands Was
Malvinas):
(N) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);

(h) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15099);
(cm) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/lsloo) . . . . , . . , , , . . . , . . *. , , . . . , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I *. . . . . . . .

SlPV.2360

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjcicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in .which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2360th meeting
Held in New York on Friday, 21 May 1982, at 2.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama. Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Amer-

the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

ica, Zaire.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2360/Rev,l)

of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of
the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15037);
Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15099);
Letter dated 2 1 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Panama to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15100)

Adoption of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion jwnz
ChiIWSLJ): The Council is meeting today pursuant to the
letter dated 4 May from the representative of Ireland
addressed to the President of the Council [S//50.37];
the letter dated 20 May from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Council [S//.509Y];
and the letter dated 21 May from the representative of
Panama addressed to the President of the Council
[S//S/00]. Members of the Council also have before
them document S/15101, which contains the text of
a letter dated 2 1 May from the representative of Argentina addressed to the President of the Council.
3. I now call on the Secretary-General.
4. The

SECRETARY-GENERAL

(irzt~~~prrttrtio/r

from Sptrnishj: Mr. President,

Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(a3 Letter dated 4‘ May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);

(6) Letter

dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15099);
(Cl Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Panama to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15100)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
-.@n - Chi-..
IWSLJ): I should like to inform members of the Councll
that I have received letters from the representatives
of
Argentina,
Australia, Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico,
Uruguay
and Venezuela in which they request to be
invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on

I felt it my duty to
‘inform you yesterday evening that my efforts to facilitate an agreement between the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom in respect of the Islas
Malvinas (Falkland Islands), initiated in pursuance of
my responsibilities as Secretary-General, did not offer
the present prospect of bringing an end to the crisis.
The armed conflict persists and threatens to grow
worse. In these grave circumstances, I wish to give
the Council an account of the actions I have taken in
pursuit of the objectives of Council resolution 502
(1982).
5. Following the adoption of that resolution. I continued my contacts with the parties and with the President of the Council concerning the situation. The
views which I expressed were based on the Charter
of the United Nations and on resolution 502 (1982)+
the implementation
of which I repeatedly urged. I also
made arrangements for contingency planning within
the Secretariat so that the United Nations could be in

a position to implement effectively any responsibilities
which might be entrusted to it.

I I. In my aide-memoire,
I suggested that the two
Governments agree to take simultaneously
the following steps, which were conceived as provisional
measures, without prejudice to the rights, claims 01
position of the parties concerned. I proposed specifically that at a specified time, “T”:

6. As long as the efforts of the Government of the
United States to facilitate a peaceful solution of the
dispute in the context of the Council’s resolution were
under way, I voiced the hope that they would succeed,
and I expressed the view that nothing should be done
to interfere with that delicate process. At the same
time, I affirmed my readiness to do all I could to be
of assistance in achieving a peaceful solution.

(N) The Argentine Government
begin withdrawal
of its troops from the Islas Malvinas (Falkland Islands)
and the United Kingdom Government redeploy its
naval forces and begin their withdrawal from the area
of the Islas Malvinas (Falkland Islands), both Governments to complete their withdrawal by an agreed
date;

7. In separate meetings on 19 April with the representative of Argentina and the representative of the
United Kingdom, and also with the representative
of the United States, I outlined the assistance that the
United Nations could render, if requested, in pursuance of any understanding or agreement that the
parties might reach consistent with resolution 502
(1982). I stated that, for example, a small presence
of United Nations civilian and military observers could
be used to supervise any agreed withdrawal of armed
forces and civilian personnel, as well as any interim
administrative
arrangements. United Nations auspices for such arrangements could also be provided, as
could a United Nations temporary administration.
I indicated that any arrangements of this kind would
require the prior authorization of the Security Council;
that, as a practical matter, they would presuppose the
consent of the parties; and that such arrangements
were mentioned without prejudice to the possibility
of other types of action that the Council might decide
upon.

(II) Both Governments commence negotiations to
seek a diplomatic solution to their differences by an
agreed target date;
(c) Both Governments
rescind their respective
announcements of blockades and exclusion zones and
cease all hostile acts against each, other;
(d) Both
sanctions;

Governments

terminate

all

economic

(c) Transitional
arrangements begin to come into
effect under which the above steps would be supervised and interim administrative
requirements met.
12. Reiterating my readiness to be of assistance,
I recalled my conversations with the representatives
of the two parties on 19 April and I stated that practical arrangements for a United Nations role in a settlement could be completed expeditiously, subject to the
consent of the parties and the decision of the Security
Council.

8. An informal note was given to the representatives
summarizing these ideas. Meanwhile, in connection
with these ideas, detailed plans were developed, as
part of the contingency planning I have mentioned,
which could be made available to the parties at the
appropriate time, on the understanding that implementation would require a decision of the Council.

13. On 5 and 6 May, I received responses from
the Government of Argentina and from the Government of the United Kingdom,
respectively.
Both
accepted the approach contained in the aide-memoire
as providing a basis or framework for an agreement
that would bring the armed conflict to a halt and make
possible a peaceful settlement. At the same time, the
responses raised a number of points on which agreement was needed.

9. On 30 April, I met at United Nations Headquarters with Mr. Nicanor Costa Mendez, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Argentine Republic.
Later that day, I received a letter from Mr. Alexander
Haig, Secretary of State of the United States of America, which provided information on the American
proposal which had been presented to the parties and
a statement of the position taken by the United States
in the light of the existing situation,

14. On 7 May, the Under-Secretary
for Foreign
Affairs of Argentina, Mr. Enrique Ros, arrived in
New York to represent Argentina in the exchanges.
Since that date I have had some 30 separate meetings
with the two sides with the purpose of assisting them
in reaching an agreement along the lines suggested
in my aide-memoire of 2 May. The intention was to
develop the ideas spelled out in my aide-m&moire with
a view to defining, point by point, the elements of a
mutually acceptable text.

10. In separate meetings on 2 May with the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Francis Pym, and with
the representative of Argentina, I handed over an
aide-memoire
in. which I expressed my deep concern
over the grave situation and emphasized my conviction that the United Nations had a most serious responsibility under the Charter urgently to restore peace
and to promote a just and lasting settlement. I stated
that the implementation
of resolution 502 (1982) was
imperative.

15. In my judgement,
essential agreement was
obtained, towards the end of last week, on the following points:
2

1. The agreement sought would be interim in
nature and would be without prejudice to the rights,
claims or positions of the parties concerned.

18, On studying these texts it was apparent that
they did not reflect the progress which had, in my
view, been achieved in the previous exchanges and
that the differences on the four points unfortunately
remained.

2. The agreement would cover: (N) a cease-fire;
(A) the mutual withdrawal of forces; (c.) the termination of exclusion zones and of economic measures
instituted in connection with the conflict; (d) the
interim administration
of the territory; and (e) negotiations on a peaceful settlement of the dispute.

19. On 19 May I spoke by telephone with President
Galtieri and Prime Minister Thatcher to express my
concern and suggest certain specific ideas which might
assist the parties at this critical stage. Both agreed to
I subsequently
presented
give them consideration.
to the two sides, on the same day, a further aidemdmoire listing, as I have just done for the Council,
the points on which I felt essential agreement had been
reached and the four crucial questions which remained
unresolved. I pointed out that the extent of agreement was, in my opinion, substantial and important
-so much so that, if it were incorporated in the text
of an interim agreement, the requirements of Council
resolution 502 (1982) would be met. I expressed my
deep concern, however, that unless the remaining
points were resolved in the very immediate
future,
all that had been accomplished would be lost and the
prospects for the early restoration of peace frustrated.

3. The initiation of these various parts of an agreement would be simultaneous.
4. Withdrawal
of forces would be phased and
would be under the supervision of United Nations
observers.
5. The interim
administration
of the territory
would be under the authority of the United Nations.
The United Nations flag would be flown. Argentina
and the United Kingdom would establish small liaison
offices, on which their respective flags could be flown.
6. The parties would enter into negotiations
in
good faith, under the auspices of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, for the peaceful settlement
of their dispute and would seek, with a sense of urgency, the completion
of these negotiations by 31 December 1982, taking into account the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly. The negotiations would be initiated without prejudice to the rights, claims or position of the parfies and without prejudging the outcome.
The negotiations would be held in New York or its
vicinity.

20. In the desire to be of assistance to the parties
in the urgent requirement of overcoming these differences, I also included suggestions and formulations
in my aide-memoire
of 19 May which might satifactorily meet their preoccupations on the four important
issues still unresolved, without prejudice to the rights,
claims or position of either of the parties.
21. It remains my belief that an agreement along the
lines developed in the exchanges over the past two
weeks, incorporating
the approaches suggested in
my aide-m&moire
of 19 May, could restore peace in
the South Atlantic and open the way for an enduring
solution of the long-standing
dispute between two
Member States. By yesterday evening, however, the
necessary accommodations
had not been made.
I concluded that, in the light of the Security Council’s
responsibilities
under the Charter for the preservation
of peace, I must urgently inform you, Mr. President,
of my appraisal of the situation. I did so at 9 o’clock
last night.

16. The crucial differences that remained
concerned the following points, on which various options
were being considered, at my suggestion:
1. Certain aspects of the interim
of the territory,

administration

2. Provisions for the extension of the time-frame
for completion
of negotiations and the related duration of the interim administration.
3. Certain
forces.

aspects

of

mutual

withdrawal

4. The geographic area to be covered
terms of the interim agreement.

22. I should like to express appreciation
for the
important support that the Council has given to my
efforts and for the understanding shown by the Cowncil members as the exchanges with the parties have
been under way. I would reiterate my personal
commitment
to be of assistance in every way towards
the lasting resolution of this problem.

of

by the

17. On 17 May the representative of the United
Kingdom delivered to me the draft of an interim agreement on the Islas Malvinas (Falkland Islands) dispute
which I transmitted to the Argentine Under-Secretary
for Foreign Affairs on the same day. During the night
of 18-19 May, I received the text of an Argentine
draft of such an interim agreement, which I promptly
made available to the British side.

23. The prospect that faces us is one of destruction, continuing conflict and, above all, the loss of
many, many young lives. Efforts must continue to
find the means of avoiding this and restoring peace.
There is no other course.
24. The PRESIDENT
(intc,prrtotir~ll
.~+o,v C’hitrcsc): I now call on the representative of Argentina.
3

sequences that would derive from a resolution that
completely disregarded the basic colonial aspect of the
question. The events that have occurred since that

(Argentina)
(intrrpretation
J%MI
Mr. President, before speaking as the Council has authorized me to do, I should like to say how
pleased I am to see you presiding, in such an outstanding way, over the Council. I should also like
-although
I shall be mentioning this later in my
statement-to
express deep thanks for the work done
by the Secretary-General, who has spared no personal
efforts in his attempt to fulfil the mandate conferred
upon him.
25. Mr.
Spanish):

ROS

time demonstrate incontrovertibly
that the Foreign
Minister of Panama was quite right in predicting the
dangers of ignoring the consequences of the maintenance of colonial situations.
34. He was also right in warning the United Kingdom that it must not use the resolution to embark on
a warlike adventure. I quote the following words of
the Foreign Minister of Panama in explaining his vote
against resolution 502 ( 1982):

26. I am appearing before the Security Council,
the organ that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world, at a
time when a very important air and naval battle is
under way on the territory of my homeland.

“I wish to state that resolution 502 (1982) in
no way authorizes the United Kingdom to resort
to force through its naval units or war fleet. It
should be made quite clear that the Council has
not empowered the United Kingdom to undertake
military operations such as the one under way in
the Atlantic, in which units are now moving towards
the Argentine territory of the Malvinas Islands.”

27. Argentina is being victimized this very day by
another serious and grave military attack on the part
of the air and naval forces of the United Kingdom
in the South Atlantic. Our history, regrettably, has
known other cases of British aggressions, invasions
and blockades; as in the past, we shall be able to withstand this irrational aggression.

[2350th mmtin,~,

~(II’N. 287.1

35. But, in spite of the serious shortcomings of
resolution 502 (1982) and the serious reservations it
deserved because it did not note the fact that this is
an anachronistic colonial case, Argentina unequivocally stated its readiness to comply with its provisions, so long as the British Government adopted a
corresponding attitude.

28. There is fighting on Argentine soil. We do not
know, nor do we wish to predict, its results, but, regardless of those results, nothing can bend the firm and
resolute will of the entire Argentine people to defend
to the end our rights to the islands that are an inalienable part of our homeland.
29. The Argentine people is united as it has been in
the most glorious hours of its history, aware of its own
calm strength and determined to defend itself in the
face of any military aggression, regardless of its magnitude.

36. The history of the events that have occurred
since the adoption of the resolution can be followed
through two clearly defined lines in connection with
that resolution: the Argentine attempts to arrive at a
peaceful and just solution, and British attempts to
obstruct the course of peace by attempting to preserve
its colonial control over the islands in a direct or
indirect form.

30. The Argentine people is, moreover, united
with the brother peoples of Latin America, not only
by links of blood created by struggles for independence, but also by the indestructible links of effective
solidarity and a common reaction to the arrogance
and disdain of the aggressor,

37. Argentine readiness to respect the authority
of the Council has been stated clearly and explicitly
on every occasion: ,on 12 April, the representative of
Argentina addressed a letter to the President of the
Council [S//4683
expressing Argentine readiness
effectively to fulfil each and every one of the paragraphs of Council resolution 502 (1982).

3 1. The Argentine people also feels the solidarity of
the non-aligned countries, most of which were born to
international life following a struggle against colonial
domination and foreign occupation.

38. That same readiness was reiterated in letters
from the representative of Argentina to the President
of the Council, dated I6 and 30 April [3//4%4 orrd
S/1.50211. In those communications,
the intention of
the Argentine Government
in this connection is
reaffirmed.

32. All this solidarity emerges as the expression
of a deep conviction, a sense of duty and a commitment to justice and historic truth. It also emerges
as a result of a mature knowledge of international
reality, where the trials to which peoples are subjected
make it possible to distinguish clearly who one’s true
friends are and through them and with them to discover new facets of one’s own identity.

39. It was within t_he context of resolution SO2
(1982) that Argentina agreed to explore the paths of
negotiation opened up through the action of the United
States before that country rejected the alternative of
peace and openly supported the bellicose stand of the
British. While that forum existed, Argentina offered

33. When the Council adopted resolution
502
(1982) on 3 April, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Panama warned the United Nations of the grave con4

its frill co-operation and did everything in its power
to facilitate a meeting of minds, basing itself from the
outset on the clear acceptance of the three operative
paragraphs of resolution 502 (1982) and willingness to
negotiate. If that forum proved fruitless, it was because the British matched our attitude of peace and
negotiation not with a like spirit, but instead with the
desire for domination of the region and with the certainty that they could rely on the support of the country which was soon to disregard resolution I of the
Twentieth Meeting of Consultation
of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs of the Organization
of American
States (OAS), adopted in Washington on 28 April
[S//.5008, (//111(‘.~],and apply immediate sanctions.

Security Council in accordance with the present
Charter.’ It is our earnest hope and wish that
the Argentine Government will act accordingly
and enable both of us. the United Kingdom and
Argentina, to resume the path of peaceful negotiation towards the settlement of our differences.”
[2350th mwting, pcr~~r.286.1

44. Following that profession of respect for the
Charter, we might at least have expected that the
United Kingdom itself would have been shamed into
complying with the Charter.
45. The truth is that, while the Security Council
was requesting a cease-fire, the British Government
was preparing the dispatch of the largest British fleet
ever constituted in a war operation since 1956, when
the United Kingdom
launched the Suez adventure.
This continuing
military
activity that threatened
Argentine security and integrity not only endangered
the prospects of the negotiated solution required by
resolution 502 (1982), but also made it impossible for
Argentina to begin to implement that resolution with
respect to the withdrawal of its troops. How can
such far-reaching duplicity be explained? How could
that country’s proclaimed desire “to resume the path
of peaceful . . . settlement of our differences” be
reconciled with the preparations for war which its
Government
was making at that very moment with
the help of war material supplied by the greatest
Western military Power?

40. It was in that same spirit that my Government, in a letter dated 13 April, from the representative of Argentina to the President of the Council
[.YCPS//#Y75,~rnizc.\-], welcomed the Peruvian truce proposal [S//4966, dnnc~.r], which the United Kingdom
rejected.
41. We must stress here that it was precisely when
Argentina was considering other peace proposals that
the United Kingdom proceeded to sink the cruiser
GPIWIW~Bel,~mo , outside the exclusion zone or,
rather, the blockade zone, an act without precedent,
to which I shall refer later. That horrible act of aggression and the attitude of the British caused the failure
of these further peace moves, as has been publicly
stated by the Government
of the sister Republic of
Peru [.V(YJS/1.507/, cInnc.r].

46. And, on the contrary, what advantage could
there be for Argentina in maintaining its forces in
operations in the Malvinas? What threat did Argentine
territorial integrity constitute for the United Kingdom,
14,000 kilometers from its coasts?

42. None the less, the British have continued to
accuse my Government of being intransigent. They
have also done so here in the Council. Does this mean
that, for the British Government,
anyone who does
not accept its demands is for that reason automatically
described as “intransigent”
and “inflexible”?
This
arrogance can be seen in the efforts of the extensive
British propaganda machinery
to convince world
public opinion that a country in the far south is not
adapting itself to London dictates.’ In this way. the
truth is distorted, reasoning is clouded and the truth
does not emerge.

47. Had the British negotiated in good faith during
those 17 long years, had they facilitated negotiations,
as requested by resolution 502 (1982), instead of
embarking on a war which obliged us to defend our
rights and made it impossible for us to withdraw out
troops in the absence of genuine negotiation and of
British willingness to negotiate, then today we would
be enjoying peace.

43. Let us now take a look at what contributions
the British have made to arriving at a negotiated settlement of the question. Let us not even mention the
political blindness of the United Kingdom leaders,
who have kept alive an anachronistic
problem long
beyond what was just and reasonable; let us not even
mention the existing lack of proportion between the
bloodless recovery of the islands by Argentina and
the bloody military escalation arising from the British
Government’s
nostalgic desire for imperial prestige.
Let us simply look at the facts. On 3 April the British
representative stated in the Council:

48. While the British fleet was advancing and being
strengthened under the cover of initial negotiations
in which the only party interested in a definitive solution to the long dispute was Argentina, the British were
arrogating to themselves the function of international
policing without, of course, the existence of any such
mandate from the Council.
49. Together with the announcement of the dispatch of the colonial fleet, the United Kingdom decided on the adoption of measures clearly constituting
aggression. On IO April it was announced in London
that, as of 12 April, a blockade zone would be crcuted
around the Malvinas.

“Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
states that: ‘The Members of the United Nations
agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the
5

50. Successive British naval and air attacks against
Argentina in the region of the Malvinas, South Georgia and South Sandwich, as well as the loss of human
lives caused by those acts of aggression, have been
reported to the Council through notes from the Argentine Mission, which are part of the documentation on
this item.

57. The exercise of self-defence which the United
Kingdom is alleging could only have taken place in the
absence of a resolution by the Council. But the resolution has been adopted, and the response of the United
Kingdom to the Council has been reiterated violation
of that resolution, which demands the cessation of
hostilities.

51, Similarly, we must also condemn in the United
Nations the fact that, in these attacks and bombings,
reiterated and publicized brazenly every day by the
United Kingdom, weapons of indiscriminate
effect
were used, posing a grave threat to the civilian population of the Malvinas, which ironically enough,
according to the British Government itself, constitutes
its greatest concern,

58. Self-defence can be exercised only as an immediate reaction to protect essential interests. The
Government of the United Kingdom had come to the
Council for the protection of its interests, but it was
unilaterally adopting all types of measures of a warlike
nature. Its war fleet was advancing and naval and air
attacks were being made against my country,

59. Self-defence can be used only to repel imminent
and grave danger. In the existing circumstances, the
United Kingdom could not allege any imminent and
grave danger. Argentina had complied in regard to
the cessation of hostilities and had not threatened
the United Kingdom. On the contrary, it had repeated
on several occasions that it accepted a peaceful settlement of the dispute, and to that end it was the first
to accept the steps taken by the Secretary-General.
It negotiated in good faith on the initial proposals
submitted by the Secretary-General;
the fruitless result
of those negot,iations is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom alone.

52. The humane character of the British was also
clearly demonstrated in the dastardly attack perpetrated by a nuclear submarine against the cruiser
G~ncrrrl Belgmno when it was moving towards the
continent and was outside the unlawful blockade zone
arbitrarily
imposed by the United Kingdom. The
bodies of 20 crew members were found: 30 1 crew members are missing. It is not surprising that, when this
fact, which, quite rightly, appalled world public
opinion, became known, a member of the British
Parliament accused the Prime Minister of having
committed “mass murder on the high seas”.
53. Every time the United Kingdom has committed
one of the odious acts described above, it has felt the
need to soothe its conscience by invoking the right
of self-defence.

60. This demonstrates
the curious form of negotiation adopted by the British Government.
While
negotiations were under way to give the appearance of
its readiness to find a peaceful settlement, brutal military pressure was being brought to bear. The alternatives were to accept its conditions or else suffer the
pressures of war. But if those conditions were not
accepted, then we were described as inflexible.
according to the reasoning which British propaganda
machinery had been disseminating
throughout the
world.

54. The corruption of principles is a grave crime and
the Government of the United Kingdom is assuming
that responsibility lightly.
55. It is known that, under Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations, unilateral actions must cease
when the Security Council has already taken measures. There is a legal obligation to suspend selfdefence once the Council “has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security”.
The determination
of whether such measures have
been effective must be reached objectively and cannot
be left to the arbitrary judgement of the Government
of the United Kingdom itself,

61. The United Kingdom cannot claim self-defence
of territorial integrity to justify its acts of aggression.
It is Argentine territorial
integrity which has been
violated. The islands belong to my country. The
great majority of independent
countries recognize
the islands as Argentine, and the United Nations has
characterized the dispute as a dispute over sovereignty. Moreover, even from its own standpoint, the
United Kingdom cannot allege that the islands are
Part of its own metropolitan
territory, but rather that
they are part of an anachronistic colonial dependency.

56. The United Kingdom decided on the mobilization of the fleet, on the naval blockade and on the
grave measures of economic blockade within a few
hours of the adoption of the Council resolution 508
(1982). Because of this, it cannot take shelter behind
an alleged lack of compliance with that resolution by
Argentina, which could hardly have withdrawn its
troops in the face of the specific threats of aggression
made by the British Government, Moreover, Argentina announced that it was prepared to comply with
the resolution and expressed that readiness before
the Council.

62. At this stage of events, we believe that international opinion has understood the deep meaning of
these facts and is shocked at the magnitude of the
British action, at the violence and the warmongering
spirit that inspire that Government.
In the face of
that fever for vengeance, the moderation with which
mY country has defended itself has been given international recognition, and the world understands that
6

lQrgentina is defending itself against a powerful aggres‘or. Argentina has not sought to humiliate, to defeat,
to obtain a military victory over the United Kingdom,
but simply to begin the recovery of that which belongs
to it. We are prepared to negotiate in good faith for
Qn honourable and intelligent
solution, but cannot
%ept being led to sign any paper that the United
kingdom presents that involves a serious renunciation
of our historic rights,

69. A Puma helicopter of the Argentine army was
also attacked and downed by British planes in spite
of the clear signs on the helicopter that it was on a
search and rescue mission.
70. In spite of all these acts of aggression, the Argentine Government
continued its willingness to negotiate, here in New York, under the chairmanship of
the Secretary-General,
in the spirit of searching for a
peaceful solution that would resolve the questions and
make it possible to fulfil Council resolution 502 (1982).

63. A genuine effort for peace has unfortunately
failed. The generous offer of assistance submitted
bY the Secretary-General
to both Governments
on
2 hlay did not succeed in finding the solution which
the gravity of the crisis requires.

71. There would be no sense in my relating in
chronological order everything that happened throughout those working sessions. But it is important for the
Council to be informed of the substance of what was
discussed and the consequences of all this for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

(j4. Argentina was the first to comply with the
initiative
taken by the Secretary-General,
as was
quite logical. Thus, at the Secretary-General’s
request, my Government decided that I should come
to this city to be available to the Secretary-General
and to express Argentina’s views on the proposal,
as well as to begin a series of meetings involving
intensive work, in which at the negotiating
table
Argentina once again stated its readiness to comply
with the will of the United Nations, as expressed by
the Security Council, as well as by General Assembly
resolutions
1514 (XV), 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII)
and 31149.

72. From the very beginning of the steps taken by
the Secretary-General,
the United Kingdom adopted
an attitude of rigidity in respect of the ideas that were
put forward at the suggestion of the Secretary-General:
that is, first, the mutual withdrawal of forces; secondly, an interim administration
of the islands: and,
thirdly, the initiation
of negotiations on substance
under the auspices of the Secretary-General.
All of
this was to be done simultaneously
and at a predetermined time.
73. I shall say a few words about the mutual withdrawal of forces. The Argentine Republic accepted
the cease-fire suggested by the Secretary-General
and proposed a modus opL>randi for the mutual and
gradual withdrawal of forces, under United Nations
observation,
following methods already explored.
Notwithstanding
that, the United Kingdom,
during
those negotiations,
introduced new demands which
imposed disturbing conditions aimed at bringing about
a failure in the withdrawal of military forces from the
region in an attempt to maintain indefinitely its warships, including nuclear submarines, in the area very
near the islands, at a distance of 150 nautical miles.
The United Kingdom clearly intended to keep its ships
near the coasts, thus purporting to show that the
Argentine forces were withdrawing under the pressure of the guns of the British ships andnot voluntarily,
as was our decision. No sovereign State could have
agreed to that.

65. The Argentine Government has from the very
outset, as a repeated demonstration
of its historic
Position in relation to the United Nations, had full
confidence in the role of the Grganization
and, in
Particular, the role which the Secretary-General might
play in these grave circumstances to preserve international peace and security and to eliminate all vestiges of colonialism from the world.
66. Our will to negotiate was constantly threatened by military aggression. The United Kingdom did
not accept a cease-fire, even informally, and in place
of it, during these negotiations, extended its blockade to I2 nautical miles from the Argentine continental
territory.
On Sunday, 9 May, it ‘resumed military
hostilities,
with military actions at Puerto Argentino
and Puerto Darwin and against an Argentine fishing
vessel.
As a result of the attack perpetrated on 3 May
67.
by a British helicopter against the Argentine dispatch
boat A(fc!rez Saht*rrl, which was unarmed and on a
rescue mission, eight crew members died and six others
were wounded. On 9 May, British ships bombarded
Puerto
Argentino for 35 minutes. That same day,
British
helicopters
attacked Puerto Darwin with
missiles and 30-mm cannons.

74. With regard to the establishment
of an interim
administration
in the islands while the parties negotiated the substantive questions in the dispute, the
Argentine Republic, in accepting the suggestions of
the Secretary-General
for an interim administration
by the United Nations, proposed that the establishment of that administration
should cover the Malvinas
Islands and its dependencies,
South Georgia and
South Sandwich, for a predetermined
period while
substantive negotiations were under way,

None of this was enough, What happened to
68.
the crew of the NOI’VNI fishing boat attacked by bombs
dropped by two British planes on 9 May was terrifying;
it caused the death of one crew member and wounded
another
14.

75. In that connection,
the Argentine
Republic
understood that an exclusively United Nations admin7

definitive, broad and rational settlement
to be found within the agreed period.

istration would be considered. The Argentine flag
would also fly in the islands. The United Nations
would carry out all legislative, executive, judicial and
security functions needed to ensure the normal administration of the islands, by means of officials who were
subjects of neither Britain nor Argentina, during the
brief period of the negotiations, which would last
approximately
one year.

of the dispute

82. However, the United Kingdom
attempted to
place conditions on that negotiating process, first of all
by insisting on a United Nations administration
that
would retain the colonial administrative
structure
which could prejudge and place conditions on substantive issues in the negotiating process. Secondly,
the United Kingdom
accepted neither direct nor
indirect reference to General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) nor to the three relevant resolutions of the
Assembly on the question of the islands. That attitude
constitutes absolute disregard of a 17-year process of
bilateral negotiations and of resolutions of the General Assembly. It was thus the British Government,
rather than Argentina, that laid down pre-conditions
on the negotiating process by rejecting mention of the
clear mandates of the General Assembly on this issue.

76. During that period, communications
between
continental Argentina and the islands would be kept
open and there would be no artificial restrictions on
the nationals of the parties on the islands or unfair
discrimination
aimed at immobilizing the territory, as
a reminder of the Victorian era, and thus of perpetual
maintenance
of British control through a system
artificially maintained over the years.
77. The Argentine airline LADE, which has served
the islands for the last IO years, and the scientific and
merchant ships that operated there would enter the
ports freely. Telephone, telegraphic and telex communications,
as well as Argentine colour television
services, would continue to operate. Also available
would be the Argentine petroleum and gas services
that provide energy to the islands, as well as the educational, health and all other services deemed useful
in the interim period.

83. We have also been surprised
to observe,
throughout the recent negotiations, the British attempt
to divide the territories and to submit to negotiation
the future of only one of the archipelagos,
whife
keeping the two smaller dependencies.
They also
wanted the interim administration
of the United Nations to exclude those dependencies, and they rejected
any withdrawal of their forces from those archipelagos. They did so in spite of the fact that in the course
of the negotiations throughout these years, and even
in joint Argentine-British
communiques
sent to the
United Nations, those dependencies were never considered separately. On the contrary,
they have
always been specifically
mentioned.
The United
Nations has throughout its actions considered them
as dependencies of the Malvinas Islands, and in the
course of negotiations those territories were always
considered to be a political and administrative
unit.
In this connection it is appropriate
to mention the
agreement contained in the joint communique
issued
in Buenos Aires and London on 26 April 1977 and
transmitted to the General Assembly in letters addressed to the Secretary-General
from the representative of Argentina, Carlos Ortiz de Rozas, and the
representative of the United Kingdom, Ivor Richard.’
The joint Argentine-British
communiques
transmitted
to the Assembly by the representative of the United
Kingdom on 19 January 1979’ and on 28 June 1979
are eloquent proof that the three groups of islands
were covered by the negotiations and that the United
Kingdom was not excluding them but, rather, explicitly
mentioning them by name.

78. Those ideas were not accepted by the United
Kingdom either. It seeks to keep the islands immobilized in time and space with the help of British colonial administrative
structures in full operation, together with the United Nations administrator,
thus
placing conditions on the United Nations and on the
process of negotiations on substantive issues.
79. It is impossible to accept, or to believe that the
United Nations could agree to, such an attempt to
prolong sirzc die, under its aegis, the structures of a
colonial administration,
This is a British claim that
runs counter to the irreversible process of putting an
end to colonial situations. We shall make further
reference to this point.
80. With regard to negotiations on substantive
issues, Argentina, while accepting the criterion of
simultaneous
action to set in motion the different
aspects- mutual withdrawal of forces, interim administration and substantive negotiations-suggested
by
the Secretary-General,
expressed its willingness to
keep negotiating with the United Kingdom on the
substantive issues under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral for a predetermined period.

84. Similarly, we should like to highlight the British claim to maintain the provisional administration of
the United Nations indefinitely,
perhaps because it
feels that nothing is more permanent than that which
is provisional.
Its draft agreement,
received on
Monday afternoon, placed conditions on that provisional administration
to the effect that agreement
between the parties would be reached. meaning that
the United Kingdom reserved its right to maintain

81. Argentina was prepared not to place any preconditions on the negotiations in view of its confidence in its legitimate authority, recognized collectively by the Foreign Ministers of Latin America at
the Washington meeting and the declarations of the
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, thus creating an appropriate atmosphere for a
8

that Situation if we did not accept what the British
wished to impose at the negotiating table, which would
have included our renouncing OUT rights.

92. The Argentine Republic, in bringing this information to the Council, wishes to thank the United
Nations, and in particular the Secretary-General, for
the efforts made in the search for an appropriate
framework in which to resolve the conflict between
the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom
on the question of the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia
and South Sandwich.

85. In other words, the interim system would not
end until the United Kingdom so desired, We believe
that that may have been their intention: that the proViSiOnal
administration
could go on without being
defined.

93. The Argentine Republic wishes to reaffirm to
the Council its constant will to negotiate.

86. The persistent utilization of force by the United
Kingdom has as a backdrop extremely serious attitudes
that serve as a context for this question. The impassive attitude which has attended the escalation of
violence, publicized
and designed by the United
Kingdom which clearly runs counter to the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and Council
resolution 502 (1982), is encouraged by the military
and economic support directly provided by other
countries.

94. It is now up to the Council to assume its full
responsibilities.
The painful experience of these past
weeks clearly demonstrates what the next step must
be if the Council is to be effective and constructive,
95. My country wants justice and wants to live in
peace, and it has demonstrated at high cost that it is
prepared to defend itself in order to achieve that.
Likewise, Latin America and the non-aligned countries have stated, with calm firmness, that they want
a peaceful and lasting settlement, that that settlement
must also be just and that justice involves recognition of Argentina’s sovereignty over the islands.

87. There can be no doubt that behind all British
reasoning and the recalcitrant attitude it has maintained
throughout this lengthy process there is an attempt
on the part of a permanent member of the Security
Council to maintain and increase its military presence
in the South Atlantic, a region which does not correspond to any of its legitimate interests.

96. The British Government must make no mistake,
nor must those who support it in this bloody undertaking: the hour of colonial restoration has gone for
ever, and nothing can counter the will of an entire
people united for the integrity of its national territory,

X8. This cannot be accepted by the United Nations
or the Council, unless the United Nations is prepared
to accept imperialism.

97. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
At the outset, Mr. President, I should like on behalf
of my delegation to congratulate you and your delegation on the great skill and patience with which you
have conducted our proceedings this month. These
are the qualities which we naturally expected to see
from a representative of your great country.

89. It is still early to draw full conclusions from
everything that is happening. None the less, one thing
appears with eternal clarity: the entire world wants
peace; it does not want an escalation of violence: it
wants a negotiated solution and the strengthening
of the spirit of genuine negotiation; it does not want
any evasion of the issues in the dispute, issues which
are none other than an attempt to perpetuate colonial
domination and a foreign presence, in violation of the
territorial integrity of a nation which is a Member of
the United Nations.

98. May I at the same time express our warmest
thanks to my good friend and colleague. Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda, of Zaire, and his delegation for the
admirable skill and urbanity with which they conducted our deliberations in the previous, also very
difficult, month.

90. British air and naval attacks have succeeded
each other in a virtually uninterrupted way since the
very beginning of the latest attempt to find a peaceful
settlement.

99, I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
for the account of the recent negotiations which he
has just given. During the long and difficult negotiations, no one could have tried harder to bring about
agreement
than did the Secretary-General.
My
Government has complete faith in his ability and integrity, It is not through want of skill or trying that he
has not succeeded.

91. Hundreds of human lives have been lost, but
this does not seem to be enough to deter the British
Government
in its will to conquer and its desire to
see our blood shed, At this very moment the colonial
intervention fleet of the United Kingdom has embarked
on a large-scale attack, whose destructive effects in
terms of lives and property may be vast. It is difficult
to anticipate the consequences of this for regipnal
and world peace, for the security of small and medtumsized countries and for the very future of the United
Nations.

100. I feel obliged to recall to members of the COUnciI how the present situation developed. I start with
the negotiations between my country and Argentina
which were held in New York at the end of February.
According to the communique which was agreed to by
the two sides, the talks had taken place in a positive
9

and constructive atmosphere. The Argentine side
had put forward during those talks some Proposals
concerning the procedure for further rounds of discussions. These proposals w’ere under consideration
by my Government during the month of March. At
the very end of that month, information came to mY
Government that there was a threat of an Argentine
invasion of the Falkland Islands. On I April, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina had informed
the British Ambassador in Buenos Aires that he was
unwilling to receive a high-level envoy; the diplomatic
channel, he said, was closed. It was for this reason
that, the same day, I April, I sought an urgent meeting
of the Security Council. I explained that we believed
an invasion to be imminent.
101. The Council reacted by authorizing its President to issue an appeal to Argentina and the United
Kingdom to refrain from the threat or use of force
in the region. My delegation immediately and on the
spot responded positively to this appeal. The representative of Argentina remained silent. On 2 April,
Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands. On 3 April,
Argentine forces invaded South Georgia. On that
same day, 3 April, the Security Council adopted resolution 502 (1982). This resolution determined that
there existed a breach of the peace as a result of the
Argentine invasion of the Falkland Islands, and
demanded the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine
forces.

104. However, in its strong desire for a peaceful
solution, mY Government
was prepared to negotiate
and, indeed, to show flexibility
in those negotiations.
Such negotiations were first undertaken through the
good offices of the Secretary of State of the United
States; thereafter, through the President of Peru.
The warmest tributes are due to both for their tireless
efforts. In particular, I believe that the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Alexander Haig, must have
set an unbreakable record of shuttle diplomacy.
in
terms of time and distance covered. Even after theil
efforts had failed to produce results, my Government
did not adopt the posture that no negotiations were
possible, nor that diplomatic channels had been closed
by Argentina’s actions. Far from it. We welcomed
the good offices of the Secretary-General
on the basis
of the broad range of ideas which he had presented
to my Foreign Secretary, Mr. Francis Pym. Tragically, the Secretary-General
felt obliged to report to
the President of the Council on 20 May that his efforts
had failed to produce the desired outcome I.s~v
S/1509Y 1.
105. Before reverting to the specific question of
the latest round of negotiations, I should like to set out
some basic principles.
106. The first one is peaceful settlement. It is clear
that the Argentine invasions were violations of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter--the fundamental
principle of peaceful settlement.
Both Argentina and
the United Kingdom had long accepted that a dispute
existed concerning sovereignty over the Falklands,
The General Assembly had also accepted this. Instead
of continuing to seek a peaceful settlement, on 2 and
3 April Argentina sought a military settlement. On
I April, the Argentine Foreign Minister had expressly
closed the diplomatic channels. These actions were
contrary to a fundamental
principle governing international relations, something
which demands the
severest censure from the international
community.
Even those who have a different view of the sovereignty question from .my own must surely agree that
Argentina, by using force, violated the fundamental
obligation on all States to seek peaceful solutions to
their differences. Argentina thus violated Article 2,
paragraph 3, and Article 37 of the Charter.

102. In the succeeding days, Argentina did not
explicitly reject that resolution, no doubt for the very
good reason that, as it was a mandatory resolution
under Article 40 of the Charter of the United Nations
-as was made clear at the time-it
was not open to
Argentina to purport to reject it. However, Argentina
rejected the resolution in practice. Instead of withdrawing, Argentina reinforced its armed forces on
the Falkland Islands. It imposed military government in the islands in place of the previous democratic
Government under which the British people of the
islands had lived peacefully in British territory for a
century and a half. Argentina was bent on consolidating its grip on the islands. In this situation, the
United Kingdom had no choice but to exercise our
inherent right of self-defence under Article 51 of the
Charter. We have meticulously informed the President of the Council of every step we were taking in
this regard. Possession of South Georgia was quickly
recovered, with little resistance and only one casualty,
on 22 April. But, 48 days after the adoption of resolution 502 (1982), Argentina remains in occupation
of the Falkland Islands.

107. I turn now to the non-use of force. The Argentine invasion was carried out by the use of force
against the entirely peaceful population of the Falkland Islands, people who had threatened no one at
any time. There was no question of self-defence by
Argentina. It is clear, therefore, that the Argentine
action was also contrary to Article 2, paragraph 4, of
the Charter. This is the obligation to “refrain . , .
from the . . . use of force
in any . . . manner inconsistent with the Pu’rphses of the United
Nations”. I need hardly remind the Council that the
very first Purpose of the United Nations, as stated in
Article 1, paragraph I, is to “bring about by peaceful
means
. , , settlement
of international
dis-

103. MY Government could have stood from the
outset on a position of absolute legitimacy-namely,
that the aggressor must withdraw, that the .vt(/tll.v yrlo
u1lte be restored and that the diplomatic negotiations, which had been so rudely interrupted by the
invasion, be resumed at the point at which they had
been broken off.
IO

putes . , .“. Argentina was thus in breach of the
Charter when on 2 April it began using force to try
to settle the difference that existed between it and
the United Kingdom over the Falkland Islands.

tory and to subjugate peoples is something which the

Charter was intended to prevent.
l 12. I turn to the question of self-determination foi
the People of non-self-governing territories. The
Charter is based on the principle of equal rights and
self-determination
of peoples. That is Article I
paragraph 2. The common article I of the Interna:
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International
Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, adopted by the General Assembly
in resolution 2200 (XXI) A, states clearly that “all peoples have the right to self-determination”.
Neither
the Charter nor the Covenants attempt to lay down
exceptions. Article 73 of the Charter which, with
Article 74, constitutes the Declaration regarding NonSelf-Governing Territories, recognizes the principle
that the interests of the inhabitants of Territories such
as the Falkland Islands are “paramount” and that the
inhabitants
of non-self-governing
territories are
“within the system of international peace and security established by the present Charter”. In other
words, the provisions about peaceful settlement and
the non-use of force to which I have referred apply
equally to non-self-governing territories. Article 73
speaks of development of self-government and the
progressive development of free political institutions.
It is institutions of this nature which the Falkland
islanders have long enjoyed. Indeed, it makes a
mockery of the right to self-determination for Argentina to attempt to replace a democratic government
and democratically
elected bodies in the Falkland
Islands with a military dictatorship. It adds insult
to injury when this military dictatorship attempts, as
it is doing, to change the way of life of the Falkland
islanders, to bring in settlers, to buy up land, to impose
the Spanish language, to change the curricula in the
schools and so on. All this is quite clearly contrary
to the right of self-determination protected by the
Charter, Indeed, it smacks of colonialism by Argentina.

108. Indeed, by its first use of armed force, Argentina committed an act of aggression within the meaning
of the definition of aggression suggested by the General Assembly in resolution 3314 (XXIX). In his statement to the Council on 3 April [2350th n?wting], the
Foreign Minister of Argentina attempted to advance
a dangerous doctrine that the Charter in some unspecified way did not apply in the present situation because the problem arose before 1945. Quite clearly,
there is absolutely no foundation in the Charter for
such a dangerous doctrine. The Charter applies to
everything in international relations which is happening
in 1982: the roots of many problems under consideration by the United Nations stretch back years, decades, centuries before the Charter was adopted in
1945. Moreover, the Argentine action was clearly
contrary to the rules of general international law prohibiting the use of force to settle problems, rules
which exist alongside the Charter. The rules of international law do not contain an exception for old, pre1945 differences between States.
109. Having established that the Argentine use of
force was illegal, because it violated both Article 2,
paragraph 3, and Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter,
it follows that the military occupation of the Falkland
Islands was and is also illegal. This was made clear
by the Declaration on Principles of International
Law
concerning
Friendly
Relations
and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations annexed to General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), which was adopted by consensus
in 1970 and which includes the principle that: “The
territory of a State shall not be the object of military
occupation
resulting from the use of force in contravention of the provisions of the Charter.”
I 10. As if that were not enough, the continued
Argentine
occupation is also clearly contrary to
paragraph 2 of Council resolution 502 (1982).

113. It is grotesque for Argentina to criticize the
system of government in the Falklands as colonial.
We have heard about “the need to remove all vestiges
of colonialism from the Americas”. But the system of
government has been endorsed by the people of the
Falkland Islands in free and fair elections. What
right have the leaders of Argentina to impose their
form of military dictatorship on an entirely different
people, who know democracy and cherish liberty?
It will not have escaped notice that Argentina has not
ratified either of the two International Covenants on
Human Rights, whereas the United Kingdom has
ratified both and has done so on behalf of the Falkland
Islands.

11 I. A word on self-defence. The situation facing
the British Government
is the following.
British
territory
has been invaded by Argentine armed forces.
British nationals are being subjected to both military
occupation
and military government against their
freely
expressed wishes. Argentina is using force
day by day to occupy British territory and to subjugate
the Falkland
islanders. Resolution 502 (1982) has
proved
insufficient
to bring about withdrawal.
Nothing
could be clearer against that background
than that the United Kingdom is fully entitled to take
measures
in exercise of its inherent right of selfdefence,
recognized by Article 51 of the Charter. If
the Charter were otherwise, it would be a licence for
the aggressor and a trap for the victim of aggression.
The first use of force to settle disputes, to seize terri-

114. The United Nations has accepted since 1945
that the Falklands are a non-self-governing territory
and that the United Kingdom is the Administering
Authority. We have co-operated with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the ImpleII

mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which
has reviewed the situation in the Falklands every year,
annually. Last year the General Assembly asked the
Special Committee to keep the situation under review
and to report to the thirty-seventh session. We have
fulfilled our obligations under Article 73 of the Charter. We have introduced political advances-a Legislative Council and an Executive Council, both with
elected members. We are not prepared to turn back
the clock and see those bodies abolished. It has been
said, but not on any evidence, that the people of the
Falklands are a transient, expatriate population. That
is untrue. The census results show the lie. The Falkland islanders have been in the Falkland Islands as
long as, or longer than, most Argentine families have
been in Argentina, They are an entirely separate
people with a language, culture and way of life different from those of the people of Argentina.

Government has exerted itself with the utmost good
faith and the strongest sense of urgency. The discussions under the Secretary-General’s
auspices have
been perhaps the most intensive and unremitting
negotiations in which I have ever participated.

115. The people of the Falklands have as much
right to continue to live in the Falklands as the people
of Argentina have the right to live in Argentina.

121. Let me illustrate what I mean by that. At the
outset, I said that there would be a legitimate attitude
for my Government-the
total withdrawal of the
aggressor, the restoration of the stratus yrro untc and
the resumption of the diplomatic negotiations which
had been broken off. Now, we had reached a position by 17 May where we were prepared to contemplate much more than that. We were prepared to
contemplate
parallel
withdrawal-parallel
mutual
withdrawal-not
that the invader should withdraw
first. We were prepared to contemplate this under
United Nations supervision. We were prepared to
contemplate a short interim period under United Nations administration
in order to enable diplomatic
negotiations to go forward for a definitive settlement
of the problem. Although we insisted that the democratic institutions on the island should remain during
the interim period, we were prepared to accept Argentine representation
in those institutions
disproportionate to the size of the Argentine community. We
were prepared to accept an official Argentine observe]
during the interim period. I do not think that these
points I have made demonstrate rigidity or inflexibility.

120. In the light of the progress which we hoped
had been made, I was called back to London last
weekend in order to take stock of the situation with
my Government at the highest level. On my return
on 17 May, I gave to the Secretary-General the final
position of my Government
in the form of a draft
interim agreement, the text of which was released to
the House of Commons yesterday and which has been
published in full in The N~II~ Yo1.k Times today. The
position was, in the carefully considered judgement
of my Government,
the furthest point to which we
could go in terms of flexibility without compromising
principles which we are not prepared to abandon.

116. Both peoples have the right to live under
their own systems of government. Argentina has no
right to deny the right of self-defence to the people
of the Falkland Islands, Nor does it have the right
to decide that Article 73 of the Charter no longer
applies to them, when it has so applied ever since
1945.

117. Argentina claims sovereignty on the basis of
eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century
history.
Argentina’s claim is not strengthened by anything
that has happened since 1833. The United Kingdom
has sovereignty on the basis of eighteenth-, nineteenth- and twentieth-century history; on the basis
of the nationality of the population; on the basis of
the freely chosen wishes of the people; and on the
basis of what they have achieved in the territory.
118. When the press publishes pictures of houses,
schools and churches in Stanley, these are houses,
schools and churches which the Falkland islanders
-not
General Menkndez’ forces-have
built. The
whole town of Stanley has been built since 1833.
I could go on giving examples. But the message is
clear. The Falkland islanders have every right to
the islands and have every interest in being allowed
to go back to their former way of life as soon as possible. Sovereignty is in dispute, but the people are
not. It is not a case of two communities sharing the
same territory.

122. As my Foreign Secretary informed the House
of Commons
yesterday-I
am paraphrasing his
words-our first requirement has been to secure the
withdrawal of Argentine forces, which was demanded
as a matter of mandatory obligation by Security Council resolution 502 (1982). The second has been to
establish a cease-fire to avoid further loss of life a~
soon as withdrawal could be agreed. The third has
been to make satisfactory provision for the democratic administration
of the islands in any interim
arrangements that might prove necessary. The fourth
has been to ensure that the negotiations with Argentina over the future of the islands should include terms
of reference to make certain that these negotiations
should not be such as to predetermine or to prejudge
the outcome, whether on sovereignty or on other
matters, The Foreign Secretary made clear in this

119. I now come to the negotiations themselves
-that
is to say, the negotiations which have been
taking place over the past 10 days or so under the good
offices of the Secretary-General.
Throughout
this
period, as was the case during the previous negotiations, initiated by United States Secretary of State
Haig and Peruvian President Belatinde, the British
12

connection that we remained prepared to negotiate
with Argentina about the long-term future of the
islands. We would be ready to discuss anything which
either side might wish to put forward, subject to the
outcome of the negotiations being in no way predetermined or prejudged in advance. As members of the
Council will see from study of our draft agreement
and from what I have just said, we have stood firm
where we have had to and we have shown flexibility
where we could.
123. I regret to have to inform you, Mr, President,
and through you the members of the Council, that
the response of the Government of Argentina to our
proposals was wholly unsatisfactory.
We had no
choice but to regard that response, as had been the
case in the previous rounds of negotiations, as a
further attempt to procrastinate in order to enable
Argentina to consolidate its hold on what it had seized
by force. Specifically,
the Argentine Government
insisted on including South Georgia and the South
Sandwich islands in the agreement. This was unacceptable to us: these islands have nothing to do with
our difference over the Falklands. They are nearly
1,000 miles away. They do not comprise an archipelago. They were administered from the Falklands
only as a matter of convenience. They are uninhabited. Our title to them rests on totally different
grounds compared with our title to the Falklands.
Furthermore, the Government of Argentina insisted
on an unequal process of withdrawal of forces which
my Government could not accept. The Government
of Argentina rejected the continuation in being, during
the interim period, of the democratic institutions in
the islands which have been developed over the years
in accordance with our obligations under Article 73
of the Charter. Argentina was only prepared to entertain the possibility that “persons” who are members of the population of British origin and Argentine
residents in the islands, in equal numbers, might be
appointed as “advisers” by the United Nations interim
administration.
This was not only ,wholly unacceptable to us in concept, as it involved the dismantling
of the democratic institutions to which I have referred,
but the idea of parity in numbers of “advisers” between a population of about 30 and a population of
about 1,800 was ludicrous. Argentina required freedom of access with respect to residents and property
during the interim period, This would have enabled
it fundamentally
to change the demographic status
of the islands during a short interim administration,
clearly an unacceptable proposition, The Argentine
formulation
on how and when and by what means the
negotiations
should be concluded was also totally
unacceptable to my Government. There was equally
no assurance, contrary to what we had previously
been led to believe, that Argentina had agreed to
language which would leave it beyond doubt that the
outcome of the negotiations should not be prejudged
at the outset.
124. That is not an exhaustive list, but it is enough
to demonstrate the justice of my Government’s conI3

elusion that the Argentine response amounted
comprehensive rejection of our proposals.

to a

125. The Secretary-General made a laudable lastnh.Ite attempt to see if the wide gulf between the
Parties could be bridged. My Government did not
reject that initiative
by the Secretary-General,
I commented to him on the telephone yesterday, as my
Prime Minister informed the House of Commons the
same afternoon, that we appreciated the positive
aspects in his initiative. I had to tell him that it differed in important respects from our final position and
that, even if acceptable to both sides as a basis for
negotiation, it would take days, if not weeks, to know
whether success could be achieved. I told the Secretary-Generaf that, before commenting in detail on
his ideas, we should first need to see comprehensive
comments from the Argentine side on every single
point in them. The gulf was so wide between our
final position and the response of the Government
of Argentina that it would have been fruitless to continue unless we could have been certain that the
Argentine reaction comprised a fundamental change
of position and major movement towards positions
which my Government could accept. No such reaction had been received by last night.
l-26. I also made clear to the Secretary-General,
as I had made clear throughout the negotiations and
as I have equally made plain to all members of the
Council in informal consultations, that, although my
Government’s
mind would never be closed to any
avenue which promised to bring about a peaceful
solution to the present crisis, we could not in the
mean time allow ourselves to be in any way inhibited
from carrying out military action in accordance with
our inherent right of self-defence under Article 51 of
the Charter. That remains our position today.
127. The British people are neither militaristic nor
bellicose. Over the centuries many nations have
made the mistake of interpreting our slowness to be
aroused as weakness. This has always proved a
profound mistake. We are not carried away by slogans
or rhetoric, but we are implacably stubborn in defence
of principles and the rights of peoples. In this instance,
the principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes
and of the non-use of force to settle political differences
have been flagrantly breached by Argentine aggression, The rights of the people of the Falkland Islands
have been trampled on by the invaders. We have
reacted as we have always reacted to such challenges
down the centuries of our history. Even so, we still
hope and pray for a peaceful settlement. provided that
it satisfies these principles and these rights.
128. Mr. DORR (Ireland): As this is the first time,
Sir, that I have had occasion to speak in public session of the Council this month, I should like to offer
to you my congratulations on your assumption of the
office of President of the Council for May. I have
good relations with you and my country has good

And over the past three weeks, the SecretaryGeneral has made a major effort in discussions with
representatives
of the two parties to establish a basis
for a settlement.
posals.

relations with your country, and I extend to you my
warmest good wishes. I should also like to congratulate and thank your predecessor, Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamanda, of Zaire, for the truly admirable way in
which he carried out the function of President in April.

137, This effort by the Secretary-General
Was CRI+
fully -judged, and it was handled with the highest
diplomatic
skill. But we have just heard from htm
that he does not consider it fruitful now t0 pursue his
present effort further.

129. The Council is meeting today at a moment of
crisis. Argentina and the United Kingdom are at war
in the South Atlantic, and their conflict has widening
consequences for the international community as a
whole. For its part, my country, which has close and
friendly relations with Great Britain and friendly
relations also with Argentina, is deeply concerned
and affected.

138. IS there any alternative’?
Or must the international community and the Council now accept the
inevitable. Like the chorus in a Greek play, must We
lament the unfolding tragedy but do nothing to try
to avert it?

130. This is the war that should not have happened.
That might perhaps be said of every war. But could
it ever before have been said with such conviction as
here and now?

139. Already, on 4 May, the Government of Ireland
formally requested a meeting of the Council. We did
so because it was unthinkable
in our view, at a time
when other peace efforts seemed to be at an end, that
the international
community
should simply accept
war as inevitable. We thought it vital that the United
Nations, as an instrument for resolving conflict and
averting war, should be mobilized and brought into
play.

131. How has it come to this?
132. In early April, Argentina acted to resolve its
long-standing dispute with the United Kingdom over
the Falklands/Malvinas
Islands by using force. It was
wrong to do so, and that must be clearly said.

140. This was done to good effect. The SecretaryGeneral had already made contacts with the parties
-as he has told us-at the beginning of May: and for
nearly three weeks now, with enormous patience and
skill, he has used his good offices to try to bring about
a settlement. During that time my Government
has
not pressed for a public meeting of the Council, Our
aim-to involve the United Nations where other peace
efforts had ended-was very well served by the heroic
effort of the Secretary-General.
At three private
informal meetings of the Council in recent weeks, we
all joined in giving him our unanimous support and
encouragement; and we have heard from time to time
from him of the progress of his efforts.

133. In speaking in the Council at the time on behalf
of Ireland, I did say so. I also warned of the dangers
ahead. I shall quote briefly from my statement of
3 April:
“Some may think that a dispute over small islands
is itself a relatively small matter, but the use of
armed force in any dispute is serious. Force can
lead to retaliation, and conflict can quickly escalate,
Wars in the past have started for less.
“It is a major purpose of the very existence of
the United Nations to avert such conflict. It is
because the United Nations exists today that we
have the right to insist, on behalf of the whole international community, that conflict, once started, must
be halted and that disputes must be settled not by
force but by peaceful means in accordance with the
Charter.” [lhid, pa,vrs. 237-238.1

141. Those efforts are now at an’ end. The Secretary-General does not think he can go further on the
present basis. Ireland has therefore asked for this
meeting of the Council-the
first such meeting to
address itself to the problem since 3 April,

134. Those fears of early April have proved well
founded. For seven weeks now the world has watched
with a kind of dreadful fascination as an old, old pattern
has been acted out once more,

142. We have two reasons for doing so. In the first
Place, we felt that the Secretary-General
would wish
to report to the Council on the long and patient effort
which he had made in recent weeks to reach a settlement.

135. The initial use of force brought force in reply.
The right of self-defence was invoked. Honour and
prestige became engaged on either side and principles
had to be defended. Conflict escalated and preparations were made for war.

143. This in itself. we believe, would justify a
public meeting. But we also believe that, at a time of
serious and growing conflict, the Council has a duty
to meet when other efforts fail to consider if any possibilities remain to stop the conflict. We know well
the limitations
on action by the Council, Hut we
simply cannot accept,
until every possibility.
however slim has been exhausted, that a conflict its tragic
as this should continue and grow,

136. Over those seven weeks, several attempts
were made through international mediation to avert
this war. Secretary of State Haig worked hard to this
end. President Belaunde of Peru put forward proI4

144. I said earlier that this is the war that should
not have happened. I repeat that with insistence.
The dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom has many special features which should have
made it possible to avert war and which should now
make it possible to halt war once it has begun.

154. Secondly, we regard the initial armed intervention by Argentina as wrong. Our Prime Minister Mr. Haughey said in the lrish Parliament
on
If May:
“The Irish Government have from the outset
regarded the armed intervention by Argentina as
contrary to the rule of law. Disputes between
nations, of which there are many around the world,
cannot be solved by the recourse to force. The
principles of the rule of law and the peaceful settlement of disputes must be upheld.”

145. In the first place, the United Kingdom
and
Argentina are not enemies-or
were not enemies until
this unresolved dispute between them turned to war.
146. In the second place, the issue in dispute in
this case is the real and only cause of conflict. Elsewhere, and in other cases, the immediate
cause of
war may be small or trivial. But the reality quite often
in such cases is that war is caused by deeper reasons,
of ideology or of regional rivalry. This is not true in
the present case. This conflict really is about a single
issue. If that issue could be resolved on a satisfactory
basis, the conflict would end. That means that here,
more than in any other case in our time, there is a
test of the systems and methods which the international community has evolved over a generation for
settling disputes between nations.

+-

.

155. Thirdly, we stand by resolution 502 ( I982), for
which we voted on 3 April. We believe that it must be
implemented in all its parts. That is to say, we want to
see an immediate cessation of hostilities, a withdrawal
of Argentine forces from the islands and a negotiated
diplomatic
settlement to the dispute. Of course, a
settlement now must also take account of developments since resolution 502 (1982) was adopted. We
believe, therefore, that it was right for the SecretaryGeneral’s negotiations to envisage a withdrawal by
forces on bdth sides.

147. Thirdly,
though the principles at stake are
none the less important, the area in dispute is small
and geographically
isolated. The population
of the
islands is tiny: no more than 1,800 people-that
is,
perhaps 800 families in all.

156. Fourthly,
as part of a diplomatic
effort to
avert conflict and have those principles implemented,
the Irish Government, in a spirit of solidarity, joined
with the other States members of the European Community in an initial programme of sanctions adopted
on 10 April for a limited period [see S//4476, rrnrzcsl.
But it became clear some weeks ago that the context
in which those sanctions were adopted had changed.
The sanctions were not now reinforcing a diplomatic
effort to secure a peaceful settlement, but were part
of a growing war. In this new situation, Ireland, a
country which has traditionally been neutral in armed
conflicts, reviewed its support for sanctions and,
following discussions about their renewal within the
European Community, declined to extend them further
when they expired on 17 May.

f48. Fourthly, although positions in the present
conflict are strongly held, both sides have in the past
accepted that the underlying issue-that
of ultimate
sovereignty over the islands-is indeed a subject for
negotiation
between them, And ideas were even put
forward at one stage of those negotiations some years
ago which could have been the basis for a settlement.
149. Those are all good reasons why the underlying
dispute about the future of. the Falklands/Malvinas
Yslands should be manageable.
,.

157. Those are the principles which Ireland has
supported throughout this present conflict and which
we continue to uphold as necessary to any settlement.

150. But, it will be said, the immediate
cause of
conflict is not the ,underlying dispute in itself, but the
effort by one side to resolve that dispute in its favour
by the use of force in breach of the rule of law.
Everything
that has followed over the past seven
weeks, it may be said, has resulted directly from that.

158. But does it follow that a commitment to these
principles must also involve acceptance of war as
necessary to uphold them? My delegation cannot
agree.

151. Where important international
principles are
at stake, it is right to be clear in our thinking. If we
accept an important principle as valid, we should also
be consistent in wishing to see it upheld.

1.59. War in our day, even limited war, is the ultimate irrationality
in international
relations. It may
begin rationally enough in defence of principles but it
soon acquires its own irrational logic and momentum.
It may start through calculation. But once started,
it soon escapes all calculation, whatever the original
intentions of political or military leaders on either

1.52. For its part, the approach taken by Ireland at
each stage of this problem has, we believe, been consistent and clear. Let me set it out briefly here again.

side.

153.
First, Ireland has not expressed a position on
the merits of the underlying dispute about the islands.

160, It may seem unlikely or even far-fetched to
say that the limited war now under way in the South
IS

i

that as other peace efforts have been abandoned, the
options remaining for action have one by one been
narrowed.

Atlantic

could spread more widely or involve other
But how unlikely it must have seemed to
the world in 1914 that a single shot would echo and reecho until an elaborate system of alliances toppled
slowly into war.
countries.

167. At the same time, it is clear that what was
achieved by the Secretary-General in several weeks of
intensive effort was indeed remarkable.
To a detached observer hearing him today, it would seem that
more than 7.5 per cent of the points at issue had been
agreed, including all of the principles of resolution 502
(1982). We simply cannot afford now to let that be
lost. For our part, therefore, we consider that there
could be merit in having the Council formally ask the
Secretary-General to renew his efforts, but this time
with the added strength which a formal mandate from
the Security Council could give him.

161. Already, in a war that is still limited, there has
been a tragic cost in human lives. The total of those
killed until today was perhaps already equal to one
third of the population of the islands. Today, it may
be even more. The expenditures on each side so far
are vastly greater than the total product of the islands
for many years. If they could have been devoted to
the welfare of the islanders, how great would have
been the benefit to all concerned.
162. It is indeed tragic that there should have been
such losses among the forces on both sides and perhaps among the islanders themselves. Nothing can
now change that. But in another sense there is still
time. We must always believe that there is still time.
For its part, Ireland thinks it imperative that a halt be
called now before the conflict escalates further and
becomes open-ended.

168. It might seem at first sight that it would be of
little avail simply to ask the Secretary-General
to
continue an effort which he himself felt it necessary
yesterday to bring to an end. But if the Council, in
pressing for an end to conflict, should now in addition
give the Secretary-General
a formal mandate, then
his effort could receive new life. Its content is already
admirable. My question is, can we give it new form,
new status and new authority?

163. I repeat with insistence that we are not indifferent. We stand strongly by the principles I have
stated and we do not want to see an action which was
originally unacceptable become accepted now as a
firit rrtwmpli.
We too believe that wrongful actions
cannot be carried out with impunity. But there is no.
question of that here. It is evident that all recent
negotiations to reach a settlement were based on an
acceptance of all the fundamental principles of resolution 502 (1982) by both sides, including, in particular, the principle of withdrawal of Argentine forces
from the islands, mentioned in paragraph 2 of that
resolution. The statement we have heard today from
the Secretary-General has again made that quite clear.

169. Those are the views which Ireland would
wish to express at this moment in our discussion of
this urgent matter. Let me conclude by setting them
out in brief.
170. We think it vital that conflict, with all its dangers and tragic possibilities,
should end and end
quickly. We think it vital that basic principles should
be maintained. And we think it vital that everything
on which the Secretary-General
has been able to
achieve tentative agreement should now be preserved
and built on through his further efforts until full agreement has been reached.

164. For our part we hold firmly, as I have said,
to the basic principles we have endorsed and we insist
that it is imperative that they be implemented.
But
we also see a new imperative in the present dangerous
situation. It is simple. Someone must shout “stop”
before the present conflict becomes uncontrollable,
precisely in order to ensure that these principles are
upheld and further tragedies averted.

I7 I. I should like to reserve my right to speak again
at a later stage in ‘our debate if the circumstances
should make it necessary to do so.
172. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): First of all. Sir,
I should like to extend to you my warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of May. Although this is only the second formal
meeting of the Council this month, you have amply
demonstrated exemplary wisdom and diplomatic skill
in a series of informal consultations held from the
very beginning of this month on the various important
matters of which the Council is seized. 1 wish to
assure you that my delegation will continue to cooperate to the fullest extent of its abilities as you carry
out the duties of your high office.

165. It is to that problem that we believe the Council must address itself now with the greatest urgency.
The challenge to us here is to find a way of calling a
halt as soon as possible to the present fighting and
allowing negotiation to resume while maintaining out
full support for the principles already endorsed by the
Council.
166. My delegation will be ready to join with other
delegations in this effort and to do so as a matter of
urgency. We have no illusions that the task will be
easy. We are aware of the inherent limitations on the
Council’s action in such a matter and we know, too,

173. I should also like to pay a high tribute to
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, of Zaire, for his guidance of the Council’s work last month. Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda’s exceptional ability was consistently in
I6

evidence as he presided over the work of the Council
in April, a particularly busy and difficult month. It is
no exaggeration to say that, without his perseverence
and keen insight, the Council would not have been
able to discharge its responsibilities
with such admirable success and efficiency.
174. Turning now to the question of the situation
in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas),
I should like first to express our deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General for the strenuous efforts he has
made during the past weeks to find a peaceful solution
to the dispute.
175. Ever since the Council took up this question
last month, my Government
has been urging the
immediate withdrawal of the Argentine armed forces
from the islands in accordance with Council resolution 502 (1982), as well as the principles and spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations, and has earnestly
hoped that the dispute would be settled peacefully
through diplomatic
negotiations.
Accordingly,
we
have positively supported the peace efforts of Secretary of State Haig of the United States, President
Belatinde of Peru and the Secretary-General. Having
witnessed the breakdown of the efforts of the United
States and Peru, it is a matter of profound regret that
the Secretary-General has now reported to the Council that his efforts have not in his judgement offered
any prospect at present of bringing about an end to
the crisis or of preventing the intensification of the
conflict.

182. In 1833, when the Government of Argentina
informed Brazil of the occupation of the islands by
Great Britain and of the expulsion of its Governor and
Argentine citizens living there, the Government of
Brazil associated itself with the protests of the Argentine Republic to the British Government. From the
outset, we have always viewed this situation as dc
fhcto occupation by the British.
183. With the passage of time, there was no arbitral award, no international judicial decision or treaty
giving juridical validity to the British occupation: nor
does the passage of time give legal validity to the fact
of occupation, since the aggrieved country-Argentina-unceasingly
reiterated its protest and its objection to the occupation.
184. Another aspect of the Brazilian stand has
always been that of promoting a peaceful and negotiated settlement to the dispute. Hence. we supported
the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly in
the framework of the broad issue of decolonization
recommended
-in
1965, 1973 and 1976-which
negotiations between the parties.

177. The PRESIDENT
fi/ztc~,p,.Ptf/tion from
Chi~PW): The next speaker is the representative of Brazil.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

da COSTA (Brazil) fintcrpwMr. President, first of all,
I should like, on behalf of the Brazilian delegation, to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
having given US this opportunity to participate in the debate on a question that is of extreme gravity for the
entire world, and in particular for Latin America.
179.
ulate

Mr, CORRi?A
from

180. The Government of Brazil has observed with
deep concern the deterioration of the situation of conflict in the Malvinas Islands, which has brought about
the convening of this meeting of the Council in the
face of imminent bloodshed of incalculable proportions. On the instructions of President Figueiredo,
our concern was expressed at the Twentieth Meeting
Of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
OAS, convened in accordance with the provisions of
the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance;
in messages addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Council by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Brazil; and in official declarations of the
Brazilian Government. President Figueiredo himself
has directly and personally appealed to the British
Prime Minister and the President of the Argentine
Republic for peace and harmony. In spite of those
statements by Brazil and many other countries, and in
spite of the adoption by the Council of resolution 502
(1982), which both parties have declared their readiness
to implement,
the situation is now more critical than
ever.
181. I should like to recall the position that Brazil
has traditionally
taken on this issue.

176. My Government
wishes to stress once again
that Council resolution 502 (1982) must be implemented as soon as possible. At the same time, my
Government hopes that, in order to avoid a worsening
of the situation, with a further.escalation of the armed
conflict and the loss of human life, both parties, as well
as all others concerned, will urgently explore in good
faith every possibility for the peaceful resolution of
the dispute, including the resumption of the use of
the good offices of the Secretary-General.
My Government, for its part, is ready to continue its utmost
efforts both within and outside the United Nations
towards this objective.

178.
ftrtion

Council. At this time that is so difficult for peace, we
wish you success in your task.

Spclnish):

185. The Government of Brazil has never given UP
hope that the question might be resolved by peaceful
means. It is our understanding that a peaceful settlement must be based on complete and non-selective
fulfilment of all the provisions of Council I.eSOhtkm
502 (1982). That is why my Government firmly suppal-ted the efforts made in recent days by the SecretWGeneral to find a solution that might avoid an armed

At the same time, Sir, I should like to congraton your assumption of the presidency of the

YOU

17

-.

conflict between the Argentine Republic and the
United Kingdom.
Brazil’s position-that
the United
Nations should contribute effectively to a settlementwas expressed in a message addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil
in which he affirmed:

189. The Council is now duty-bound to decide on
measures, under the supervision of the United Nations,
to prevent a worsening of the situation and to give the
Secretary-General
a formal mandate to resume his
efforts with the two parties to reach a just, honourable
and lasting solution.

“Given the continuing worsening of the crisis
between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Argentine Republic and
that the outbreak of an armed conflict in the South
Atlantic is imminent,
the Government of Brazil
believes it is imperative to immediately activate the
mechanisms established by the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is the responsibility of the United
Nations to take prompt and effective measures,
including those of a preventive nature, to ensure the
implementation
of Security Council resolution 502
(1982) in all its aspects.” [S//5024.]

190. The Council has the obligation and the exclusive competence to adopt necessary measures for
the fulfilment, in all its aspects, of resolution 502 (1982),
which the Council itself adopted, and it cannot accept
unilateral actions against specific provisions of that
resolution, even if, without its authorization, allegedly
aimed at the fulfilment of the Council’s decision.
191. In the statement to the Council made by my
delegation on 3 April [22350th Merriam], we affirmed
that the question of the Malvinas Islands affected us
deeply as Brazilians. The international
community
cannot remain passive in the face of this situation,
as all its members will be affected by it.

186. On 19 May, in the face of an imminent bloody
conflagration in the South Atlantic, our Foreign Minister addressed to you, Mr. President, a message of
support for the Secretary-General’s efforts, in which
he said:

192. We trust that the Council will take the necessary measures to ensure that there will be no room for
individual acts of war.
193. The PRESIDENT
fintc>rpwirrtion
~%~m ChiThe next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ecuador. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement,

new):

“Deeply concerned at the prospect of imminent
bloodshed as the outcome of the crisis between the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Argentine Republic over the Malvinas Islands, I reiterate, on behalf of the Brazilian
Government, the firm conviction that it is indispensable to reach a peaceful and honourable solution,
without winners or losers, and involving the participation of the United Nations, if necessary at the
operational level, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of its Charter and the relevant resolutions of its main organs.

194. Mr.

ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) (intcrpwttrfiw
I thank you, Mr. President, for being
so kind as to allow the representative of Ecuador to
take part in this meeting of the Council, a forum for
the free expression of the opinions of countries interested in, and concerned about, world peace, where
there are thorough debates with the full participation
of countries from different regions of the world. I trust
that your presidency of the Council will be successful.
since your talent and experience speak for your great
country’s age-old wisdom and vocation of peace.

.fiom SptrnLsh):

LL. . .
“AS a Member State of the United Nations invariably dedicated to the purposes and principles of the
Charter, Brazil is confident that, if necessary, the
Security Council, on discharging its duties, will
take prompt and effective measures for the maintenance of international
pence and security.”
[S/lSOY7. ]

195. Ecuador, as a Latin American country and
strong defender of the principles of international law,
cannot but regret the breakdown of negotiations
which two member countries had been holding under
the auspices of the United Nations.
196. Ecuador has unswervingly
and resolutely
supported the Argentine territorial claim to savereignty over the Malvinas Islands, both in the organs
of the United Nations and in those of the OAS and of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

187. In the same spirit, the Government of Brazil,
through its Foreign Minister, supported the Secretary-General’s
peace efforts, and it cannot fail
deeply to deplore the interruption
by the United
Kingdom
of those efforts. In fact, the essential
elements of a peaceful solution were present in those
efforts.

197. Argentina’s right to those islands as part of
its national territory is clear, since, when it achieved
independence from Spain, it succeeded to all the
rights formerly held by that metropolitan country,
In this regard, as the constitutional
President of mY
country, Mr. Osvaldo Hurtado, said in a recent cummunication to the President of Argentina:

188. The situation is grave and critical. There has
already been significant loss of life on both sides. and
it is increasingly urgent to break the chain of violence,
18

“Ecuador has AW~IYS maintained that right to the
territories of the Latin American countries must be
based on the essential legal principle of I,ripo,~,~;&ti,v
.iirri.v of 18 IO and. consequently, has always rejected
territorial gains by the threat or use of force. Hence,
it considers that the mere occupation of territories
that rightfully
belong to our countries cannot be
validated by the passage of time, however long it
may be. From the outset, it has been a matter of
outright usurpation of territory. Added to this is
Ecuador’s firm determination,
expressed on many
occasions, to exhaust every possible effort in order
to achieve the elimination of colonialism throughout
the world, particularly in Latin America.”
1%. In the face of the unacceptable dispatch-which
is as much a breach of the law as it is an anachronismof an enormous naval force against the American continent; in the face of the declared use of force in order
to impose solutions; in the face of the announced and
publicized
naval and air blockade through the arbitrary seizing of ocean spaces: in the face of economic
Sanctions, endorsed by various Powers in the European Community;
and now in the face of the resort
to open warfare-Ecuador
expresses its complete
repudiation
of these acts and invokes the principles of
law to put an end to economic and armed aggression.
This same view has been expressed by the countries
of the Andean Group and by those of the Latin American Integration
Association.
Ecuador’s Foreign
Minister,
Luis Valencin, had the following to say
concerning this kind of extra-continental economic and
armed aggression:
“These attacks in order to maintain colonialism,
besides endangering peace and security on the American continent and in the world as a whole, togethel
with the coercive measures imposed upon Argentina, violate the validity and binding nature of the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of American States: namely, that there should be no recourse
to the threat or use of force in international relations,
that disputes between States should be settled solely
by peaceful means and that the occupation of territory by force cannot be validated by the passage of
time, however long the interval may be-fundamental principles on which Ecuador’s traditional
foreign policy is based.”
199. It is Ecuador’s understanding that a member
State of the OAS, a party to the Inter-American Treaty
of Reciprocal
Assistance or a State Member of the
United
Nations can have recourse to any world or
inter-American
body, according to its preference.
That is why it is relevant to mention at this meeting
ofthe Council the important resolution of the Twentieth
Meeting
of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the OAS, adopted by 17 Votes to none, with
4 abstentions
on 28 April [S//5008, ~/!?/w.v]. The InterAmerican
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance establishes explicitly
that its resolutions bind all the Parties

to it in a legal and moral commitment once those
resolutions have been adopted by a two-thirds majority. After appealing for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, the resolution urges the Governments of
Argentina and the United Kingdom to call a truce that
will make it possible to resume the negotiations aimed
at a PeaCefUl settlement of the conflict, taking into
account the right of sovereignty of Argentina over the
Malvinas Islands, as well as the interests of the islanders. It deplores the adoption by members of the European Community
of coercive economic measures
and cites the Declaration of the Inter-American JUridical Committee of I6 January 1976 to the effect
that: “the Republic of Argentina has an undeniable
right of sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands”
[ihid.].
200. Ecuador has consistently advocated the elimination from our continent of any colonialist presence
and thus supported General Assembly resolution I5 I4
(XV), containing in its annex the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, which applies to American territory, without
prejudicing the essential principle of the national unity
and territorial integrity of States. Similarly, as regards
Argentina’s claim to sovereignty over the Malvinas,
the General Assembly, in its resolutions 2065 (XX),
3 160 (XXVIII)
and 31/49, expressed concern at the
lack of substantial progiess in the negotiations between Argentina and the United Kingdom on the
peaceful settlement of their dispute. It is relevant to
mention resolution XXX111 of the Ninth International
Conference of American States, held in 1948, which
stated that:
“The historical process of the emancipation of
America will not be complete so long as there remain
on the continent peoples and regions subject to a
colonial rigime, or territories occupied by nonAmerican countries.“4
201. Desirous of achieving a peaceful solution.
which is what can and must be sought instead of using
force, Ecuador-which,
together with Colombia and
Costa Rica, secured the adoption by consensus in the
OAS of the initiative of offering friendly co-operation
in the efforts to find a solution that would finally
avert the threat of war between countries which
deserve the respect of the international COmmUnitY
-reiterates before the Council the need to demand an
immediate cessation of hostilities. The gallant initiative of Panama, as the true representative of Latin
America, and that of Ireland, which a few days ago
called for an immediate cessation of hostilities between
the forces of Argentina and the United Kingdom and
for the negotiation of a diplomatic settlement under
United Nations auspices, have already been mentioned, In so doing, and in urging the European Community to rescind its hastily imposed sanctions against
an American State, Ireland reaffirms its noble traditions, traditions which have also been part of the
history of our South American peoples ever since the

days of independence, 150 years ago, independence
from that same colonial rule of which we are today
witnessing the last painful chapters and, we hope,
the final elimination.
202. Ecuador endorsed General Assembly resolutions 32/76 and 32/79, concerning the Treaty for the
Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco).
There is a commitment
to
implement the Additional Protocols in the territories
within the geographic zone established in that Treaty,
which clearly includes the Malvinas Islands; those
islands similarly fall within the scope of the InterAmerican Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance of 1947.

threatened scale of the conflict demonstrates stork!Y
the dangers of allowing the situation to deteriorate.
210. But it is necessary to keep in mind the origins
of the present conflict. It was Argentina’s invx&n
of the Falkland Islands, in defiance of the call made
by the Council on 1 April [2345th meeting, pcwc~.74 1
that force not be used, that is the cause of the current
breach of the peace in the region.. And it has been
Argentina’s refusal to heed the mandatory call of the
Council on 3 April [resolution 502 (1982)] for withdrawal of its occupying forces which has sustained the
continued crisis.
211. By invading those islands tind then spurning
every call for withdrawal, Argentina has been the
author of its own misfortunes. It is not British ohstinacy but Argentine recklessness that accounts for the
present widening conflict. The Argentine Government, while it is bound by treaties of the United Nations and-let us not forget-the OPS not to use force
or the threat of force to settle territorial disputes.
repudiated those principles in its grab for the islands
in early April. It has since hoped t? be rewarded with
a promise of permanent sovereignty. The British
Government has consistently,
and understandably.
rejected such an approach.

203. The United Nations, faithful to its principles,
cannot remain indifferent and the Council must take
action to halt the use of force and to re-establish negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations.
Ecuador will never accept the use or the threat of use
of force as a means of settling international disputes.
Action by the Council immediately to restore peace in
the western hemisphere is anxiously awaited in fulfilment of the solemn commitment enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It is to be regretted
that the United Kingdom has broken off negotiations
which were proceeding according to the timely and
persistent initiative of the Secretary-General,
who
should be given a mandate by the Council which would
be both wide-ranging and practical.

212. Britain has taken a position based on principle.
The Falklands may seem remote from the interests and
concerns of many countries of the world. But what is
at issue is not remote. If the use of force is allowed
to go unchecked in one area, it invites similar techniques in other areas. South America and Ccnt~*aI
America in particular are littered with territorial disputes. If one country succeeds in acquiring territory
by invasion, what moral is to be drawn? The tragic
example of the 1930s comes to mind. That is where
that road leads.

204. My country reiterates its faith in the United
Nations and hopes that the action to be taken to bring
about a cessation of hostilities as provided for in the
Charter will be followed by a period of peaceful negotiation to settle the dispute.
205. The PRESIDENT
(irztcrp,etotion jiorn Chinc~sc): The next speaker is the representative of Australia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

213. It has not gone unnoticed by the Australian
Government that among the many international reactions which followed the Argentine invasion, concern
was expressed particularly by many of the smeller
States around the world. The moral they drew WL\S
much the same: aggression can be curbed only if
aggression is resisted.

206. Mr. STREET (Australia): It would have been
my hope, Mr. President, to have been able to offer
the usual congratulations on your election to the
presidency in happier circumstances, but that is clearly
not to be.
207. My delegation has requested permission to
speak in the light of the grave turn of events in the
Falklands crisis. We thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing us to do so.

214. So much for the facts in this dispute. Australia
is reticent about allowing itself to be dragged into s~rnc
of the technicalities which Argentina has invoked in
an attempt to justify its action. These arguments.
often resting on esoteric interpretations of the Charter
and of earlier United Nations resolutions, only Cloud
the real issue.

208. It is appropriate that the issue should again be
before the Council. The situation of armed conflict
which has erupted in the South Atlantic threatens to
develop into a major conflagration. There has already
been a tragic loss of life on both sides. New clashes
over the past 24 hours carry the danger of much greater
losses, both of men and material.

215. Nevertheless, a few observations may be in
order. First, Argentina has invited attention to PUrIlgraph I of resolution 502 (1982) to accuse the United
Kingdom of itself engaging in hostile action. In Our
view, this is a perverted reading of that resolution.
The present state of armed conflict in the area was the

209. All this points to the necessity of reaching an
acceptable political
settlement.
The present and
20

result of Argentina’s seizure of the Falklands, and
it Was to that Point that paragraph I of resolution 502
( 1982) was directed.

withdraw its forces. In moving to recover its territory, the United Kingdom was acting legitimately
under Article 5 I of the Charter in pursuit of its inherent
right of self-defence.

216. Argentina
has also invoked its claims to
sovereignty to rationalize its actions. It is not my
purpose at this critical juncture to probe those claims.
But it is to be noted that the Falklands are not selfevidently part of Argentina. Nor can the Argentine
claim be based on common ethnic ties-a critical point,
since the wishes of the islanders must be regarded as
an integral element in any long-term settlement.

.

222. It would, of course, have been everyone’s hope

that the situation had never reached the point of military conflict. Australia supported the successive
efforts, first by the United States Secretary of State,
then by Mr. Haig in conjunction with President
Belatinde of Peru, and finally by the Secretary-General,
to achieve a peaceful solution. That they have not
succeeded has not been their fault. For more than
six weeks their mediation efforts have been continuing,
to no avail. Argentina would not withdraw its forces
except under arrangements and conditions which
would have rewarded its unacceptable behaviour.

217. This in fact is the crux of the political problem.
Argentina has said that it accepts resolution 502
(1982). But at the same time and in the same breath,
it has been insistent on loaded arrangements in the
Falklands which, if accepted, would inevitably lead to
conceding its demalid of sovereignty. That, of course,
ignores the rights df the Falklanders, and therein lies
the problem in getting to the negotiating table.

223. We must nevertheless continue to hope that
there will be a return to the negotiating table. The
Secretary-General’s intervention, and that of other
well-disposed countries like the United States and
Peru, may still offer prospects for a return to reason.

218. AS the United Kingdom delegation has noted,
the inhabitants of the Falkland Islands constitute a
permanent
population
with roots in many cases
stretching back to the early part of the last century.
The fact that there is only a small number of them does
not diminish the importance they attach to choosing
the kind of life they want and the kind of government
they want, They must enjoy the same rights of consultation as any other peoples, including those who
inhabit other small islands and territories. This is an
obligation shared not only by the United Kingdom and
Argentina but by the international
community as a
whole.

224. The framework for reaching a just settlement
is laid out in Council resolution 502 (1982). The basic
point is that, since it was the Argentine invasion which
started the present crisis, it must be an Argentine
withdrawal that puts an end to it.
225. Time has almost run out in the South Atlantic.
But it still may not be too late. If some useful action
can be taken in the United Nations framework,
obviously this should be done. To the extent that
others have a capacity to bring about a meeting of
minds, these efforts too need to be pursued. It is
nevertheless, the firmly held view of the Australian
Government that the onus rests first and foremost on
the Government of Argentina. It is to those in authority in Buenos Aires to whom the international community must look to avert a deepening tragedy.

219. In short, what we have here is no simple
wrangle over colonialism,
as some would have us
believe.
Indeed,
if Argentina’s
aggression were
allowed to persist, it would itself amount to COIOnialism. The fact is that the islanders have not shown
any evident desire to change the essentially British
administtation
in which they have been able to take
part through their elected representatives. In free
and fair elections, the most recent in October I98 1,
they have shown a preference for the strrt~!.~ L/LI(J.

226. The PRESIDENT

(intcrprettrtion .f?Ol?I Chi-

ne.yc): I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of Antigua and Barbuda in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the Usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

220. But even if the facts were otherwise, even if
its claims were weII founded, Argentina would still
have no warrant for its use of force to try to establish by WLI~ dc /w/in what it had not succeeded in
obtaining at the conference table. On the contrary,
Argentina’s invasion of the islands was in clear violation of Article 2, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which lay down the fundamental
principles of peaceful settlement of disputes and nonuse of force.

:,
f .Ii.

221, If the United Kingdom has also been moved
to military action, it is a natural consequence of Argentina’s own unprovoked resort to force and failure to
comply with the demands of the Security Council to

227. The PRESIDENT

(intrrpretatioll

IIIJ,sLJ): I call on the representative
Barbuda.
21

.fi*Oln Chi-

of Antigua

and

I-

Mr.
JACOBS
(Antigua
and
Barbuda):
Mr. President, before I proceed with my statement,
I should like to congratulate you on your assumption
of your important office. I should like also to thank
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, of Zaire, for his wise and
diplomatic handling of the Council’s business during
the month of April.
228.

229. My country deeply regrets that the efforts by
the Secretary-General,
and by the United States Secretary of State before him, to bring Argentina and the
United Kingdom to the negotiating table, have not
found an affirmative response. It is obvious that the
crisis in the South Atlantic will now intensify. That
this should be so in 1982, when mankind is supposed
to have reached an age of reason and maturity, is a
mark against all humanity.
230. This development also strikes at the credibility
of the Security Council itself, for resolution 502 (1982)
should be binding on all Member States and should
have the force of law. To ignore that resolution is
nothing short of a slap in the face to this body, a slap
which will resound across the world, with severe
implications
for global peace and security; for, when
the Security Council can be so easily ignored, the
world is left without an effective forum to summon
erring nations to order.
23 I. As a small island State whose only defence
against the aggression of those larger and more powerful than ourselves is the Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of the Security Council, we must
deplore Argentina’s illegal use of force in seizing the

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

Yurk

Falkland Islands rather than negotiating
settlement of the dispute with Britain.

a peaceful

We are satisfied that the United Kingdom
Government has made genuine attempts to put forward proposals which could have led to a negotiated
settlement with Argentina. As the newest Member
of the United Nations, Antigua and Barbuda is deeply
saddened that Argentina did not find it possible to
respect Council resolution SO2 (1982) by withdrawing
its troops from the Falklands. We are further saddened
that Argentina did not find it possible to adhere to
the Charter of the United Nations, which provides fol
the peaceful settlement of disputes.

232.

233. We believe that a peaceful settlement can still
be attained even at this late hour, providing that the
will exists to prevent further confrontation.
In the
interests of global peace and the security of all small
States, Antigua and Barbuda urges Argentina to
eschew needless bloodshed and turn instead to the
conference table for a negotiated settlement of this
dispute.

NOTES

’ A/32/llOand
2 A/34/66.
.’ A/34/343.

A/32/111.
