A /70/PV.39

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

39th plenary meeting

Monday, 26 October 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. González
Franco (Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session
The Acting President: Before we proceed to
consider the item on our agenda for this afternoon, it is
my sad duty to inform members of the Assembly of the
passing away, on 19 October 2015, of His Excellency
Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like
to convey our deepest condolences to the Government
and the people of Libya and to the family of Mr. Treki.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Mr. Ali
Abdussalam Treki, former President of the General
Assembly.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Sierra Leone, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): As we gather in
remembrance of a departed African statesman, some
of us are with an especially heavy heart. The African
Group is particularly inspired by his years of service,

as reflected in his trail of public service, both national
and international, here at the United Nations and in his
country of origin. We note his service as the Permanent
Representative of his country to the United Nations,
as Chair of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) and as Vice-President
of the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
His work here at the United Nations culminated in his
election to the presidency of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session, in 2009.
On my personal behalf and on behalf of the African
Group, I wish to extend our deepest condolences to the
people of Libya and to the family of the late Mr. Ali
Treki for their great loss, and we encourage them as
a group to find solace in his legacy of national and
international service.
Some of us here at the United Nations recall his
powerful acceptance speech (see A/64/PV.1) on his
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session. In that speech he pointed
out quite clearly that, while the Second World War had
given victory to certain States and while the Charter of
the United Nations had allowed those victorious States
certain rights not accorded to the general membership,
the world had changed since then. It was therefore
no longer possible for the United Nations, with a
membership of more than 190 countries, to remain the
Organization it had been when it had only 50 Members.
Those are words to bear in mind as we address the
questions of the revitalization of the General Assembly
and the reform of the Security Council. He has left us

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33386 (E)

*1533386*

A/70/PV.39

a legacy to build upon as we continue to advocate for a
reformed United Nations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like,
as Chair of the Group of Asia-Pacific States, to extend
our deepest condolences to the bereaved family of the
late Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, former President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
Ambassador Treki was a man of deep knowledge
and a veteran in the field of diplomacy and international
relations. He was Libya’s Foreign Minister from 1977
to 1980 and served several times as his country’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. In
1982, he served as one of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session and later
presided over the Fourth Committee. During his tenure
as Libya’s Secretary of African Union Affairs, he played
a significant role in the creation of the African Union.
Ambassador Treki’s candidacy to the presidency
of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session
was supported by 53 African nations. When he
assumed office, on 15 September 2009, it was a very
busy year. It was a time when the world was facing
a number of challenges ranging from economic
and food security crises, political instability, issues
concerning the protection of human rights, as well as
those related to the Millennium Development Goals
and global health. It was during his presidency that the
Assembly consolidated the four bodies working for the
advancement of women into a single new entity, which
is UN-Women today.
Let us remember Ambassador Treki’s first speech
(see A/64/PV.1) upon assuming the presidency of
the General Assembly. President Treki referred to
his determination to put an end to wars and to their
causes and consequences. He stated that dialogue and
mutual understanding paved the way towards resolving
our problems, and that embargoes and blockades
were fruitless. He also said that embargoes and
blockades exacerbated antagonism and rebellion, while
undermining respect for the international community.
We believe that the Ambassador’s words still resonate
today, as dialogue and mutual understanding are indeed
some of the best ways to resolve the conflicts of the
world.

2/20

26/10/2015

Ambassador Treki’s passing away is felt not only
by the African States, but by many Member States of
the United Nations. As such, I would like to conclude
my brief statement by once again conveying the deepest
condolences of the Asia-Pacific States. Our prayers go
to the bereaved family members of the late Ali Treki.
May his soul rest in peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
It was with a great sense of loss that we received
the news of the passing away of His Excellency
Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session. On behalf of the
Eastern European States, I would like to express to the
Government and the people of Libya, as well as to the
family of Mr. Treki, our deepest sympathy and most
sincere condolences.
President Treki was an experienced diplomat well
acquainted with United Nations issues, having served
three times as his country’s Permanent Representative
to the world Organization. President Treki played a
significant role in the creation of the African Union
and contributed significantly to international efforts
to promote peace and stability, mediating several
conflicts in Africa, Cyprus and the Philippines, as well
as in other parts of the world, including in countries
members of our regional group.
President Treki was his country’s Secretary for
African Union Affairs when he became the sixtyfourth President of the General Assembly, in 2009. As
President of the General Assembly, he is remembered
for cultivating a spirit of cooperation, consensusbuilding, enlightened leadership and dedicated service
to our Organization. May God rest his soul.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
Mr. Condor (Saint Kitts and Nevis): On behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, I
express our condolences on the passing away of His
Excellency Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.

15-33386

26/10/2015

A/70/PV.39

President Treki had an extensive background in
diplomacy and multilateralism, including his long
career in the service of his country. He served as Libya’s
Secretary for African Union Affairs, Ambassador to
France, Permanent Representative to the League of
Arab States in Cairo and Minister for Foreign Affairs.

with the international community. The members of
the Group of Western European and Other States
express their gratitude for what President Treki gave
to the United Nations and offer our sympathies and
condolences to his family. Our thoughts and prayers are
with them during this difficult time.

President Treki also served as his country’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations three
times. He presided over the General Assembly’s Fourth
Committee and represented Libya on the Commission
on Human Rights. Notably, Mr. Treki was elected
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session, from 2009 to 2010, the culmination of a career
dedicated to international relations. During his time as
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Treki reiterated
the call for the Assembly to focus on three essential
elements for its success, namely, support, coordination
and innovation. Those are elements that we can all
continue to champion as we move forward in attempting
to strengthen the role of the General Assembly.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.

President Treki will also be remembered for his
dedication to the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the Non-Aligned Movement. His education
in history and political history prepared him well for his
service to the international community and the United
Nations family. We extend our sincerest sympathy to
his family, friends and colleagues. The United Nations
community mourns his passing.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): On behalf of the Group
of Western European and Other States, I extend to
the people and the Government of Libya our deepest
condolences on the death of His Excellency Mr. Ali
Abdussalam Treki, former President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
President Treki is remembered for his tireless
work in advancing the ideas of the United Nations as
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session. A distinguished Libyan diplomat, he served as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya several times
and as the Permanent Representative of Libya to the
United Nations no fewer than three times. In 2009, after
a distinguished career in the Libyan Foreign Service,
Mr. Treki served as President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session, and throughout his career
he consistently sought to promote Libyan cooperation

Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I have
the sad task today to speak on behalf of the host
country, the United States, on the loss of our colleague
and former President of the General Assembly, Mr. Ali
Abdussalam Treki. We wish to convey our sincere
condolences to his family, extended family and friends
and all the people of Libya, whom he served. As we all
know, Ambassador Treki was a distinguished diplomat
and an esteemed member of our community at the
United Nations.
His many posts, including representing Libya at the
United Nations, serving as Libya’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs, its Ambassador to France and, most recently,
as President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session, speak to his distinguished career in the service
of his nation, his continent and the broader global
community. Among his diplomatic achievements,
Ambassador Treki also played a significant role in the
creation of the African Union and in mediating several
conflicts across Africa and in other regions of the
world.
I would like to reiterate, on behalf of the United
States, our deep regret for the loss of a husband and a
father, as well as a colleague and a friend.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, and the representatives
of the regional groups and the representative of the host
country for the heartfelt condolences expressed today
and extended to the bereaved family members and
friends of our countryman, the late Mr. Ali Abdussalam
Treki. We would also like to thank all those who have
extended their condolences to the Libyan Permanent
Mission to the United Nations, whether through letters
or phone calls. Naturally, we would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and we would like

15-333863/20

A/70/PV.39

to inform the Assembly that all condolences will be
forwarded to the bereaved family of the deceased.
Allow me to personally extend my sympathy to
the wife of Mr. Treki, to his children, his family and
indeed all of his friends. We are greatly saddened by his
absence, and we pray to God that He accepts him and
that He bestows mercy upon him.
Mr. Treki enjoyed a long career, which spanned
more than 40 years. He held a number of positions
and posts, including serving at the head of Libya’s
diplomatic service, namely, as Minister for Foreign
Affairs. He also represented the African Union and
was secretary of the League of Arab States. He served
three times as the Permanent Representative of Libya
to the United Nations in New York, and he was also the
Ambassador of Libya to France and Libya’s permanent
representative to the League of Arab States in Cairo.
In addition, Mr. Treki chaired the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly in 1983, at a time
when a number of States were still under the yoke
of apartheid and colonialism. He was also one of the
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session, in 1982, and was elected President of
the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, for the
period 2009-2010. Mr. Treki always strove to strengthen
and bolster joint Arab and African diplomacy. He
always served international peace and security. He
played a major role in creating the African Union and
contributed directly to mediation efforts in a number of
conflicts, both within States and between States, such
as conflicts in Africa, in the Sudan, in Chad, between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, between Djibouti and Eritrea, as
well as in other regions of the world, such as Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cyprus, the Philippines and that between
Iraq and Iran.
Mr. Ali Treki, as head of Libyan diplomacy,
worked in very difficult conditions, but always in a
highly professional manner, displaying exemplary
patience, because he had to deal with the whims and
changing moods of the dictator at the head of Libya and
was also forced to manage the situation, the reality of
international relations and, at the same time, protect
Libya’s interests. He was able to ensure that Libyan
diplomacy and good standing were preserved. Of
course, he always worked to further Libya’s interests.
Libya today pays tribute to one of the greatest symbols
of its diplomacy.

4/20

26/10/2015

All those who knew Mr. Ali Treki will remember
him as an outstanding statesman, a patriot, one who
was very jealous of the prerogatives of his country, who
always fought for the rights of his country and Africa,
a man of peace who worked for peace, security and the
well-being of humankind as a whole.
Agenda item 12
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/70/L.3)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/70.L.3.
Mr. Nuzman (Brazil): It is a privilege as an
Olympian and President of the Organizing Committee
for the Rio 2016 Olympic Paralympic Games to address
the General Assembly and introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.3, entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I come to this house of dialogue to talk about truce,
the Olympic Truce. That is the greatest honour of all
in this temple of consensus, where the Olympic flag
is raised with the goal of embracing diversity. Our
mission is to organize the Olympic Games, and through
that effort to create a better world for the coming
generations, to help them to see life through sport and
to see sport as a way for all of us to build a fairer society
in a healthier planet.
Sport brings a brighter future to athletes and to
the wider athletic family, which includes doctors,
coaches, sponsors, teachers, journalists and supporters.
Six years ago, in Copenhagen, I asked my friends and
colleagues at the International Olympic Committee
(IOC) meeting to vote for Rio de Janeiro. It opened
a gateway to 180 million passionate young people in
South America, embracing a continent of 400 million
people, and offered exciting new opportunities for the
Olympic movement.
South America is a new region for the Olympic
movement: we will host the games for the first time.
That is an inspiration. Doors have been opened to other
regions of the world. Sport could boost solidarity and
improve education, social inclusion, understanding,
peace and hope for generations to come. We are looking
for a new set of opportunities that will allow the young

15-33386

26/10/2015

to build the future they deserve. The International
Olympic Committee supported our dream. The frontiers
of the Olympic movement have expanded. When we
think about the true meaning of the IOC agenda and
we see Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and our IOC
President Thomas Bach working together, we realize
that our future is in very good hands. Rio de Janeiro is
ready to deliver history. The city is being transformed.
The legacy of the 2016 Games will be tangible and
perennial. We are talking about sport as a part of the
city’s education programme — a new urban mobility
system, multiple job opportunities and a sustainable
drive for the future.
(spoke in French)
The Olympic spirit has had a unique power. It has
transformed cities, regions, countries and the lives
of millions of people. It has changed the course of
history. We dream of achieving the overarching goal.
We dream of humankind advancing towards a fairer,
more peaceful world with many more opportunities for
young people. The Olympic Truce should not be only
a dream. We are here today to promote transformation
through sport. We ardently desire peace.
(spoke in English)
Peace is the only fair future for humankind,
so our aim is to create a lasting legacy of peace for
young people — a message of hope for the future, by
reinforcing the rights of the world’s boys and girls.
That message includes the right to education, access
to sport, access to health care, and protection from
abuse and neglect. I have pointed out that this will be
key at the Rio 2016 Games, as 50,000 volunteers and
11 million young students, who could potentially be
involved in our education programme, will be lending
their assistance. Those boys and girls are also part of
the school games organized by the Brazilian Olympic
Committee every year, with sport as a framework
for a better life. We have 284 days until the Olympic
torch arrives at the Maracana stadium for the opening
ceremony of the XXXI Olympiad. Today is the perfect
day for all of us to make an even greater contribution to
a brighter future for generations to come.
On behalf of Brazil, the city of Rio de Janeiro and the
Organizing Committee, with its partners and the strong
support of the federal, state and city Governments,
I would like to thank the General Assembly at its
seventieth session and ask for its support for the draft
resolution.

A/70/PV.39

Mr. Purevsuren (Mongolia): It gives me distinct
pleasure to address the General Assembly today on the
role of sport and the Olympic ideal in promoting peace
and development.
By its very nature, sport is about participation.
Sport is about inclusion and equality. It stands for human
values such as respect for the opponent, acceptance of
binding rules, teamwork and fairness — principles that
are also embedded in the Charter of the United Nations.
Sport has the potential to help overcome conflicts, both
within and between States. It promotes rapprochement,
bridges social, economic and cultural divides, and
builds a sense of shared identity. Hence it is important
to use sport as a tool to promote peace, dialogue and
reconciliation in areas of conflict and disturbance,
both during and beyond the period of international
sporting events. To that end, today we will vote for
draft resolution A/70/L.3, sponsored by Brazil as host
of the XXXI Olympic Games and of the XV Paralympic
Games, to be held next year.
We commend the work done by the United Nations
Office on Sport for Development and Peace and other
relevant agencies in implementing the Olympic Truce
and the Action Plan on Sport. World leaders have
recognized sport as an important enabler of sustainable
development, as envisaged in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), adopted at
the historic Summit last month.
Mongolia welcomes the decision of the General
Assembly to designate 6 April as the International
Day of Sport for Development and Peace. Sport is
deeply rooted in the traditional way of life of Mongols.
Wrestling, horse racing and archery are the three
age-old competitions traditionally used to measure
the courage and strength of nomads. The development
of sport has therefore been high on the agenda of the
Government of Mongolia.
Since 2011, we have been implementing a
comprehensive national programme to promote sports.
The programme seeks to promote public sports and
education aimed at instilling a healthy lifestyle and
increasing the longevity of the population, supporting
sportsmen and athletes, building sport and fitness
centres for the general public, especially youth,
children and people with disabilities, and encouraging
public-private partnerships in sport development. It
also envisages, inter alia, strengthening the national
capacity in sport and the skills of athletes, so that

15-333865/20

A/70/PV.39

26/10/2015

they can perform at a high level in world tournaments.
We also wish to expand the types of sports in which
we participate in the Olympic Games and other
international championships.

of conflicts. In particular today, when violent extremism
is on the rise, the ideal of the Olympic Truce could serve
as a perfect historical example for reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence, even for a short period of time.

Sport brings about new opportunities for
individuals, communities and States. It expands global
commitments to strengthening physical, mental and
emotional health, social welfare and cohesion, while
also promoting team spirit, solidarity and adherence to
standards and the rules of the game, and also raising
awareness and increasing the understanding of human
rights.

We warmly thank Brazil for facilitating this year’s
draft resolution and wish that country every success
for the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games. We
particularly welcome the fact that this year’s draft
resolution includes several positive references to the
protection of human rights and recognizes that sport
can be used to promote human rights and strengthen
universal respect for them.

Sport is important in promoting human rights
worldwide through the interactions that it generates
among people from different backgrounds and cultures.
Through its universal nature, sport can instil in people
the values of respect, diversity, tolerance and fairness,
thereby serving as a tool to combat all forms of
discrimination.

In conclusion, allow me to underline once again
our commitment to support the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. I wish to use this opportunity to urge all
Member States to send a message of unity by observing
the Olympic Truce during the 2016 Olympic Games in
Rio de Janeiro.

As a candidate country for the Human Rights
Council in the upcoming elections to be held in a
few days, Mongolia stands strongly committed to the
promotion of human rights, including through sport.
Sport has a unique power to convene, mobilize and
inspire. Let us all therefore use sport to help create a
healthier, happier and more prosperous world, a world
where no one is left behind.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Whiteley (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
Today’s draft resolution A/70/L.3, entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal”, highlights the indispensable
interaction between peace and sport. The EU and its
member States remain committed to the values of the
Olympic ideal and will spare no effort to promote the
ancient, but always timely, concept of the Olympic Truce
as an invaluable means towards peace and solidarity.
The Olympic Games have historically been
associated with the ideal of a truce. We consider sport
an invaluable tool to encourage dialogue and mutual
understanding among people of different backgrounds.
The concept of the Olympic Truce provides us with a
unique opportunity to achieve a cessation of hostilities,
even temporarily, and to promote the peaceful resolution

6/20

Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Accustomed
to major international events, the city of Rio de Janeiro
is on the verge of again hosting another global event, this
time from 5 to 21 August 2016 for the Olympic Games
and from 7 to 18 September 2016 for the Paralympic
Games, which are being organized for the first time in
a South American country.
The Principality of Monaco wishes to fully
associate itself with the commitment to build a peaceful
and better world through the Olympic ideal. This year,
we welcome draft resolution A/70/L.3, which we
co-sponsored and which will certainly be adopted by
consensus.
Over 20 years after the inclusion of this item on the
agenda of our Organization, this meeting is another stage
in the process of recognizing sport as an “important
enabler of sustainable development” (resolution 70/1,
para. 37). We are entirely convinced of the
“contribution of sport to the realization of
development and peace in its promotion of tolerance
and respect and the contributions it makes to the
empowerment of women and of young people,
individuals and communities, as well as to health,
education and social inclusion objectives” (ibid.).
Those words, drawn from the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, rightly underscore the role
that sport plays at all levels.
Allow me to draw attention to the approach of the
International Olympic Committee (IOC), which has
15-33386

26/10/2015

made sustainability the central principle of its work.
In that respect, the IOC and its various committees
work with the host country in the process of preparing
for the Games and ensure that athletes have adequate
infrastructure for the competitions, but above all and
beyond the Games, they seek to ensure that there will
be an improvement in the quality of life of the millions
of inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro. That is reflected in the
creation of jobs, the provision of training for the host
city’s inhabitants and the renovation and construction
of new urban sport infrastructure, not to mention the
participation of women. As the host city of the Olympic
and Paralympic Games, Rio de Janeiro will be at the
centre of our planet’s attention next summer. However,
the heritage of that event will last beyond the intense,
but fleeting, duration of the Games themselves.
We wish to pay tribute to the IOC and its President
for the Olympic Agenda 2020, as well as the numerous
actions that have been taken on the ground, which have
made the IOC an essential partner. The strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and the IOC
would not have developed to its current extent without
the confident and collective commitment of the
Secretary-General and the President of the IOC, which
is enshrined in a framework agreement that forges a
solid and effective partnership aimed at promoting
the common ideals and values of the charters of both
organizations. I would also like to pay tribute to the
constant efforts of the Special Adviser on Sport for
Peace and Development.
We note that sport’s intrinsic values reflect, in
many ways, those of our Organization, and that its
vocabulary can easily be adapted to the pledge we
made in September in adopting the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, namely, to leave no one
behind in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. Similarly, the ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations — those of the dignity and value of the human
individual, the equality of the human rights of men and
women, social progress and tolerance are all reflected
in sport. The values of sport that are incorporated into
our daily life enable us to build a more harmonious,
healthier, calmer and more united society.
Beyond words, how can we realize in practice the
benefits that sport offers? Sport is the act of transcending
oneself to achieve fixed goals by focusing on one’s
skills and strength. Sport also serves communities
by enhancing people’s skills and reducing individual
failings. We will be able to go farther together in

A/70/PV.39

overcoming challenges than we would be able to as
unorganized individuals.
At a time when there are 70 million displaced
persons and refugees around the world, I would like to
pay tribute to the IOC, which is invested in and working
towards, through the commitment of its Honorary
President, the empowerment of those millions of men,
women and children and providing them a better life
through sport.
The practice of sport and the Olympic Games
are not only about setting new records. Sport brings
together the peoples of the world around three main
values, namely, excellence, friendship and respect.
Practising sports and the Olympic ideal are not only
about winning a medal, but also means participating
side by side, in a spirit of friendship, in the most notable
sports competition that exists, that is, the Olympic
Games and Paralympic Games. We are therefore
impatiently waiting to see the flags of the United
Nations and the IOC fly together again above the four
Olympic sites in Rio de Janeiro, which will illustrate
the full synergy between the two organizations. But
before that always magical moment when the Olympic
flame is lit in Rio de Janeiro, the Olympic flame will
have travelled to 500 cities, including 300 in Brazil,
allowing the world to become more familiar with that
large country. The enthusiasm and hospitality of Rio de
Janeiro will mean that we will soon become familiar
with the names of Barra da Tijuca, Deodoro, with the
soccer temples of Maracanã and Copacabana, which
are globally renowned. We wish Brazil every success
in Rio de Janeiro.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to pay tribute to the United Nations
support of sports. I would also like to pay tribute to
Mr. Wilfried Lemke, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace. I would
also like to welcome Mr. Thomas Bach, President of
the International Olympic Committee (IOC), and to
reiterate our support for the efforts of the IOC, which
seeks to promote peace and understanding among
peoples through sport and the Olympic ideals, including
the Olympic Truce.
Sport has played a very important role historically
in all communities. That is why nations and peoples
have promoted sport as part and parcel of their daily
lifestyle and as one dimension of society and culture.
Accordingly, sport has become one of the fundamental
United Nations principles and a human right that

15-333867/20

A/70/PV.39

deserves to be respected, applied and recognized
as a low-cost and high-impact tool for human aid,
development and peace, whether in the United Nations,
in non-governmental organizations or in other agencies.
Sport is not only practiced in any given community,
but represents a very important and significant
investment in the present and future, especially in
developing countries. Sport plays a very prominent
role in supporting social integration and economic
development. Given the pioneering role of sport and
its impact on individuals, sport should be part and
parcel of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), adopted during the exceptional United
Nations Summit on sustainable development, because
the link between sport and development and peace is
growing. That translates into an increasing awareness of
the importance of sport and its linkage to humankind’s
aspirations to enjoy its universal rights without any
discrimination, thereby according everyone equality of
opportunity.
In the spirit of using sport as a tool for peace and
social development, I would like to express the support
of Tunisia for draft resolution A/70/L.3, which Brazil
submitted this year. That draft resolution reiterates the
international community’s determination to continue
its efforts to make sport a tool for communication,
reconciliation and human rights. That also promotes
the importance of the notion that Member States accord
priority to sports in their national policies as a tool for
peace, sustainable development, education and health.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Tunisia’s
support to the IOC, noting that the Winter Olympics
will be held in Pyeongchang, South Korea, in 2018 and
in Tokyo in 2022. That will also be an occasion for
promoting the culture of peace and harmony.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Sport has the power to
nurture dreams and bring people hope. Sport has the
power to change the world, and even the future of
humankind. High respect must therefore be accorded
to sport. In the spirit of peace, the international
community should once again join together by adopting
draft resolution A/70/L.3, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
which has been adopted biennially since 1993. As
various United Nations documents indicate, this draft
resolution has become an expression of humankind’s
desire to build a world based on the rules of fair
competition, peace, humanity and reconciliation,
which Japan deeply respects and firmly supports. Japan

8/20

26/10/2015

appreciates the initiative and leadership of Brazil,
which will host the Olympic and Paralympic Games
next year and has submitted this year’s draft resolution.
As a co-sponsor, Japan strongly supports the draft
resolution. We firmly believe that next year’s Games,
to be hosted in Rio de Janeiro, will realize the draft
resolution’s ideals and objectives.
Japan will host the Olympic and Paralympic Games
in Tokyo in 2020. It is our great pleasure to set the stage
for the international community to view the outstanding
performances of top athletes from all over the world. We
will also have the privilege of welcoming many diverse
guests to our country from every corner of the world.
Japan is determined to do its best to make that occasion
a great success. Japan wants the Tokyo 2020 Games to
realize the following three ideals: first, achieving one’s
personal best; secondly, unity in diversity; and, thirdly,
connecting to tomorrow.
Achieving one’s personal best means that the Tokyo
2020 Games aim to deliver events where every athlete
can realize his or her greatest athletic performance and
achieve his or her personal best.
Unity in diversity means accepting and respecting
differences in race, colour, gender, sexual orientation,
language, religion, political or other opinion, birth,
level of ability or other status in support of peace, so
that society can continue to develop and flourish. The
Tokyo 2020 Games will foster a welcoming environment
and raise awareness of the concept of unity in diversity
among the citizens of the world.
Last but not least, there is connecting to tomorrow.
I recall that half a century ago, the Tokyo 1964 Games
completely transformed Japan, enhanced the Japanese
people’s awareness of the outside world and helped
bring about the rapid growth of Japan’s economy. We
hope the 2020 Games will enable Japan to promote
constructive changes throughout the world and leave a
positive legacy for future generations. In the lead-up
to 2020, the Japanese Government has been steadily
implementing various programmes under our Sport for
Tomorrow Programme, which is targeted at reaching
over 10 million people in more than 100 countries.
Specifically, we intend to concentrate on improving
sport facilities and cooperating in sport curriculums
and on design and human-resource development.
Japan will continue promoting sport in collaboration
with the United Nations Office on Sport for Development
and Peace, other United Nations bodies, Member States

15-33386

26/10/2015

and non-governmental organizations, so that the 2020
Tokyo Games will inspire people around the world and
leave positive legacies in Japan and in the world.
Ms. Vraila (Greece): Greece aligns itself with the
statement delivered a few minutes ago by the observer
of the European Union. For reasons that should be clear,
my delegation wishes make some additional remarks in
its national capacity.
As far back as the eighth century B.C., the ancient
Olympic Games were meant to be a force for peace
and solidarity among the ancient Greek city-States,
which declared a truce starting seven days before the
beginning and ending seven days after the end of the
Games. The ultimate goal was the peaceful conduct
of the Games by protecting the city from invasion and
by ordering individuals and State authorities to refrain
from interfering with the safe passage of the athletes.
As the historian Thucydides claimed, if States violated
the truce, their athletes were banned from participating
in the Games.
The concept of the Olympic Truce was born and
carried out for 1,200 years back in antiquity. Greeks
saw the Games as a chance to replace conflict with
friendly competition. However, the ideal of the
Olympic Truce was also of great importance for the
revival of the Olympic Games in the modern era, as an
invaluable tool to advance international understanding
and promote world peace.
In today’s world, the emphasis on Olympic peace has
become a major feature of modern Olympic ideology.
The foundation of the International Olympic Truce
Centre, in whose creation Greece was actively engaged
along with the International Olympic Committee,
gave new dynamism to the pursuit of peace. Most
importantly, the inclusion of the Olympic Truce into
the United Nations framework, through the adoption of
relevant resolutions, granted a distinct role to the ideal.
We should bear in mind that, in a world of differences,
inequalities and conflicts, even an agreement on a
temporary truce represents an achievement on the part
of the international community. We feel, therefore,
responsible for continuing to promote the Olympic
Truce, and we will spare no effort to ensure its actual
implementation.
In 2016, Brazil will host the XXI Olympic Games
and the XV Paralympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. I
seize this opportunity to wish Brazil every success in
that demanding endeavour. The task of the rest of us is

A/70/PV.39

to meet our responsibilities by observing the Olympic
Truce and making peace an attainable goal, at least
this once. We should all find inspiration in next year’s
Olympic Games, and reflect on how sport could be used
as a useful tool to prevent or reduce tensions and build
bridges between nations.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased with the holding of this debate
on the creation of a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal. Morocco wants to accord
special importance to all international organizations
that promote sport throughout the world. We are
also pleased at the activities of the International
Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic
Committee aimed at promoting and strengthening the
culture of peace based on the spirit of the Olympic
Truce. My delegation also welcomes the proclamation
by the General Assembly of the International Day of
Sport for Development and Peace on 6 April, which
is intended to highlight the contribution of sport and
physical exercise to education, human development,
the adoption of healthy lifestyles and the building
of a more peaceful world. We are also pleased to be
co-sponsoring draft resolution A/70/L.3, presented this
year by Brazil, which we hope the General Assembly
will adopt by consensus.
Since the dawn of human civilization, sport
has always made a major contribution to bridging
points of view and bringing countries closer together.
Sport has the unique ability to attract, mobilize and
inspire people throughout the world. It knows neither
geographic borders nor social classes. It is an important
element of social inclusion and fulfilment that enables
the strengthening of relations and the promotion of the
ideals of peace, fraternity, solidarity, non-violence,
tolerance and justice.
Morocco is pleased at the similarity of principles
underlying both the United Nations and the Olympic
spirit. The Olympic ideals are very similar to those of
the United Nations, whether we are talking about civil,
political, economic, social or cultural rights. Moreover,
we are pleased at the presence of the United Nations flag
at all Olympic events, which brings to mind the common
objective of the United Nations and the International
Olympic Committee. During sports events we have a
real opportunity to promote knowledge, understanding
and the enforcement of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. That is an ideal opportunity to convey
messages of peace and tolerance — educational

15-333869/20

A/70/PV.39

messages that correct stereotypes and clichés, call
for the fight against ignorance, intolerance and
discrimination, and encourage the bridging of cultural
differences. My delegation highlights the crucial
role and the important and long-lasting contributions
of sport to the dissemination and realization of the
Sustainable Development Goals announced in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
The Kingdom of Morocco has a national programme
for sport and development. Since 2008, Morocco has
had in place a strategy that makes it possible to ensure
that the practice of sports and its values are part of
daily life, to affirm sport as a fundamental right and
a crucial element of social integration, and to extend
access to sport while encouraging the creation of
sport associations. His Majesty the King believes in
giving a strong impetus to development, with sport as
a fundamental element assisting in the development of
the capacities and personal skills of young people. That
has always been one of the strategic priorities of the
Kingdom of Morocco, whether it be youth education,
training, access to the labour market, the participation
of young people in political life or their contribution to
the economic, social and cultural areas of life. Every
individual must have the possibility of practising
sport without any discrimination. In that regard, my
delegation emphasizes the particular importance of
ensuring the participation of women, girls and persons
with disabilities in all sports activities in order to
enshrine the principle of equality between men and
women and to end stereotyping.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its determination to strengthen international
brotherhood, friendship, goodwill and unity among
peoples through sport, for there is no better way
to inculcate and encourage the values of respect
for diversity and tolerance among communities,
civilizations and cultures. Furthermore, peace and
non-violence are some of the basic values that we are
working to defend.
Ms. Liew (Singapore): Singapore looks forward to
today’s adoption of draft resolution A/70/L.3, entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal”. We are pleased to be a sponsor of
the draft resolution, introduced by Brazil, and welcome
the ideals represented by the Olympic Truce.
Sport brings many benefits to societies. Besides
encouraging healthy lifestyles, it helps to build social
capital and inspires the human spirit. More important,
10/20

26/10/2015

it is a profound way of bringing people together in the
pursuit of excellence, while transcending differences in
socioeconomic backgrounds, cultures and nationalities.
The Olympic Games, the pinnacle of sporting
achievement, have helped to promote peace, tolerance
and solidarity all over the world. The Olympic Agenda
2020, approved by the International Olympic Committee
in December 2014, is a strategic road map for our global
efforts to promote the Olympic movement, safeguard its
ideals and strengthen the value of sport in sustainable
development. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Thomas Bach, President of the International
Olympic Committee, for his foresight and leadership in
driving these reforms.
The Olympic Games have been a source of
inspiration for us in building a strong sporting culture
in Singapore. Our Vision 2030 master plan is best
described as the story of how sport can be used as a
national strategy for developing healthy and resilient
people, forging strong, united communities, instilling
core values, creating shared memories and building a
dynamic society and economy. The attributes that sport
embodies — tenacity, discipline, teamwork, leadership
and a love of country — are what we need as we compete
in a more globalized environment while maintaining
Singapore’s social cohesion and sense of identity. These
are principles that we want to be firmly rooted not just
in our athletes but throughout our society. We believe
we can live better through sport.
Last June, Singapore hosted the twenty-eighth
Southeast Asian Games, a biennial multisport event
with the participation of more than 4,000 athletes. The
games echo the timeless Olympic values of excellence,
friendship and respect. What shone through was
the spirit of friendship among the peoples of SouthEast Asia. While athletes competed intensely and
spectators cheered vociferously, spectators and athletes
alike exemplified sportsmanship and were gracious
even in defeat. It is heartwarming to see how sport
forges common bonds and brings peoples of different
nationalities closer together, building a more peaceful
and better world.
In December, Singapore will have the honour of
hosting the Para Games of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations for the first time. The event celebrates
the triumph of the human spirit against all odds and
exemplifies the Paralympic values of determination,
inspiration, courage and equality. The theme of the
Games, “Celebrate the extraordinary”, pays tribute

15-33386

26/10/2015

to the tremendous courage and spirit of para-athletes,
who have overcome great challenges not just to lead
active lives but to excel in their various domains.
Through the Games, we hope to inspire more persons
with disabilities to overcome challenges and blaze new
trails, and help to produce a society that is as inclusive
as possible.
The role of sport as an enabler of sustainable
development is duly recognized in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). As the
United Nations and its Member States embark upon the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, Singapore firmly
believes that we should harness the value of sport as
an inspiration to aim higher and do development better
in our race to build a more inclusive, sustainable and
prosperous future for our peoples.
Mr. Al-Sowaidi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Qatar is
also pleased to be a sponsor of today’s draft resolution
A/70/L.3, entiled “Building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
The outcome document of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda, “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development” (resolution 70/1), cites sport
as an important enabler of sustainable development.
It recognizes sport’s growing contribution to the
realization of development and peace through its
promotion of tolerance and respect and the contributions
it makes to the empowerment of women, young people,
individuals and societies.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
our national experience in this area. Qatar is a firm
believer in the role that sport plays in promoting
peace, development and dialogue among civilizations.
Within the framework of anchoring the 2030 Agenda in
Qatar’s national vision, and with the goal of achieving
that vision of a healthy, active society both physically
and psychologically, Qatar proclaimed 2 February an
annual national day of sport, beginning in 2012. It is a
public holiday in Qatar, reflecting an initiative that is
unique in the world. Its aim is to focus on and deepen
understanding of sport in the community and increase
popular participation in various sporting activities. We
are working to that end by ensuring best practices and by
promoting and encouraging the effective participation
of all members of society in celebrating the holiday and
in sports activities.

A/70/PV.39

The General Assembly has addressed the issue
of building a more peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal on many occasions,
highlighting the important role of sport in enhancing
education, health, development and peace. The work of
Qatar’s Ministry of Youth and Sport is based on similar
aims, and it oversees the curriculums for students aged
between 15 and 18 in many areas of sport. To date,
more than 26,000 students have benefitted from such
activities.
Our national Olympic committee has signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Alliance for
Civilization of the United Nations whereby it takes part
in programmes and activities aimed at promoting peace
and development through sport. In Geneva in 2013, we
also had the honour of co-chairing, with Costa Rica, the
Group of Friends of Sport for Development.
We attach particular importance to sport at the
national, regional and international levels. As we are
discussing this item today, Qatar has successfully
hosted the Paralympic Games in order to integrate all
members of society and to promote the advancement of
communities. We also underscore the importance of the
Doha GOALS Forum, which since 2012 has served as a
forum for international development initiatives through
sports, sponsored by His Excellency Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al-Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar. The
Qatar Olympic Committee is playing an important role
in preparing Qatar to host the FIFA World Cup in 2022,
which will be an exceptional occasion to reinforce the
values of peace, development and understanding among
all peoples of the world. It will be the first time that an
event of such scale will be hosted in the Arab world. In
this regard, we are also planning to organize a highlevel event, with the participation of other countries,
at the United Nations on the economic, social and
development role played by sport. We plan to share the
lessons learned and experiences with other countries
that have hosted other major sporting events in the past.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
importance of sports in building a world of peace and
understanding with a view of promoting harmony and
development, nationally and globally.
Mr. Kaganda (United Republic of Tanzania): We
congratulate Brazil, host of the 2016 Olympic and
Paralympic Games, for the excellent facilitation of
draft resolution A/70/L.3, which we are about to adopt
and which Tanzania has gladly co-sponsored. We

15-3338611/20

A/70/PV.39

would also like to acknowledge the great work being
undertaken by the International Olympic Committee,
the International Paralympic Committee and the United
Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace in
promoting peace and understanding through sport and
the Olympic ideal.
The 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games will
coincide with the commemoration of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations. This meeting
therefore presents a unique opportunity to assess
the contribution of sport in advancing the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
especially in building an atmosphere of tolerance
and understanding among peoples and nations, as
envisioned in the outcome of the 2005 World Summit. In
addition to the commemoration, the meeting coincides
with the adoption of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), which recognizes sport
as an important enabler of sustainable development.
Despite that recognition, however, many people in
countries across the world, especially in developing
countries, have yet to realize the full benefits of sport.
Many are trapped in situations, including conflicts and
colonial occupation, which inhibit their enjoyment of a
social activity that dates back to ancient times. Those
people deserve better. They must not be left behind.
That is why we welcome and support the work being
undertaken by all national, regional and international
stakeholders in promoting and strengthening a culture
of peace based on the Greek tradition of the Olympic
Truce. We call for the full cooperation of all Member
States in realizing the objective of that just endeavour.
We also call upon Member States and other stakeholders
to include sport, where appropriate, as a complement to
conflict-prevention and peacebuilding efforts.
Tanzania believes that sport is an important
tool for building national unity, fostering gender
equality and women’s empowerment, education,
health, development, peace and conflict prevention
and resolution. Consequently, since the birth of our
nation, sport has been accorded ample attention,
including through the promulgation of policies and
legislation as well as through the establishment of the
Ministry of Youth, Culture and Sport. Among the chief
preoccupations of the newly independent Tanzania
was the restoration of several traditional sports,
which, inter alia, served as a symbol of national pride.
Games and sports such as archery, Bao — a form of
Mancala — wrestling, swimming, running, tug-ofwar, javelin, stick fighting, rope skipping and oxen
12/20

26/10/2015

racing, which were prevalent in pre-colonial Africa,
were either altered or eliminated entirely, as they
were perceived as either primitive or pagan in nature.
We therefore ensured that all persons, irrespective of
their age, sex, religion or tribe, participated in sporting
activities, which were and are still conducted at the
primary, secondary and higher education levels, as well
as among Government employees, through the annual
inter-ministerial sports competition.
Like the United Nations, the strength and uniqueness
of the Olympic establishment is its diversity, reflected
by the participating nations that are united in support of
its ideals. We are very satisfied that the organizers have
made every effort to involve persons with disabilities,
through the Paralympic Games. We are concerned,
however, by the uneven representation of developed
and developing countries that are participating. It is
imperative, therefore, that we foster partnerships and
enhance cooperation to bridge that gap. We need to
build lasting and mutually beneficial partnerships to
promote sport among youth, for we know too well that,
in addition to other benefits, sport can be an important
source of livelihood. Tanzania’s doors are open to
such partnerships, including in the development of the
necessary infrastructure for training young persons
in different sports. Only recently, His Excellency
Mr. Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, inaugurated a state-of-the-art
community-based sports park, which was developed in
partnership with the Symbion Power Company of the
United States of America and Sunderland Association
Football Club/A.F.C. of the United Kingdom.
In conclusion, we would like to voice our dismay
at the continued racism and xenophobic tendencies in
sport. We note that such tendencies run counter to the
spirit and principles of both the Charter of the United
Nations and the Olympic Games. We recall paragraph
218 of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action, which urges Member States, in cooperation
with the relevant Olympic bodies, to intensify the fight
against racism in sport, including through education
and raising awareness of the Olympic spirit, which
calls for human understanding, tolerance, fair play and
solidarity. We believe that the International Day of
Sport for Development and Peace, to be observed on
6 April, should be used to address some of those thorny
and regrettable issues.
Mr. Narang (India): We welcome the emphasis
the General Assembly has laid on sport as an agent of

15-33386

26/10/2015

peace and an instrument of development. India strongly
concurs with the recognition of sport as an ideal to be
pursued for several noble objectives that are at the heart
of the Organization’s work.
In ancient Indian tradition, exercise and sport
were considered an inseparable part of good health.
As an old proverb in Sanskrit emphasizes, the virtue
of health is the basis of all achievements. The author
of the proverb is extolling the benefit of exercise and
sport for health, long age, strength, freedom from
disease and ultimately, happiness. Sport plays an
important role at both the individual and social levels.
At the individual level, as the Sanskrit proverb notes,
sport is directly linked with good health, an important
objective of development policy and, needless to say,
now a dedicated Sustainable Development Goal.
At the same time, sport also builds character. It
helps motivate children and youth, inculcating in them
the much-needed esprit de corps, a sense of partnership
with others. It also develops leadership skills, a spirit of
sharing, of competing fairly and of respecting others.
At the social level, on the other hand, there can indeed
be no more powerful tool than sport to inspire and bring
people together for a common purpose. Principles such
as non-discrimination and equality, including gender
equality, and the foundation of all human rights can
be taught through sports. Sport also helps foster peace
and a feeling of friendship among all nations and all
peoples.
We are happy that the contribution of sport as an
important enabler of sustainable development has been
duly noted by our leaders in the Declaration of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), which has correctly recognized the growing
contribution of sport to the realization of development
and peace in its promotion of tolerance and respect
and the contributions it makes to the empowerment of
women, young people, individuals and communities,
as well as to health, education and social inclusion
objectives.
India wholeheartedly recognizes the invaluable
contribution of the Olympic Movement in establishing
sport as an ideal means for the promotion of peace,
good neighbourliness and development. We welcome
the upcoming Summer Olympic Games and Paralympic
Games, to be held in Rio de Janeiro. We wish our friends
from Brazil every success in hosting this remarkable
celebration of the human spirit. In the same vein, we
also would like to commend the efforts of the organizers

A/70/PV.39

of several such events earlier this year. To mention
only a few, there were the Special Olympics World
Summer Games in Los Angeles, the Cricket World
Cup in Australia and New Zealand, the Fédération
internationale de football association Women’s World
Cup in Canada, the Universidad in the Republic of
Korea and the European Games in Azerbaijan.
At the national level in India, sports, games and
physical fitness have been an integral part of the Indian
heritage, evident even today not only in the highly
evolved system of yoga, but also in the vast range of
indigenous games and martial arts practised in different
parts of India. A young and resurgent India has once
again embraced sport. That is evident in the revival
of several sports, not to mention hockey and kabaddi,
which are today competing with cricket for prime-time
television viewership. Yet India is a developing
country where the sporting infrastructure has not
been able to match the growing demand. Our higher
population density has also meant a comparative lack
of open access, especially in urban areas. The Indian
Government is actively engaged in these issues to make
sure that sport remains available to every Indian.
Allow me to also highlight the important role of
yoga as a practice for both physical and mental health.
Recognizing the rich and proven expertise of this
ancient practice for building healthy individuals and
communities, the Government of India has redoubled
its efforts to promote yoga as an important health
and sporting activity throughout the country. In that
context, the Assembly’s decision in the past year to
commemorate 21 June as the International Day of
Yoga and the unprecedented celebration of the first
International Day of Yoga, right here at the United
Nations earlier this year, are particularly gratifying for
my delegation. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the General Assembly, and indeed the entire
membership, for their valuable support.
The former President of South Africa, Nelson
Mandela, who famously used sport for social harmony
and peace, could not have put it better when he said of
sport, “It speaks to youth in a language they understand”.
We would therefore do well to use this tool that speaks
a universal language in the pursuit of our universally
recognized goals of peace and development.
Allow me to conclude by again emphasizing
India’s sincere belief that sports and all sporting
events strengthen the cherished ties of goodwill and
understanding that unite us as one family.

15-3338613/20

A/70/PV.39

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union at the beginning of this meeting and wishes to
make the following additional remarks in its national
capacity.
My country welcomes the imminent adoption of
draft resolution A/70/L.3 and is proud to be among its
sponsors. The clear consensus of the General Assembly
on this issue demonstrates that the ideal of the Olympic
Truce is alive and powerful. We must now translate
that commitment into reality. In a time of persistent
instability and increasing challenges, we applaud
the message sent by the draft resolution of sport as a
means of prevention. In effect, its universal language
can bridge gaps and promote the core values necessary
for tolerance and lasting peace. On the playing field,
cultural, linguistic, religious, social and ideological
differences disappear. We also highly appreciate
the emphasis this year on vulnerable groups, such as
children, persons with disabilities, women and girls, as
well as the need to engage them in the practice of sports
for peace and development.
Italy is a strong believer in sport as a powerful tool
and vehicle to promote peace and development and
is proud to be part of the Group of Friends of Sport
for Development and Peace. That is also why in 2009
we actively supported the adoption of resolution 64/3,
which granted observer status to the International
Olympic Committee in the General Assembly, and we
welcome President Bach and Vice-President Pescante.
More recently, in 2014, we organized at the United
Nations in New York an event on children, sport and
development, with an inter-campus programme, a
non-profit social event that instituted the famous Italian
soccer team Internazionale Milano, which provides
assistance to needy children and young people in 29
countries around the world. Its aim is to give back to
children the right to play through football programmes,
teach youths team work and the meaning of fair play
and give them access to health and education services,
which are very often absent from their villages. The
main message of the event was that sport is a crucial
means to promote sustainable development. It has
already proved to be a cost-effective and flexible tool
in promoting peace and security objectives.
Since the inception of the Millennium Development
Goals, in 2000, sport played a vital role in advancing
each of the eight goals. We are convinced that sports

14/20

26/10/2015

will also be a powerful tool to achieve the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals that we have recently adopted.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon once said, sport
has become a world language, a common denominator
that breaks down all the walls, all the barriers. It is in
that spirit that we wish the best success to Brazil for
the organization of the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de
Janeiro.
Ms. Kasese-Bota (Zambia): I thank the President
for according my delegation an opportunity to contribute
to this very important agenda item, which focuses on
the role of sport in the promotion of development and
peace. The introduction of this year’s draft resolution
A/70/L.3) is very timely, coming just one month after
our Heads of State and Government adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
and the commemoration of 70 years of existence of the
United Nations during the high-level debate, in which
countries recommitted to the ideals of the Charter of
the United Nations, espousing international peace and
security. Zambia recognizes the valuable role that sport
plays in the promotion of peace, dialogue, reconciliation,
national and regional cooperation and solidarity,
education, health and sustainable development.
As a sport-loving country, Zambia reaffirms
its commitments to the provision of the necessary
legal framework as well as financial support for the
integration of sport in the national development agenda.
In that regard, physical education has been incorporated
as part of our country’s educational curriculum starting
for students at a very early age. Zambia acknowledges
that sport is an important medium for the promotion of
harmony and a unifier of people of all political, social
and religious affiliations. Sport has been used as a
means of recreation, healthy life style and as a crowdpulling medium for the dissemination of life-saving
messages, including those concerning HIV/AIDS in
both primary and secondary schools. Consequently, a
number of community projects have been implemented,
and they have successfully revealed the power of sport
in bringing positive social transformation. The projects
include the Go Sisters! programme, which focuses on
empowering girls and women between the ages of 12
and 25 to take on leadership roles in their communities,
with peer-leaders creating self-managed, organizing
committees to plan and lead educational and sports
programmes. A number of street kids, orphaned
children and those affected by HIV/AIDS have been

15-33386

26/10/2015

enrolled in those programmes, which have yielded very
positive results.
Sport has furthermore been identified as an
important skill and career pursued by young people,
which provides meaningful and very sustainable income
across all age groups. Therefore, young people are being
made aware of the profitability of pursuing sport as a
profession. In that regard, the Zambian Government,
in conjunction with sports associations, has embarked
upon enhancing talent identification and promoting
excellence in that field. Zambia remains committed
to the promotion of sport for development and peace
by supporting, among other things, the national
Paralympic Committee, an institution that coordinates
sports programmes for people with disabilities. The
Government is also making efforts to construct userfriendly sports facilities to accommodate various
disciplines in sport.
Zambia is a beneficiary of the International Olympic
Committee’s pilot programme Sports for Hope, which
built a multi-purpose centre for the Olympic Truce
in Lusaka. The Olympic youth development centre
has served sportsmen and sportswomen from all
over Africa. The centre houses modern facilities for
football, hockey and other athletics. It also attracts
underprivileged youth within Lusaka and gives them a
chance to unleash and fulfil their potential for sports by
participating and training at the centre.
Our modern sports infrastructure enabled Zambia
to successfully host the 2012 under-20 youth games
of the Supreme Council for Sport in Africa, zone 6
under the confederation of sports associations. The
successful hosting of those tournaments at the centre
has prompted the Government to consider larger-scale
continental games in the future. Zambia also uses the
practices of the International Olympic Committee as
a model throughout the country. The Government has
accordingly embarked upon the construction of sports
facilities in all the provinces of Zambia.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore Zambia’s
commitment to youth sport in fostering peace and
sustainable development at national, regional and global
levels. Zambia stands ready to work with all cooperating
partners to promote various sport disciplines in order to
maintain peace and achieve sustainable development.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba has traditionally been a co-sponsor of the draft
resolution (A/70/L.3) before us, presented by Brazil.

A/70/PV.39

We will continue to back efforts to promote sport as
a way to promote the development of peace and wellbeing, as well as the achievement of goals in health,
education, social inclusion and the empowerment of
women, young people and communities, in general,
in compliance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1).
Cuba has put the development of mass sport
at the service of improving the quality of life for
the population, and practising sport is free for all
citizens. Guaranteeing the enjoyment of sport as a
constitutional right for all Cubans is one of the most
important achievements of the Cuban Revolution in the
field of human rights. Today, the practice of sport is
widespread throughout the country, thereby allowing
the Cuban population to achieve high fitness levels,
with the majority of beneficiaries being women. The
inclusion of physical education as a subject within
the national education system and the establishment
of specialized education centres that provide specific
physical education programmes have played a vital role
in achieving those goals.
Cuba has trained a considerable number of men and
women teachers and professors who are specialized in
physical education. They implement our strategy to
promote a culture of physical well-being and health
in the community, including via fitness and therapy
centres. The are also responsible for our programmes
to promote good health and prevention within groups
representative of the elderly, pregnant and nursing
women, as well as community aerobic groups and basic
gymnastic groups for women, all of which make up
our development strategy. Cuba has a broad network
of sports facilities with services in all municipalities of
the country, which encourage the the practice of sport
within the general population.
The broad coverage of sport education is supported
through the system of sport education established
by the Cuban State. Each province has a university
department/faculty for physical culture. There is
an institute of physical culture at the national level,
eight schools that train physical education teachers at
the intermediary level and an international school of
physical education and sport. The latter school was
inaugurated in 2000, opening its doors to the first
students coming from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Today, it is still graduating thousands of young
people hailing from developing countries. One of the
achievements of the training within the institutions of

15-3338615/20

A/70/PV.39

the sports education system has led to the establishment
of specialized centres for training athletes, including
top-level professional athletes. Cuba has developed one
of the most advanced sports medicine systems, including
one of the best-equipped anti-doping laboratories, as
recognized by the International Olympic Committee.
That modern laboratory reflects Cuba’s commitment to
combating doping in sport.
Cuban sport is currently in very good health and
enjoys widespread recognition at both the regional and
international Olympic levels, as evidenced not only in
the outcome of every competition at every level, but also
in the solidarity and cooperation that Cuba provides
to countries that so request, by dispatching sports
professionals to them. Cuba’s presence, expressed
through its global solidarity with trainers and physical
education teachers, upholds the prestige of Cuban sport.
Cuba has supported the sporting achievements of many
countries and will continue to do so to the best of its
abilities.
All those achievements, both at the national level
and in terms of cooperation, have been made possible
thanks to the will of the Cuban Government and people.
However, our efforts aimed at the full exercise of that
right have been thwarted for more than 50 years by
the genocidal policy of the economic, financial and
commercial blockade imposed on Cuba. To give just
one example, Cuban sporting institutions have been
prevented from acquiring in the American market tools,
equipment and uniforms such as pole- and high-jump
mats, Multimarc folding hoops for artistic gymnastics,
Canondale bicycles and electronic measuring equipment
for athletic training, among other things.
Finally, Cuba reaffirms its commitment to
promoting sport both for the Cuban people and for the
brotherly countries that need our modest contribution
and experience in that realm.
Mr. Crilchuk (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to commend the work being done at
the United Nations by the Group of Friends of Sport for
Development and Peace, which aims to promote sports
as a means for promoting citizenship and friendship.
We also commend the expected adoption of draft
resolution A/70/L.3, which was sponsored by Brazil
and co-sponsored by my country. Furthermore, I would
like to highlight Brazil’s crucial work in organizing the
upcoming Olympic and Paralympic Games to be held in
2016, for the first time in our region. We are convinced

16/20

26/10/2015

that the Games will be successful and that they will
bring together many athletes from across the world.
Much has been said about how sports can play a key
role in the United Nations efforts to improve the lives of
people around the world. Sports build bridges between
people and communities and prepares fertile soil for
peace. By promoting a philosophy of life based on
the Olympic Game of exerting oneself for excellence,
demonstrating respect and celebrating friendship, the
Olympics show that sport can help to build a better
world. Those efforts are closely related to the initiatives
and important programmes that many Member States
and international organizations have undertaken in
order to advance sport in a comprehensive fashion
comparable to achievements in the social realm.
The importance of sport in the new 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) provides an
example of that.
In Argentina, we have implemented a national sport
policy, and we promote healthy practices that foster
the values that promote people’s holistic development,
including commitment, solidarity, fellowship and
respect for diversity. In that regard, for the past decade
Argentina has been developing the concept of social
sport, by which we mean the practice of physical and
sporting activities geared to the population as a whole,
irrespective of age, gender, physical condition or social
or ethnic origin, and which in its various guises generates
inclusion, thereby making sports an endeavour that
encourages comprehensive human development. We
see with satisfaction that those elements are reflected
in the draft resolution that we are about to adopt.
As members of the Assembly know, the city of
Buenos Aires was chosen for the third Summer Youth
Olympics, which will be held in 2018. We believe that
the selection of Buenos Aires expresses the international
community’s recognition of Argentina’s achievements
in sport and the socioeconomic development of our
country in recent years.
In conclusion, I wish to indicate that by adopting
this draft resolution, we propose to continue sending
a clear message of peace and international goodwill
to the inhabitants of the world. As a sponsor of the
draft resolution, we call upon everyone to observe
the Olympic Truce, an ancient tradition that makes
it possible for athletes and others to take part in the
Games under secure conditions, mobilizing the peoples
of the world in the name of peace.

15-33386

26/10/2015

Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): Ukraine fully
supports the adoption by consensus of draft resolution
A/70/L.3, on building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal. Traditionally,
Ukraine is one of the States that have co-sponsored
that resolution. However, the draft resolution contains a
provision noting the successful conclusion of the XXII
Olympic Winter Games and the XI Paralympic Winter
Games held in Sochi, the Russian Federation, from
7 to 23 February 2014 and from 7 to 16 March 2014,
respectively. We believe that this provision directly
contradicts the ancient Greek tradition of ekecheiria,
the Olympic Truce. During those games, the Russian
Federation cynically violated the Olympic Truce.
It illegally occupied and annexed the autonomous
republic of Crimea, Ukraine, and still continues its
aggression against my country. Taking those facts into
consideration, this year Ukraine regrettably had to
abstain from co-sponsoring the draft resolution.
Nevertheless, I would like to take this opportunity
to wish Brazil every success and to stress our full and
sincere support for its hosting of the 2016 Olympic
Games and Paralympic Games, as well as promoting
and strengthening a culture of peace based on the spirit
of the Olympic Truce.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 64/3, of 19 October 2009, I now
call on the President of the International Olympic
Committee.
Mr. Bach (International Olympic Committee)
(spoke in French): The International Olympic
Committee (IOC) is honoured to take the floor today
before the General Assembly.
The IOC would like to thank the Government
of Brazil and its representatives to the United
Nations for having submitted to the Assembly draft
resolution A/70/L.3. We would also like to express
our sincere gratitude to the Group of Friends of
Sport for Development and Peace, co-chaired by the
Principality of Monaco and Tunisia, and to all the
States that sponsored the draft resolution, as well
as the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for
Sport for Development and Peace for supporting the
incorporation and integration of sport into the work of
the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
Both the United Nations and the IOC are built on
the shared values of tolerance, solidarity and peace.

A/70/PV.39

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon described this in the
best way, namely, that “Olympic principles are United
Nations principles”.
The IOC applauds the General Assembly once
again for recognizing sport as an important enabler to
foster peace and understanding in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). As during
the most recent United Nations sustainable development
summit, I want to emphasize that the United Nations
and all its Member States can count on the unwavering
support of the IOC to achieve our common goal of the
peaceful development of humankind.
With our Olympic Agenda 2020, we are fully
aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. In particular, that is
true of Sustainable Development Goal 16, which is
about building accountable, effective and inclusive
institutions. The IOC, with its Olympic Agenda 2020,
has ensured that we are in compliance with the highest
standards of good governance and transparency. In that
respect, we are asking other major sports organizations
to undertake the necessary swift reforms in order to
restore their reputations.
The Olympic Truce stands for our shared values
of tolerance, solidarity and peace. Sport is in a unique
position to put the spirit of the Olympic Truce into
practice. Sport is the only area of human experience
that has achieved universal law. Regardless of where in
the world we practice sport, the rules are the same and
apply to everyone. They are based on our shared values.
Sport is always about building bridges — it is never
about erecting walls.
We can only build bridges if our autonomy and
our neutrality are respected. In the mutual interest of
both sport and politics, I urge the Assembly to continue
to protect and strengthen the autonomy of sport, as
it did in adopting resolution 69/6 last October, which
recognizes the autonomy of sport.
In Olympic sport, all people are equal regardless
of their race, gender, social status, cultural or political
background, faith or belief. That fundamental principle
of non-discrimination allows sport to promote peace
and understanding among all people. The Olympic
Games are the culmination of that vision. The Olympic
Games is the time when the values of tolerance,
solidarity and peace are brought to life. It is the time
when the international community comes together for
peaceful competition.

15-3338617/20

A/70/PV.39

In the Olympic Village, we see tolerance and
solidarity in their purest form. Athletes from all 206
National Olympic Committees are living together
in harmony, without any kind of discrimination. It
represents the true spirit of the so-called “Olympic
Unity in Diversity”, with athletes from every corner
of the world living together under one roof. In what is
literally a global village, the athletes get to know and
understand each other, not just on a human level by
sharing their experiences, emotions and meals. They
also share their respect for excellence, for victory and
for defeat. In that way, the Olympic athletes set an
example to the whole world that it is possible to engage
in competition while at the same time live peacefully
together.
In this Olympic spirit of peace and solidarity, the
IOC, together with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, is assisting refugees
all over the world by providing activities, hope and
self-confidence through sport. The Secretary-General
appointed our Honorary President, Jacques Rogge, as
Special Envoy for Youth Refugees and Sport in 2014.
The IOC is happy to support those activities financially
and has created an additional fund of $2 million to
bring hope to refugees through sport. At the same time,
we are assisting high-level refugee athletes to continue
their sports careers. We help them to make their dream
of sporting excellence come true, even when they have
to flee from violence and hunger. I would like to appeal
to all United Nations Member States to help us to
identify such hopeful, great athletes.
At present, however, none of those athletes would
have the chance to participate in the Olympic Games,
even if they qualified from the sports point of view,
because with their refugee status they are left without
a home country, or a National Olympic Committee
to represent them. Today, I am happy to announce
before this meeting of the General Assembly that the
International Olympic Committee will invite the highest
qualified refugee athletes to participate in the Olympic
Games in Rio de Janeiro 2016. Having no national team
to belong to, having no flag to march behind, having no
national anthem to be played for them, those refugee
athletes will be welcomed to the Olympic Games with
the Olympic flag and the Olympic anthem. They will
have a home, together with all of the other 11,000
athletes from 206 National Olympic Committees in the
Olympic Village. That will be a symbol of hope for all
of the refugees in the world, and will make the world
better aware of the magnitude of the crisis.
18/20

26/10/2015

Another wonderful example of how sport can
promote peace and inclusion happened recently
with the IOC recognition of the National Olympic
Committee of South Sudan. With that recognition, we
wanted to send a signal of hope to a young nation and
its people — a signal of hope because sport always
builds bridges among all peoples and all cultures. The
President of the newly recognized National Olympic
Committee of South Sudan thanked the IOC session by
saying, “Now we will arm our young people with sport,
and not with guns.” That is the spirit of the Olympic
Truce that the Assembly will uphold in supporting
today’s draft resolution.
The Olympic Games are the moment when the
international community comes together to celebrate
our common humanity. There is no doubt in my mind
that the upcoming Olympic and Paralympic Games in
Rio de Janeiro in 2016 will provide a spectacular stage
to showcase the best of the human spirit. We can look
forward together to inspiring Olympic Games.
I would like to reiterate the warm-hearted
invitation to the international community to come
together in Rio de Janeiro in 2016 extended by the
Organizing Committee, so ably led by our friend and
colleague Carlos Nuzman. Brazil and the Brazilians
will enthusiastically welcome the world and overwhelm
us with their joy of life and their passion for sport.
Through the Olympic Games, the Brazilian people
will remind the world of their unique combination of
passion and efficiency.
History will speak of a Rio de Janeiro before the
Olympic Games and a much better Rio de Janeiro
after the Olympic Games. Rio de Janeiro is building
a legacy of the Olympic Games through very concrete
measures. Much-needed improvements to the public
transportation system and education programmes for
all will benefit generations to come. The Olympic
Games in Rio de Janeiro are already now a symbol for
the efforts of Brazil to build a better future for all its
citizens.
The values of tolerance, solidarity and peace are a
central part of Rio de Janeiro’s legacy to the people of
Brazil. They will showcase sport as a key tool for peace,
social inclusion and tolerance in the fight against racial,
ethnic and gender discrimination.
I would like to commend the efforts of Brazil, the
Organizing Committee and the Paralympic Movement
to promote the rights and inclusion of persons with

15-33386

26/10/2015

disabilities at the Paralympic Games and beyond. This
is another example of how sport can inspire social
progress. Still another example is the cooperation
between the IOC and UN-Women. Our joint initiative
targets girls between the ages of 12 and 14 in schools
across the state of Rio de Janeiro. Using a series of
sports programmes, we are empowering those girls to
become future leaders.
The mission of the IOC is to put sport at the service
of humankind. We are aware that we can reach this goal
only in partnership with others, which is why today we
are reaffirming our strong commitment to the United
Nations and its Member States to work in partnership
towards making our shared goals a reality. The Olympic
Truce can give hope for a better future for all. With the
General Assembly’s support for the draft resolution on
the Truce today, it is my hope that the Olympic Games
Rio de Janeiro 2016 will become synonymous with
the efforts of the international community to build a
peaceful and better world for all through sport.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 12.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.3, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/70/L.3, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and

A/70/PV.39

Barbuda, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad,
Colombia, the Comoros, the Congo, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, the
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic
of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.3?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/4).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 12.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

15-3338619/20
