United Nations

S/PV.6766

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6766th meeting
Monday, 7 May 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Wittig
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Special report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2012/280)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-33105 (E)

*1233105*

S/PV.6766

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

at the international level since the report was compiled
following the 12 April 2012 coup d’état.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2012/280)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola and Guinea-Bissau to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the
participation at this meeting of the Minister of External
Relations of Angola and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and Communities of
Guinea-Bissau.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, in her
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Salamatu Hussaini Suleiman,
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the Economic Community of West African States, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/280, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: It is a privilege for me to
introduce to the Council the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2012/280), dated 30 April 2012. The following are
the main highlights of the situation on the ground and

2

At the national level, the release of Interim
President Raimundo Pereira and Prime Minister Carlos
Gomes Júnior on 27 April met a key precondition of
the ruling African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) for participation in
any talks. Notwithstanding, while the Secretary of
State for Former Combatants, Brigadier General Fodé
Cassamá, was also released on 28 April, it is important
to note that several Government officials are still
seeking refuge in diplomatic compounds in Bissau or
are still in hiding. It is therefore critical to work
towards improving current security conditions to
ensure the safe return of those officials and facilitate
the restoration of constitutional order in the country.
While the PAIGC is facing internal divisions,
with 35 members suspended for questioning the
credibility of the party’s leader, Carlos Gomes Júnior,
the party continues to call for the full restoration of
constitutional order with the reinstatement of the
constitutionally elected civilian authorities. The
National Anti-Coup Front, led by the former security
sector reform (SSR) adviser to late President Malam
Bacai Sanhá and leader of the Solidarity and Labour
Party, Iancuba Djola N’Djai, has condemned the coup
and called for, first, the immediate restoration of
constitutional order and the release of all detainees;
second, the end of the persecution of Government
leaders and looting of public property; third, the
reinstatement of the PAIGC Government elected in the
2008 elections; fourth, the deployment of a United
Nations-mandated stabilization force to provide
security to State institutions and to facilitate the
implementation of the SSR programme; fifthly, the
fight against impunity and drug trafficking; sixth, the
imposition of individual sanctions on the coup leaders
and their prosecution; and seventh, the conclusion of
the electoral process.
As negotiations towards finding a solution to the
crisis continue, the needs of the population of GuineaBissau have been set aside. As a result of the political
crisis, the payment of civil servants’ salaries has been
delayed in the absence of a Government, and the
cashew trading season, which is crucial to the economy
and livelihood of the population, has been disrupted.
Food security assessments conducted by the World
Food Programme to measure the impact of the current
situation on the household food security in the regions

12-33105

S/PV.6766

of Oio, Quinara, Gabú, Bafatá and Cacheu have
indicated that cashew nuts are being traded at a lower
price — 150 to 200 CFA francs per kilogram — than
the agreed price, which is 250 CFA francs per
kilogram. In addition, barter trade has increased in the
absence of cash flow. This is seriously affecting the
revenue of the population relying on this main export
product and their ability to earn a living or to survive.
In the face of the quickly evolving crisis, the
United Nations on the ground has continued to
mobilize efforts to ensure a swift and peaceful return to
constitutional order. To this end, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) has met with the military junta on a
number of occasions to underscore the need to return
the country to constitutional rule, release detained
officials and complete the electoral process.
Following the Security Council’s issuance of its
presidential statement of 21 April (S/PRST/2012/15),
my office met with the leadership of the military junta
to hand over a copy of the presidential statement and to
enquire about what steps the junta planned to take to
comply with the statement. The junta indicated that it
was engaging in negotiations with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) aimed
at arriving at a solution to the crisis. During the
meeting, it agreed to grant access to the United Nations
to visit the detainees, and that visit took place on
26 April 2012.
I also consulted with the PAIGC, opposition
parties and civil society organizations to ascertain their
various positions regarding the coup and to encourage
their participation in the ECOWAS-led mediation
process. Overall, the coup is unpopular in the country,
especially within the population and in the former
freedom fighters’ association. There is mounting
anxiety, particularly around the fact that the longer a
solution to the crisis is delayed, the more severe the
social and economic consequences. In addition, human
rights violations, including restriction on freedom of
expression and on peaceful assembly, intimidation and
arbitrary arrest, continue unabated.
The UNIOGBIS Human Rights Section has met
on a regular basis to analyse the impact of the coup
d’état on the human rights situation in the country. The
Section monitors the situation in detention centres and
has called on the military authorities to respect the
detainees’ human rights. The United Nations

12-33105

Emergency Preparedness and Response Working Group
has also conducted an assessment of the humanitarian
situation in the aftermath of the 12 April coup and
reviewed the United Nations inter-agency contingency
plan. The assessment concluded that the situation is not
critical for the moment.
I also held a series of regular discussions with
international partners based in Bissau to echo the
Council’s call for a common and coordinated voice and
action in addressing the ongoing political crisis. In
order to ensure the effective sharing of information, as
well as mutual support among international partners
and the harmonization of efforts, international partners
in Bissau agreed to the creation of a crisis contact
group, including ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
the United Nations and possibly the European Union
(EU) as a major development partner, under the
chairmanship of UNIOGBIS. The first formal meeting
of the group will be convened on my return to Bissau.
At the regional level, ECOWAS has continued to
lead the mediation process aimed at facilitating the
peaceful restoration of constitutional order. In this
regard, the Gambia, on behalf of the ECOWAS
regional contact and follow-up group, convened a
meeting of Guinea-Bissau stakeholders in Banjul on
29 April. The meeting was attended by representatives
of Guinea-Bissau, including the military junta, the
PAIGC, the forum of opposition political parties, the
five candidates contesting the results of the first round
of the presidential elections, as well as the inter-faith
facilitation group that, prior to the coup, had attempted
to mediate a solution for the completion of the
electoral process.
During the meeting, the regional contact and
follow-up group proposed the following solutions:
first, taking immediate measures to restore
constitutional order; second, putting in place a
12-month transitional period for the revision of the
Constitution and the electoral law, the implementation
of the national security sector reform programme, and
other reforms to prepare the ground for new elections
aimed at choosing a president during the transition;
third, reinstalling Mr. Raimundo Pereira as the Interim
President; fourth, appointing a consensual Prime
Minister vested with full powers to lead a broad-based
Government during the transition; fifth, granting the
interior and defence portfolios to the military junta;
sixth, extending the National Assembly’s mandate until

3

S/PV.6766

the end of the transition; and seventh, deploying an
ECOWAS force to provide security for the departure of
the Angolan mission in order to guarantee security
during the transitional period and to assist in the
implementation of SSR within the scope of the
ECOWAS/CPLP road map in support of national SSR
strategies.
Although the ECOWAS summit held in Abidjan
on 26 April started on a positive footing, leading to the
release of the Interim President and the Prime Minister,
the talks in Banjul on 29 April stalled when parties
disagreed on key issues, such as who should be the
Interim President. In addition, the proposals put
forward by the regional contact group included
measures that could be challenged as not meeting the
ECOWAS zero tolerance principle and the Security
Council’s call for the restoration of constitutional
order. This is particularly true in the case of its
decision that the military junta should take the defence
and interior portfolios in the transitional Government.
There is also a lack of clarity on what the
completion of the election process means in practical
terms. The armed forces spokesperson has argued that
the military junta was fully compliant with ECOWAS
requirements and that the only point of difference was
the question of the interim presidency. The PAIGC, on
the other hand, insisted that a solution had to be based
on a sole premise, namely, respect for constitutional
and democratic legality. For the PAIGC, which did not
participate in the negotiations on the ground, restoring
constitutional normalcy means the unconditional
release of all detainees, the return of power to the
legitimate civilian authorities — that is, the Interim
President, the Prime Minister and the Government —
and the conclusion of the 18 March 2012 electoral
process.
On 3 May, I attended an extraordinary summit of
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government on GuineaBissau, in Dakar. In their final communiqué, ECOWAS
leaders reaffirmed their zero tolerance principle for
coups in the subregion and confirmed their previous
decision to deploy a contingent of the ECOWAS
Standby Force to Guinea-Bissau, though no timeline
was given. The communiqué also established a
12-month transitional period in the country, during
which the following measures would be taken with the
assistance of ECOWAS: first, a review of GuineaBissau’s legal texts, including the country’s
Constitution and electoral code; and secondly, reforms

4

in the defence and security sectors and other reforms
aimed at preparing the ground for the holding of fresh
elections to choose a President by the end of the
transition.
They also recommended that, first, the National
Assembly renew its leadership through a vote,
following which the elected Speaker of the National
Assembly should assume the responsibility of Interim
President and the elected Deputy Speaker become the
Speaker of the National Assembly; secondly, a
consensual Prime Minister with full powers be
designated to lead a broad-based Government that
should lead the transition to its conclusion; thirdly, the
Interim President and the transitional Prime Minister
not be eligible to contest the envisaged presidential
election; and the tenure of the membership of the
National Assembly be extended through appropriate
mechanisms to cover the transitional period. In
addition, ECOWAS leaders directed the ECOWAS
Commission to seek the assistance of the African
Union, the United Nations and the international
community in implementing these measures. They also
decided to maintain the sanctions imposed on the
military junta until such time that all the protagonists
accept the modalities for a return to constitutional
order.
Meanwhile, the EU has imposed targeted
sanctions on six members of the military junta,
including travel bans and the freezing of assets. For its
part, the CPLP issued a resolution on 5 May
demanding, inter alia, the reinstatement of the Interim
President and the Prime Minister, and the conclusion of
the electoral process that was disrupted by the 12 April
coup d’état. It also called on the Security Council to
impose targeted sanctions on the military and civilians
involved in the coup, and reiterated its support for the
establishment
of
a
United
Nations-mandated
stabilization force in Guinea-Bissau comprising troops
from ECOWAS, the CPLP and the African Union.
The main parties to the mediation process led by
ECOWAS are the military junta and political parties,
including
the
PAIGC,
which
formed
the
constitutionally elected Government prior to the
12 April coup. The PAIGC argues that all parties
should not be on the same footing in the negotiations
and that account needs to be taken of the results of the
2008 legislative elections.

12-33105

S/PV.6766

In a document entitled “Memorandum on the
Management of the Politico-Military Crisis in GuineaBissau advocated by ECOWAS”, which was issued on
2 May, the Permanent Commission of the PAIGC
Political Bureau expressed some reservations about the
ECOWAS decisions. In particular, the PAIGC stressed
the importance of maintaining the policy of zero
tolerance regarding the 12 April coup d’état, and
expressed its determination not to participate in a
transitional organ that would explicitly or implicitly
legitimate the coup or give credence to the coup
leaders. The PAIGC also pointed out the ECOWAS
decisions that were viewed as unconstitutional,
including the appointment of members of the military
junta as Ministers of Interior and Defence, whereas
Guinea-Bissau’s Constitution states that the armed
forces and its active members cannot undertake any
political activity.
In another memorandum issued on 5 May, the
Political Bureau reiterated its earlier messages and
rejected the ECOWAS proposal to extend the mandate
of the National Assembly beyond November 2012. The
Political Bureau stressed that it would instruct its
parliamentary group not to take part in any process that
would not respect the approved rules for the
functioning of Parliament.
Allow me to conclude by making the following
key points.
First, I would like to reaffirm the United Nations
strong condemnation of the unconstitutional seizure of
power by the armed forces in Guinea-Bissau. I also
underscore the importance of United Nations support
for the ECOWAS-led mediation process, which should
aim at ensuring the restoration of constitutional rule in
the country in compliance with Guinea-Bissau’s
Constitution.
Secondly, in the light of the divisions in GuineaBissau, including within and between the political and
military groupings in the country, any sustainable
solution to the current political crisis must be one that
is inclusive of all national stakeholders. In that
connection, I will continue to work with national actors
to foster inclusive dialogue among segments of
Guinea-Bissau’s society, aimed at arriving at a
consensual solution to the current crisis.
Thirdly, the continued delay in the return to
normalcy in Guinea-Bissau is negatively impacting on
the innocent citizens of the country who want to see a

12-33105

speedy resolution of the crisis. In that regard, the
Council may wish to consider the imposition of
targeted measures against those who continue to
impede the return to constitutional order in the country.
Finally, the international community cannot
afford to be divided in its engagement in GuineaBissau. In that regard, it is essential that all
international partners — in particular the African
Union, the CPLP, ECOWAS, the European Union and
the United Nations — agree on a joint international
response to facilitate the peaceful restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. I would like to
assure the Council that I will continue to engage with
international stakeholders with a view to achieving that
objective.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mamadú Saliu Djaló Pires, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Pires (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): Allow me to
congratulate you and your country, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of Security Council
for the month of May.
I would like to thank all the members of the
Council for once again giving me an opportunity,
within a three-week period, to participate in the
Council on behalf of legitimate Government of GuineaBissau.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Minister of External Relations of Angola on behalf of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), the representative of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for Guinea Bissau.
In the light of the most recent developments in
the current political and military situation — namely,
the conclusions from the regional ministerial contact
group meeting held in Banjul on 29 April and the final
communiqué of the extraordinary meeting of the
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government Summit that
took place in Dakar on 3 May — the legitimate

5

S/PV.6766

authorities of Guinea-Bissau take this opportunity to
once again acknowledge and thank ECOWAS for its
efforts to find a just solution to the crisis caused by the
military coup of 12 April.
We are pleased with the solid positions taken by
the Security Council, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
CPLP, the European Union and the International
Organization of la Francophonie, which vehemently
condemned the military coup and considered the
application of sanctions against its organizers. We are
also overjoyed by the freeing of President Raimundo
Pereira, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior and other
politicians who had been held under military custody.
However, we would like to alert the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, that
atrocities continue to be committed by the organizers
of the coup d’état and their supporters, both in the
capital and in the interior of the country.
For example, many members of the Government,
party leaders, regional governors, individuals linked to
the interim President and the Prime Minister,
representatives of the judiciary, including its President,
the President of the National Electoral Commission
and some of the primary collaborators are still in
hiding since the coup on 12 April, many of them in
diplomatic representations in Bissau.
Peaceful rallies continue to be forbidden by the
military, and are violently dispersed when they are
organized.
Assaults and theft of cattle continue to occur in
Bissau and in the countryside, with no one to protect
the civilian victims from organized criminal groups.
The funds of many public institutions are being
pillaged by military elements, without a minimal
observance of legal and administrative procedures.
The largest party in the Bissau-Guinean
Parliament has been practically leaderless since
12 April, with its leadership in hiding due to
persecution and threats from the illegitimate military
power.
The home of the Prime Minister and candidate for
the second round of presidential elections, which was
bombed and destroyed by the military, continues to be
pillaged in spite of supposedly being guarded by the
military.

6

The legitimate authorities of Guinea-Bissau are
concerned about the mechanism adopted by ECOWAS
to implement the zero-tolerance principle vis-à-vis
coups d’état, as detailed in the final communiqué of the
3 May extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government. In truth, the recommended solution of
ECOWAS could be, in practice, an ineffective modality
to resolve the current political and military crisis,
possibly leading to the aggravation and postponement
of the problems the country is facing. Objectively, it
also legitimizes the coup d’état by not endorsing the
continuation of the electoral process for the second
round of voting, nor the return of the legitimate
authorities who are supposed to serve until 11 April.
Indeed, the endorsement of the election of a new
bureau for the National Popular Assembly and the
recommendation to organize a transitional Government
with the political parties reinforces that view.
Therefore, in our view, the solution recommended by
ECOWAS seems to encourage coups d’état in Africa,
in particular in Guinea-Bissau, instead of combating
them.
In that context, the legitimate authorities of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau are of the view that the
mechanism adopted by ECOWAS to implement its
zero-tolerance principle against coups d’état, by
distancing the country’s democratically elected Interim
President and the Prime Minister, does not observe the
principle of the return to constitutional order demanded
by the international community, namely, by the Council
through its presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/15)
and by the main political and civilian actors in GuineaBissau. The ECOWAS position on this is also a long
way from those held by other segments of the
international community, in particular the African
Union, the European Union, the IOF and the United
Nations.
For those reasons, the Government of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau reiterates to the Council its
determination to fulfil the requests contained in the
Council’s presidential statement of 21 April and
reaffirmed by the international community, considering
the following as necessary conditions, sine qua non, for
an immediate restoration of constitutional order and
democratic legitimacy, in accordance with GuineaBissau’s constitutional framework.
Those are, first, the restitution of effective power
to the democratically elected leaders who were serving

12-33105

S/PV.6766

the people up until 11 April, namely, the Interim
President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker of the National Assembly.
Secondly, a multinational force should be
dispatched, based on the willing cooperation and
involvement of various international organizations,
including ECOWAS, the African Union, the CPLP and
the United Nations. Such a force should be mandated
to ensure the protection of the Government’s leaders
and institutions and the civil authorities, as well as the
holding of the second round of presidential and
legislative elections by the end of this year.
Thirdly, the electoral process should be continued
through the holding of the second round of presidential
elections interrupted by the military coup of 12 April.
Fourthly, the current military leadership must be
immediately removed from their posts in the Guinean
armed forces for their role in initiating all the military
uprisings in Guinea-Bissau during the past 14 years.
Fifthly, the armed forces should be reformed as
outlined in the proposed security sector reform, to
which the international force should actively contribute
by helping to create the necessary conditions for its
implementation and for the establishment of a
democratic, republican military.
Sixthly, sanctions should be imposed on the coup
leaders and their associates. Finally, criminal charges
should be brought against the leaders and their
associates for the grave economic and social effects of
the coup resulting from the acts of vandalism and the
pillaging of businesses and private residences
perpetrated during the disruption of constitutional
order. Our position is supported by the majority of
public opinion in the country, including the PAIGC and
its members of Parliament and all the parties that make
up the national anti-coup movement, the Guinea-Bissau
Human Rights League and the trade unions.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Georges Rebelo Chikoti, Minister of External
Relations of Angola, speaking on behalf of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Mr. Chikoti (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I am
addressing the Council on behalf of the States members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP):
Brazil,
Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-

12-33105

Leste and my own country, Angola, which is currently
president of the Community.
In response to the coup d’état in Guinea-Bissau,
the international community has in recent weeks
proposed initiatives seeking a solution that will
safeguard the dignity of the Guinean people and restore
their legitimate right to a normal life and to peace,
justice, freedom and development. In that regard, two
weeks ago I had the honour to take part in a meeting of
the Security Council (S/PV.6755) convened by the
President for that month, the United States of America,
in which we had the opportunity to discuss GuineaBissau. Today, we are again taking measures to find an
acceptable solution that satisfies the international
community.
The CPLP and its member States remain deeply
concerned over developments in the country. We have
adopted two resolutions on Guinea-Bissau, most
recently on 5 May, reaffirming that the only authorities
in Guinea-Bissau recognized by the CPLP are those
that derive their authority from constitutional and
democratic legitimacy, and giving full support to the
view expressed by the legitimate Government of
Guinea-Bissau following the conference of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), held in Dakar on
3 May.
Despite the international community’s firm
condemnation of the coup d’état and its demands for
the restoration of the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau,
there have been no results so far that can ensure the
restoration of constitutional normality. We welcome the
release of the Government officials jailed after the
military coup, including Interim President Raimundo
Pereira and Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior, and
we call for the release of the remaining detainees
following the coup. We believe that the Guinean people
cannot consider themselves free so long as they do not
enjoy all their political and civilian rights, both within
and outside Guinea-Bissau.
The CPLP welcomes the position taken by the
United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie, which strongly condemns the coup
d’état, and calls on the Security Council to make every
effort to immediately restore the constitutional order,
to reinstate the legitimate Government of GuineaBissau and to conclude the electoral process. The

7

S/PV.6766

CPLP also appeals to the Security Council to impose
targeted sanctions on the military personnel and
civilians involved in the coup d’état, and expresses its
support for the sanctions recently adopted by the
European Union and those also planned by ECOWAS.
At this time, the most important task of the
international community, under the leadership of the
Security Council, is to implement appropriate
mechanisms for the restoration of constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the request of the legitimate Government of
Guinea-Bissau for the establishment and deployment of
a comprehensive stabilization force, comprising staff
of member countries of ECOWAS, the CPLP and the
African Union, under a Security Council mandate.
The Council should therefore urgently deliberate
such a proposal, under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, and establish a mission mandate
that will safeguard the constitutional order, protect the
country’s institutions, legal authorities and people,
ensure the completion of the electoral process and the
implementation of the defence and security sector
reform, and, last but not least, effectively combat drug
trafficking and its related impunity.
The CPLP and its member States are ready to
make a genuine contribution to that initiative, as it is
the best option among the ongoing efforts to resolve
the crisis and — as the most comprehensive and
multilateral solution to be received by the political and
social forces and people of Guinea-Bissau — offers the
best guarantee of success.
Following the establishment of the Angolan
technical and military assistance mission, which was
fully committed to achieving a bilateral solution to the
necessary defence and security sector reform, and after
it was deemed impossible to implement the tripartite
memorandum
of
understanding
between
the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS and the
CPLP, as provided for in the road map for reform, we
believe that it is time for a multilateral approach to
support the stabilization of Guinea-Bissau, under the
auspices of the Security Council. That seems to be the
way to help that country.
We propose the urgent establishment of a crisis
contact group for Guinea-Bissau, coordinated by the
United Nations, as mentioned in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau

8

(S/2012/280), with the participation of representatives
of the African Union, ECOWAS and the CPLP.
In conclusion, allow me to draw the Council’s
attention to the terrible scourge of illicit drugs and
arms trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, as well as other less
prevalent but equally serious trafficking. We believe
that the expressed intention of the country’s legitimate
Government to combat drug trafficking was a key
reason for the coup d’état. The international
community is therefore being challenged to mobilize in
that fight, which is of concern to everyone as it affects
us all, causing irreparable damage to and destroying
the country’s political cohesion and social and moral
well-being, and making it important to strengthen
support for the ECOWAS plan to fight drug trafficking,
in particular in West Africa.
Finally, allow me to alert the Council and the
international community to the serious humanitarian
situation emerging in Guinea-Bissau, in particular
those of internally displaced persons and refugees and
the risk of an epidemic, which require a response and
appropriate action of the international community. We
cannot delay such a response to Guinea-Bissau’s needs.
I am grateful for attention of the Council and the
invitation to the CPLP to address it.
The President:
Ambassador Viotti.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting and for inviting me
to brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Communities of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency
Mr. Mamadú Saliu Djaló Pires, and of the Minister of
External Relations of Angola and Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP),
His Excellency Mr. Georges Chikoti. I also welcome
Ms. Salamatu Souleiman, Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his
valuable work as Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
of

From the outset, the Guinea-Bissau configuration
the Peacebuilding Commission has strongly

12-33105

S/PV.6766

condemned the forcible seizure of power from the
legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau. It is worth
noting that the international community also
condemned the coup d’état in unison. The message was
clear — the constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau must
be restored and all those who are illegally detained
must be released as a matter of urgency. We believe
that the unity of all international partners of GuineaBissau behind such a strong message will contribute to
the resumption of the democratic process and to
convincing the perpetrators of the coup d’état to
withdraw to the barracks, allowing for the return of
civilian rule.
By condemning the coup d’état, we also made it
clear that all national stakeholders should resolve their
disputes through political dialogue, never by the use of
force. The first step to further national reconciliation in
Guinea-Bissau should be respect for the rule of law and
the restoration of the constitutional order. The active
engagement and coordination of the various international
partners, especially regional organizations, should be
sustained. The recent release of the Interim President
and the Prime Minister is an important development,
and should be seen as an opportunity to maintain the
momentum and lead to the restoration of the rule of
law.
At this juncture, it is of the utmost importance
that we continue to coordinate our efforts and speak
with a single voice, underscoring that the international
community will not, under any circumstances, tolerate
the unconstitutional seizure of power. The United
Nations, the African Union, the CPLP and ECOWAS
should continue to cooperate and mutually reinforce
each other’s efforts. We commend the notable role of
regional organizations in discussing solutions to the
crisis and in underlining that the overthrow of a
democratic Government shall not be accepted by those
committed to peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
Now it is time to seek convergence and align our
actions with the purpose of rendering them as effective
as possible.
The Peacebuilding Commission is committed to
helping Guinea-Bissau to implement the necessary
reforms to achieve political stability and further its
social and economic development. As I had the
opportunity to stress in my previous statements before
the Council, tangible results were obtained in the fields
of institution-building, economic recovery and
financial management. Let me also reiterate that the

12-33105

country was in the process of conducting democratic
elections and that the first round had a significant
turnout and was considered credible and transparent by
international observers. The coup d’état represented a
serious blow to the democratic will of the people of
Guinea-Bissau.
I refer once and again to those gains to emphasize
that the engagement of the United Nations and of the
Peacebuilding Commission with Guinea-Bissau was
paying off. Despite all of the difficulties of a country
affected by years of conflict, Guinea-Bissau had
started, with the cooperation of the international
community, to create a positive trend that would
establish a virtuous cycle of political stability and
economic development.
I therefore echo the call made by Special
Representative Mutaboba that all international
partners — the United Nations, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the CPLP and the European Union — must
stand united in their efforts to assist Guinea-Bissau at
today’s critical juncture. To maintain the firm
engagement of the international community with
Guinea-Bissau, it is crucial that the constitutional order
be restored. I reaffirm that the Guinea-Bissau countryspecific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission is ready to continue to engage in those
efforts.
The President: I thank Ambassador Viotti for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Suleiman.
Ms. Suleiman: I would like, first of all, to
convey to you, Mr. President, warm greetings from the
President of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Commission, Mr. Kadré Désiré
Ouédraogo, whom I am honoured to represent at
today’s important meeting of the Security Council.
The several meetings convened by the Council in
recent weeks to deliberate on the situation in GuineaBissau bear witness to the importance that the Council
and the Secretary-General attach to the issues of peace
and security in West Africa. I wish therefore to express
the gratitude of the heads of State of the Economic
Community of West African States and the ECOWAS
Commission for the support that the Council and the
Secretary-General have given to the subregion in its
efforts to stabilize the peace and security environment.

9

S/PV.6766

As I thank you, Sir, for your excellent
stewardship of today’s proceedings, I would also like
to acknowledge the speakers who took the floor before
me, in particular, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guinea-Bissau, the Minister of External Affairs of
Angola, who spoke on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), and the Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
For years now, Guinea-Bissau has stood as a
major challenge in the ECOWAS space. The permanent
stand-off between the over-politicized military and the
perpetually bickering political class runs the risk of
transforming a beautiful country with great potential
into a virtual failed State. That trend cannot be allowed
to continue.
Since 19 April, the last time it briefed the
Security Council (see S/PV.6754), ECOWAS has
intensified its efforts aimed at pushing for the speedy
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau,
but with mixed results. At yet another Extraordinary
Summit of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government
in Abidjan on 26 April, which previous speakers have
referred to, the Summit denounced the agreement
between the military command and the 26 fringe
parties to establish a so-called national transitional
council to rule the country for two years. Instead, the
ECOWAS Summit demanded the establishment of a
12-month transition in Guinea-Bissau that would
culminate in the holding of a presidential election. The
Summit also instructed the Commission to deploy the
ECOWAS Standby Force in the country to, among
other duties, secure the withdrawal of the Angolan
Technical and Military Assistance Mission in GuineaBissau, secure the proposed transition and commence
work on the implementation of the road map for
defence and security sector reform in the country.
The heads of State adopted a series of targeted
sanctions on the military command and its associates,
along with diplomatic, economic and financial
sanctions on the country, if the junta failed to accept
ECOWAS demands within 72 hours. A regional contact
group, with Nigeria as Chair and comprising Benin,
Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Senegal and Togo,
was also established to follow up on the Summit’s
decisions.

10

In a major breakthrough in the crisis, ECOWAS
succeeded, on 27 April, in securing the release of both
the Interim President, Mr. Raimundo Pereira, and the
Prime Minister, Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, who had
been in detention since the 12 April coup d’état. On
29 April, as was mentioned earlier, the regional contact
group held extensive consultations in Banjul with the
principal stakeholders in the crisis — lasting more than
12 hours — on the modalities for the transition. The
interlocutors included the military command, the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC), the group of five presidential
candidates in the aborted election, the group of
26 fringe parties allied with the junta and interfaith
groups for the promotion of dialogue. However, the
consultations failed to yield the desired results,
principally because of the intransigence of the junta
and its political allies. Therefore, targeted and general
sanctions came into effect at midnight on 29 April.
The ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit held in
Dakar on 3 May further consolidated the regional
position on the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The Summit
provided further details on the proposed 12-month
transition, the highlight of which was the proposal to
reconvene the National Assembly, elect a new
leadership through a vote and make the Speaker so
elected the new Interim President. A consensual Prime
Minister with full powers would then be appointed to
head a transitional Government. The tasks of the
transitional authority would include, inter alia,
overseeing a review of the relevant legal texts, namely,
the Constitution and the electoral code, economic
reform, reform of the defence and security sector, a
national dialogue and the conduct of a presidential
election.
On Friday, 4 May, the Chairman of the Authority
dispatched an ECOWAS mission to Guinea-Bissau, led
by Nigeria, the Chair of the regional contact group, for
yet another round of discussions with the stakeholders.
At those discussions, the junta, the PAIGC, the five
presidential candidates, members of civil society,
interfaith groups and the political parties were present.
In the consultations, the proposals put forward by
ECOWAS were met by the stakeholders with broad
acceptance, even though some of the interlocutors
called for a joint technical team to review and
harmonize the proposals with the provisions of the
Constitution of Guinea-Bissau. ECOWAS believes that

12-33105

S/PV.6766

progress is being made and that a solution will soon be
found in that direction.
In adopting the strategy for the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS was
informed by its awareness of the seriousness and
complexity of the situation in the country. Against that
background, sacrifices and compromises must
necessarily be made by all stakeholders. The
constitutional order that existed prior to the coup d’état
cannot be restored immediately, as the PAIGC is
demanding, if civil war is to be avoided in the country.
Nor will ECOWAS or any international authority
accept the proposals of the junta and its allies seeking a
two-year transition period, because that would be
tantamount to rewarding the coup plotters. A
compromise is therefore needed. In proposing a
transition through the National Assembly, ECOWAS is
aware that the overthrown Government of the PAIGC
controls 63 per cent of the seats in the Assembly and
would have a major say in determining who eventually
emerges as Interim President.
Even as ECOWAS is working hard to find a
peaceful solution to the constitutional crisis, the
planning element of the ECOWAS Standby Force has
maintained regular contact with the Bissau-Guinean
army on the modalities for the deployment of the
ECOWAS Force, which is imminent. In those
endeavours, ECOWAS has worked, and will continue
to work, in close cooperation with the African Union,
the United Nations and other partners, whose support
will greatly enhance the achievement of the set
objectives of the re-establishment of the rule of law
and the maintenance of peace and security in GuineaBissau.

heads of State and Government will require resolve as
well as the continued understanding and support of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Security
Council and the international community at large.
ECOWAS will definitely need financial, technical and
logistical support, particularly for the deployment of
the Standby Force. Work on the details of the support
required is at an advanced stage and will be made
available to all partners as soon as possible.
The initiatives taken by ECOWAS are aimed at
helping the Government and the people of GuineaBissau, because ECOWAS, as a regional body, is aware
of the country’s problems and hopes, through dialogue,
to undertake a thorough review of the country’s
political and military system, with a view to
transforming the country into a responsible member of
the international community and an agent for
international peace and security, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter.
The political paralysis and the drug culture, to
which earlier speakers have referred, in Guinea-Bissau
today symbolize the fragility that threatens the
subregion’s efforts to entrench democratic culture and
promote growth and development; it also threatens
international peace and security. The international
community has a responsibility and an opportunity to
transform that situation, and the time to do so is now.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

ECOWAS
is
acutely
aware
that
the
implementation of the decisions of the subregion’s

12-33105

11
