United Nations

S/PV.4661

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4661

st meeting
Thursday, 12 December 2002, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Valdivieso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Colombia)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Yap
Mr. Atieh
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2002/1314).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

02-73422 (E)

*0273422*

S/PV.4661

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2002/1314)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
invitations under rule 37 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Mirko Šarović,
Presiding Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Sulejman Tihić,
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Dragan Cović, Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and His
Excellency Mr. Dragan Mikerević, Prime Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Mr. Mirko Šarović, Presiding Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr.
Sulejman Tihić, Member of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Dragan Cović,
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Mr. Dragan Mikerević, Prime
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, were
escorted to their seats at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the
Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Chief of Mission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2002/1314, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jacques Klein, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Chief of Mission, His Excellency Mr. Mirko
Šarović, Presiding Member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Sulejman Tihić,
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and His Excellency Mr. Dragan Cović, Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Kofi Annan, to whom I give the floor.
The Secretary-General: It is a great pleasure to
be here at this Security Council meeting on the
conclusion of the United Nations missions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in Prevlaka. Both these missions
have successfully completed their mandates.
My report on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) describes in detail
what the mission has achieved and how it was done. It
has completed successfully the most extensive police
reform and restructuring project ever undertaken by the
United Nations. In doing so, it broke new ground in the
techniques
of
United
Nations
civilian-police
operations. Bosnia and Herzegovina has now a police
“fit for Europe”; this is the orientation of the country’s
leaders, and they will continue to pursue it. The
presence of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
at today’s session is a demonstration of their common
determination to assume full responsibility for meeting
the challenges ahead.
The United Nations Mission of Observers in
Prevlaka (UNMOP) had a more modest objective. By
monitoring the demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula, it helped to shield this strategically
important area from the fighting and tensions in the
vicinity. In this way, it maintained a favourable
situation for an eventual negotiated settlement. I am
encouraged by the signing, on 10 December, of a
protocol between Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on an interim agreement along their

S/PV.4661

southern border. While this protocol does not pre-judge
the terms of the final settlement, it is a tangible
expression of willingness, on both sides, to settle the
dispute in a good-neighbourly manner.
Our mission continues in Kosovo. But with the
end of these two missions — both, in their way,
successors to the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) — an era of United Nations
involvement in the former Yugoslavia comes to an end.
This era has seen some of peacekeeping’s bitterest
moments, which have left a lasting impression on the
Organization and on all of us who were personally
involved.
I believe that, over time, we have drawn
important conclusions about the nature, scope and role
of United Nations peacekeeping and have made it a
better instrument for the international community.
UNMIBH and UNMOP have shown that, with the right
mandate, the cooperation of the parties and the strong
support of the Security Council and United Nations
Member States in general, United Nations
peacekeeping operations can make an important
difference.
The United Nations will, of course, stay engaged
in the Balkans. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo is carrying out a
complex mandate, together with our partners: the
European Union (EU), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
In doing so, it makes use of many of the lessons
learned from Bosnia and Herzegovina. And in Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself, the United Nations family will
continue to support the Government and the people.
In conclusion, I want to thank Jacques Klein and
Rodolfo Sergio Mujica for the leadership they have
provided; the men and women of the two missions for
their devoted service; the contributing Governments,
for making their personnel available; the leaders of the
host countries for their cooperation; and finally, this
Council itself, for the steadfast support it has given.
Without all of you, the good work would not have
been possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jacques Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Chief of Mission.
Mr. Klein (spoke in French): It is a great honour
for me to be before the members of the Security
Council once again to discuss, for the second time in
six years, the successful completion of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. The conclusion of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), in 19 days’ time, represents, in the annals
of United Nations peacekeeping, the most important
police-sector reform and restructuring programme that
the United Nations has ever undertaken.
For myself and for the women and men who are
part of UNMIBH, this moment fills us with pride that
we have done our job well, but it also fills us with
humility, because we are aware of our inability to
prevent or to swiftly put an end to the conflict that took
place 1 decade ago, whose consequences were tragic
and devastating. Despite the difficult start of United
Nations peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
conclude our Mission with our heads held high,
convinced that the United Nations has helped the
country to embark on the path of peace and stability.
As was emphasized by the Secretary-General during
his recent visit to Sarajevo, a historic chapter is
drawing to an end. We close that chapter with dignity.
(spoke in English)
The role given to the United Nations under Annex
11 of the Dayton Peace Accords has been fulfilled. We
leave behind a legacy of democratic law enforcement;
police forces fit for Europe. A platform now exists on
which the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
continued help from the international community, can
build a society based on respect for the rule of law and
functioning democratic institutions.
On 1 January 2003, the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM) will begin to build on UNMIBH’s
achievements to ensure continued professional police
performance. The Brahimi report called for greater
cooperation between United Nations peace operations
and regional organizations. This first operation under
the European Union Common Security and Defence
Policy is the practical embodiment of that
recommendation.

3

S/PV.4661

Greater European involvement assures the
common citizen that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
integral part of Europe — that it cannot be left to
languish in a Balkan no-man’s land, isolated from
mainstream European political and economic
development. The country must now move ahead with
progressive reforms focusing on the rule of law, on
economic development and on higher education
standards. With vision and perseverance, Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leader — who honour us today with
their presence — can take the country to its rightful
place in the European family of nations.
But serious systemic challenges remain.
Politically, the fundamental bargain that institutionally
and organically links citizens together in a single State
without the need for external props has not yet been
struck. Strengthening State-level institutions by giving
them the necessary legislative, executive and financial
authority is essential for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
able to function as a modern State in its European
context. Economically, Bosnia and Herzegovina faces a
critical challenge. With 64 per cent of the gross
domestic
product
consumed
by
Government
bureaucracy, priority issues such as educational reform,
investment, job creation and the rule of law suffer. The
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina who are here today
have in their hands the ability to reform the State
apparatus in the interests of all of their citizens. I urge
them to bring their bloated bureaucracies under greater
fiscal discipline and to give Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as a State, the revenue that it needs to survive and
prosper.
As I have said before, justice and reconciliation
will not take root until the country is rid of the
malignant blight of war criminals. The continued
freedom of Karadzic and Mladic, among others, keeps
us all prisoners of the past and continues to
demonstrate the international community’s impotence
in the face of evil. Bosnia and Herzegovina must fulfil
its commitments to cooperate in full with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Additionally, building up domestic
capacities to try ICTY-approved war crimes cases is an
essential and necessary step, and current efforts in that
direction deserve our collective support.
The new High Representative, Lord Ashdown,
has at last set the right priorities. His motto, “First
justice, then jobs, through reform”, captures what the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina expect and what

4

political authorities must deliver. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has suffered too long from a political
culture in which elections were no more than a census
of ethnicity. Politicians should carefully read the
results of the most recent elections: programmes count;
politicians can lose office. Despite the clear progress
that has been made, the assistance and the involvement
of the international community continue to be essential.
But new Governments need to act quickly and
resolutely to ensure meaningful reform.
I now turn to the details of UNMIBH’s
completion of its core mandate. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2002/1314) before the Council
updates our activities since June 2002 and puts them in
their historical context. As the Council is aware, the
mandate implementation plan has been the conceptual
guide of the Mission for the past two years. With the
Council’s endorsement, it has virtually served as our
mandate. Based on established international standards
of competence and integrity, our intensive reform and
restructuring efforts have culminated in the
certification of individual officers and the accreditation
of police administrations. Local partnership and
ownership have been the key to the implementation and
the sustainability of our objectives.
Allow me to elaborate on our qualitative and
quantitative
achievements.
UNMIBH
created
mechanisms to verify and certify that all current and
future police personnel are qualified professionals able
to serve the public with competence and integrity. To
determine individual integrity, each police officer has
been comprehensively vetted according to strict
criteria: wartime activities, housing status, academic
credentials, performance and adherence to human
rights standards. Senior police personnel were subject
to additional checks to ensure that managers were fit to
manage. To establish individual competency, all
serving police officers were intensively trained in basic
standards of democratic policing through the two
police academies that UNMIBH established. Training
has now been fully handed over to local ownership. As
a result, local police forces today comprise 15,786
certified law enforcement officers.
UNMIBH instituted structural reforms in law
enforcement institutions, on the one hand to address
organizational management and personnel policy
deficiencies carried over from the war, and on the other
to institutionalize the separation of politics from
policing. To ensure organizational competence, through

S/PV.4661

our systems analysis project, we opened up budgets to
external audits, instituted effective management and
human resource systems, and ensured internal and
external oversight mechanisms. The establishment of
local change management teams, with UNMIBH’s
oversight, to implement our recommendations ensured
that that project would reflect a change in the
“corporate culture”.
Three police administrations have thus far
received UNMIBH accreditation as meeting the basic
standards of democratic policing. With the support of
the High Representative, the legislative framework is
now in place to accredit the remaining administrations
by the end of the mandate. To ensure organizational
integrity,
we
established
independent
Police
Commissioners and Directors of Police in 12 police
administrations to insulate police work from unlawful
political interference.
Police forces should reflect the community that
they serve. Minority representation now averages 10
per cent in all police administrations. Recruited female
officers currently make up an average of 3 per cent of
the total personnel strength. That baseline will be
advanced through institutionalizing recruitment and
deployment mechanisms.
We have learned that the greatest threat to
international stability comes from the institutional
weaknesses of States themselves — from the inability
of new democracies to control borders, to fight
organized crime and to cooperate with neighbouring
States. The multi-ethnic State Border Service is now
fully deployed, a key UNMIBH achievement in
enhancing Bosnia and Herzegovina’s statehood and
territorial integrity. With the establishment of the State
Information and Protection Agency (SIPA), Interpol
national coordination bureau and intra-State and
regional cooperative mechanisms, the country now has
an integrated law enforcement network to facilitate
national, regional and international cooperation.
To combat the reprehensible trade of human
trafficking, in July 2001 UNMIBH initiated the Special
Trafficking Operations Programme (STOP), the largest
and most extensive anti-trafficking programme in
South-East Europe, comprised of local police
monitored by International Police Task Force (IPTF)
officers.

UNMIBH’s institution-building efforts also
encompassed assistance to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina play an active role as a United Nations
Member State. Civilian police and military observers
are now participating in three United Nations peace
operations, and troops are ready for deployment as part
of a composite unit. Bosnia and Herzegovina is no
longer only a beneficiary of, but also a net contributor
to, peace operations.
When UNMIBH leaves, our success will be
judged not only by what has been achieved but also by
what we are leaving behind. The impact of police
reform is measured by police performance and the level
of public trust and confidence.
The sea change in police professionalism has
created the essential security conditions for an
unprecedented number of minority returns. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
registered more than 80,000 returns in the first nine
months of this year — nearly the total year-end figure
for 2001.
As a result of improved police planning and
performance, public commemorations, re-inauguration
of religious sites and large-scale inter-ethnic sporting
and other events are, by and large, peaceful
occurrences. The recent incident-free elections further
attest to the high level of growing police
professionalism.
With the establishment and deployment of the
State Border Services (SBS), Bosnia and Herzegovina
is no longer a springboard for illegal migrants into
Europe. The dramatic reduction of illegal migration by
more than 95 per cent over the last two years through
the Sarajevo airport alone has benefited not only
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also the whole continent.
Intra-State and inter-State law enforcement
cooperation is now routine,institutionalized at the
ministerial level and operationalized through the Task
Forces. The State of Bosnia and Herzegovina now has
the functioning capacities and mechanisms to fight
terrorism, organized crime and human trafficking both
at home and in the region.
UNMIBH’s Human Rights Office began
coordinating joint IPTF and local police raids on
establishments suspected of involvement in human
trafficking in March 1999. Recognizing the magnitude
of the problem, we established and monitored local

5

S/PV.4661

STOP teams in July 2001. Since then, over 830 raids
have been conducted on 240 identified establishments.
Of these, 152 have now been closed. Overall, several
thousand women have been interviewed and more than
550 victims have been assisted with repatriation to
their homelands. As a result of these operations, there
are 52 ongoing prosecutions and 19 pending court
cases, and 100 traffickers have been convicted.
In terms of police and public interface, we have
witnessed a remarkable trend of growing public
confidence and trust in the police. In sum, the
transition of law enforcement agencies from tools of
the State to professional servants of the public is firmly
on track.
Complementing our core mandate, progress has
been made and reinforced through two specialized
United Nations Trust Funds. Through the United
Nations Trust Fund for the Police Assistance
Programme, $16.5 million has been provided for basic
police equipment and facilities. Additionally, more
than 540 quick-impact projects have been implemented
from the United Nations Trust Fund for the Restoration
of Essential Public Services, costing $25 million.
Finally, a few words on one of our greatest
challenges — the legacy of Srebrenica. Our aims were
not only to assist in healing the wounds of the
survivors of the tragic massacre but also, in the scope
of peace-building, to lay the foundations for recovery.
We encouraged multi-ethnic representation in the
police forces to build confidence for returnees, and as
many as 3,500 Bosniacs have returned to the wider
Srebrenica region so far. From the United Nations
Trust Fund we disbursed over $1.6 million on
infrastructure, including funding and construction of a
model community police station. Additionally, in close
cooperation with United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), we initiated the Srebrenica
Regional Recovery Programme. The SecretaryGeneral’s meeting, during his recent visit to Sarajevo,
with representatives of one of the survivor groups, the
Mothers of Srebrenica, served as another reminder that
they are not forgotten.
Work has commenced on a project led by the
Office of the High Representative to construct the
Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial Cemetery. I take this
opportunity to urge all Member States to lend their full
support to fund-raising efforts to complete plans for the

6

site and enable the burial of the victims to begin. At the
very least, we owe the victims burials with dignity.
Today, UNMIBH has reached the point where we
have confidence in passing the baton of police reform
to a smaller successor mission. The seamless transition
to the European Police Mission is well advanced. I
welcome their agreement to give priority to the SBS,
SIPA and the maintenance of effective countertrafficking measures. I am also glad that the EUPM
intends to continue a robust approach to organized
crime. We are confident that under this framework our
achievements will be sustained and UNMIBH’s legacy
preserved. The EUPM deserves the Council’s full
political support.
Even with such a solid baseline, challenges
remain. Attention will be required to safeguard the
integrity of police forces from political influence. For
UNMIBH, this has been one of our overriding
priorities. Unless efforts continue along these lines,
sustainability of the achievements made so far in police
reform and restructuring will be seriously undermined.
Politics must be kept out from policing.
In the context of overall establishment of rule of
law, there is a vast disparity between the levels of
judicial reform and that of the police. UNMIBH’s
Criminal Justice Advisory Unit partially filled the void.
However, definitive closure of this gap will depend on
an accelerated pace of judicial reform. The fullest
support is required for this already prioritized reform
item for the sake of eliminating parasitic criminality
and opening the doors to foreign investment.
Seven years of UNMIBH and a decade of United
Nations peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
about to end. Many lessons have been learned. I hope
that one aspect of UNMIBH’s legacy will be the
application of the Mission’s lessons to other peace
operations. Two primary examples come to mind.
First, we have reached this closing phase only by
knowing where we wanted to go. UNMIBH’s mandate
implementation plan encompassed our strategic and
operational vision and our exit strategy. It helped to
prioritize projects for international donor assistance
and represented a process of local capacity-building for
the eventual taking over of the tasks of police
professionalization. I am heartened that this approach
has found resonance for the work of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the

S/PV.4661

development of an Office of the High Representative
mission implementation plan.
Second, a holistic approach to rule of law must
happen early in a post-conflict situation and all the
necessary tools put in one hand. Police reform and
restructuring is only one aspect of the rule of law.
Without complementarity and simultaneous reform of
all areas, the rule of law will be a chain only as strong
as its weakest link. A pillar construct must be in place
to ensure the simultaneous professionalization of the
full sector - police, judiciary and prison systems.
UNMIBH is a success. A mandate has been
implemented, and there are visible signs that reforms
are at work. The quality of the women and men of
UNMIBH, representing 96 nations and 43 policecontributing States, and the support of the Council and
of the Secretariat under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral have made this Mission our collective success.
You, the members of the Security Council, have
provided the critical direction and means for UNMIBH
to implement its core mandate. It has been an
exemplary collaborative effort. Our colleagues in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations have been
unwavering in their support and assistance, and their
confidence in us has been an inspiration. To the
Secretary-General, I would like to extend particular
thanks and appreciation for his leadership not only in
guiding the United Nations, but for his recent visit to
Sarajevo to mark the end of an important chapter in
United Nations peacekeeping in the Balkans. It also
represented the realization of the Mission that he
personally initiated in 1995.
(spoke in French)
We have witnessed in recent years the fulfilment
of a partnership between the authorities and people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations.
Together we are closing this peacekeeping chapter. The
United Nations system will, however, continue to work
in other ways to help the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a better future. The path has been
laid out: it leads towards a Europe-oriented future, on
the basis of a spirit of reform and responsible
leadership. I sincerely hope that the promise of a
European future will enable the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to attain the goals to which they
collectively aspire.

Before the work of UNMIBH is finalized, I
would like to give the Council a small gift as an
expression of our appreciation for its ongoing support
and encouragement, which has helped us to complete
our mandate and accomplish our mission successfully.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Klein, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Chief of
Mission, for his comprehensive briefing, which has
supplemented his previous briefings. I would also like,
on behalf of the members of the Council, to thank him
for the gift that he has given us on this important and
historic occasion.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mirko Šarović,
Presiding Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Šarović (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me
to participate in this important meeting. I believe that
the final report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2002/1314) represents the end of one era and the
beginning of another in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unfortunately, at the beginning of previous
decade, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina was
often under consideration in this Chamber. By adopting
resolution 1031 (1995), which welcomed the Peace
Agreement reached under United Nations auspices, the
Council established the International Police Task
Force, whose role was of great importance for the postDayton Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council thus
provided for the implementation of the comprehensive
Peace Agreement by defining the mandate of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is about to complete its mandate. We are
grateful to the United Nations and to all those who
have supported the mission and sent troops to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We consider the withdrawal of the
peacekeeping operation to be a sign of confidence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that other
international missions will gradually be withdrawn, so
that the local infrastructure can take over their roles in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

7

S/PV.4661

The role of the United Nations mission was of
key importance in assisting the parties to ensure
stability and establish the reform process, including the
restructuring of the police force, with a view to
creating a foundation for the rule of law. The United
Nations mission helped to establish the State Border
Service, which recently assumed the full control of the
State border.
With the completion of the UNMIBH mandate,
the European Union Police Mission will take over the
process of institution-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Given Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
orientation towards integration into Europe, we fully
support the transition from the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union
mission, as well as continued cooperation with its
special agencies there.
With that transition, the United Nations mandate
in Bosnia and Herzegovina will have been successfully
completed. I would like to express my gratitude to the
United Nations, the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, as well as to all other personnel of the
mission. It was a very successful mission.
Given our efforts aimed at peace, both in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the institutions and bodies of
the United Nations, I would like to remind the Council
that we have submitted our candidacy for nonpermanent membership of the Security Council for
2010-2012. We believe that we will be able to create an
environment and build an infrastructure that transforms
our shortcomings into advantages, as we will be able to
use the experience gained during the foundation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the fight against crime and
terrorism and thus contribute to the building of
democracy in our country and in the world.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is playing an active role
in the fight against terrorism. We are ready to support
the United Nations in its war against terrorism, as well
as the United Nations activities pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001).
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully committed to the
implementation of United Nations resolutions. During
Secretary-General Kofi Annan’ visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the representatives and the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina confirmed their
absolute commitment to reform and to the European
and Euro-Atlantic integration processes. In this

8

connection, following the October elections in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, our newly elected three-member
Presidency, which represents our three constituent
peoples and two entities, would like to emphasize its
determination to continue the process of democratic
transformation as we move towards sustainable peace
and democracy.
We have a common responsibility and a common
goal to ensure a brighter future for our children. I
would like to note that, since the general election, we
have been working to build a sustainable governmental
infrastructure. The State and entity governments of
Bosnia will have a new administration, and I am
convinced that, working in partnership, we will
continue to move towards reform and away from
internal conflict. I believe that, in place of the bad
news, we will increasingly be hearing good news from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Finally, I would like to take
this opportunity to express my gratitude to Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein for the work about which he spoke.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr.
Mirko Šarović for his comprehensive briefing and for
the kind words he addressed to me.
I give the floor to Mr. Dragan Cović, Member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Cović (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Croatian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
would like to echo the gratitude expressed by Mr.
Mirko Šarović for the invitation to participate in
today’s meeting and for the assistance that the Council
has for years been extending to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path towards peace and the building
of a sustainable State.
In order to ensure a brighter future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we are firmly committed to European
integration and to the application of European
standards at all stages of democracy-building, on the
basis of internationally recognized norms, especially in
the field of human rights.
The creation of a politically stable country that
fully respects human rights must be based on equality
for all peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina we all wish to see
must ensure sovereignty and constitutionality for
Serbs, Bosnians and Croats throughout its territory as
well as ensure that their rights are protected. Only in
this way can a multi-ethnic State become a community

S/PV.4661

of equal citizens working together to achieve common
goals.

enable us to begin preparations for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s admission to the European Union.

Full institutional legal protection for all ethnic
groups is a requirement in order to ensure political
freedom for each and every citizen.

The existence of a large number of mine fields is
a tremendous problem for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is working to implement and strengthen the
Ottawa Convention on landmines.

Our economic and financial reforms will be
achieved through the harmonization of tax rates and
customs regulations. Other reforms will also be
undertaken on our path towards European integration.
The creation of a unified economic space and the
finalization of bilateral agreements on the promotion
and protection of investments, the agreement on free
trade, the reform of the financial sector and efforts to
attract direct foreign investment are not merely election
promises, but rather the strategy we are using to join
the ranks of those countries that are not only
economically sustainable but also able to attract
investments.
The implementation of educational reform and
the promotion of scientific, cultural and technical
cooperation are preconditions for the creation of
opportunities that will keep young people in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and enable them to become active
players in their own development and future. The
achievement of peace, development and stability in this
part of Europe is closely linked to the rebuilding and
restoration of the infrastructure in this field.
The Presidency supports the strategy of “First
justice, then jobs, through reform” set out by the High
Representative. Bosnia and Herzegovina therefore
remains fully committed to cooperation with the High
Representative, primarily through dialogue. As the old
proverb says, “Agreement builds a house”.
Therefore, I would stress once again our
readiness to reform the legal system, establish the rule
of law, create economic sustainability and new jobs,
promote the return of qualified young people from
abroad, improve the educational system and promote
scientific, educational and cultural cooperation with
other countries in the region and in the world.
I would like to inform the Council that important
progress has been made with respect to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s accession to the Partnership for Peace
and to NATO. We are also working actively to finalize
the process of joining the World Trade Organization.
We are currently working to fully and unconditionally
fulfil our obligations under the road map, which will

We are also endeavouring further to reduce
military expenses and to effect further reform in the
armed forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
with respect to the establishment of civil control over
the armed forces, which is a precondition for Bosnia’s
accession to Partnership for Peace and to NATO.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
universal implementation of the Programme of Action
agreed upon at the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects.
Our relations with neighbouring countries are
based on equality, full independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In this regard, the goal of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina is to ensure that
the ongoing process of the establishment of goodneighbourly relations with Croatia and Yugoslavia
takes place on the basis of mutual trust and assistance.
We support full and open cooperation, in particular on
such important issues as the struggle against the traffic
in human beings, organized crime and terrorism.
We in Bosnia and Herzegovina believe that
regional cooperation is a key factor in the
establishment of peace in the region and an
indispensable element of our efforts towards European
integration.
I should like to thank Mr. Klein and the Security
Council for all of their efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr.
Cović for his comprehensive briefing and for the kind
words he addressed to the Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Sulejman Tihić, Member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Tihić (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
would like to reiterate the gratitude expressed by my
colleagues. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will never forget the fact that 200 members of United

9

S/PV.4661

Nations forces lost their lives while carrying out a
peace mission in our country.

responsibility of the United Nations in that tragedy is
indisputable.

I should like to stress that, although the mandate
of the United Nations Mission will be completed on 31
December 2002, Bosnia and Herzegovina will need the
help of the United Nations in future as well.

With regard to Srebrenica, I would also like to
remind the Council that the families of the victims of
Srebrenica have not yet returned to their homes.
Neither have the victims received proper burial, as
their remains are currently housed in morgues
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. I appeal to the
United Nations to help the survivors of Srebrenica to
return to their homes and to assist them in burying the
remains of the victims with honour. We are also
working to build a memorial at Srebrenica.

We need support with respect to the return of
refugees, almost half of whom have not yet returned, or
have not been allowed to return, to their prewar homes.
This is true even today, seven years after the signing of
the Dayton Peace Accords. The return of refugees is a
precondition for lasting stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those who have returned have very hard
lives, since they have no jobs and their property has
been damaged or destroyed. We therefore consider the
involvement of United Nations structures providing
support for the return of refugees as being very
important. The return of refugees means reversing
ethnic cleansing. It also sends a clear message that
anything created out of violence and crime will never
be legitimized.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) will play a significant role
in creating lasting peace, justice and confidence among
ethnic groups. Unfortunately, the most notorious war
criminals in Europe since the Second World War,
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are still at large.
We therefore strongly support the work of the Tribunal.
We request the Security Council to provide its full
support to the Tribunal and to ensure that all parties
involved provide their unreserved cooperation to the
ICTY.
I must apologize, on this happy occasion, for
having to mention Srebrenica. However, I believe it is
my duty to do so — a duty I owe to both the victims
and the truth, as well as to the cause of ensuring that
the events at Srebrenica are never again repeated
anywhere in the world.
On his recent visit to Sarajevo, Secretary-General
Kofi Annan said that the darkest chapter of the history
of the United Nations was written at Srebrenica, which
had been a United Nations safe haven. Srebrenica
became the site of the worst war crime in Europe since
the Second World War. The safe haven of Srebrenica
was not protected and, as a consequence, an act of
genocide took place that resulted in the murders of
7,000 to 10,000 people, mainly civilians. The

10

I would like to join my colleagues in saying that
we view positively the work of the United Nations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is thanks to United Nations
Mission that Bosnia is now a stable country on the road
to progress that is becoming a factor of stability in the
entire region.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for the understanding he showed the victims of
Srebrenica and for his personal involvement. I believe
he will continue to do whatever he can to help
survivors return and ensure the proper burial of the
victims, as well as to see to it that the criminals
responsible are punished.
My particular gratitude goes out to Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for his personal
involvement in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will always
remember him. During his mandate Bosnia was able to
establish a single license plate, passport and customs
and border controls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Following
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Coordinator of the United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to support the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto,
collectively
the
Peace
Agreement
(S/1995/999/annex), as well as the relevant
decisions of the Peace Implementation Council.

S/PV.4661

“The
Security
Council
takes
this
opportunity to express its deep appreciation for
the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and the
personnel of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which
includes the International Police Task Force, for
the contributions to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. The Council highly appreciates
the achievements of cooperative efforts in
bringing about the successful conclusion of
UNMIBH’s mandate, which will expire on 31
December 2002, and expresses its thanks to all of
the countries which took part in and contributed
to the accomplishments of this Mission.
“The Security Council welcomes the
decision of the European Union (EU) to send a
Police Mission (EUPM) to Bosnia and
Herzegovina from 1 January 2003, as part of a
broader rule of law approach, as well as the close
coordination between all those concerned to
ensure a seamless transition of responsibilities
from the IPTF to the EUPM, with the
participation of the interested States which are
not members of the EU.
“The Security Council reiterates that the
primary responsibility for the further successful
implementation of the Peace Agreement lies with
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
themselves and that the continued willingness of
the international community and major donors to

assume the political, military and economic
burden of implementation and reconstruction
efforts will be determined by the compliance and
active participation by all the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing the
Peace Agreement and all the reforms needed to
rebuild a civil society.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the principles of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity and inviolability of the
borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council
encourages a continued commitment by Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the promotion of peace and
stability in the region, including through
enhanced political and economic cooperation.
“The Security Council expresses its
intention to keep the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina under review. The Council invites
the EU to keep it regularly informed as
appropriate on the activities of EUPM.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2002/33.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

11
