S/PV.9431

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9431

st meeting
Monday, 9 October 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. França Danese/Mr. Moretti. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Kumanga
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-29203 (E)
*2329203*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Kharkiv — Ukraine’s second-largest city — reportedly
killing a 10-year-old boy and his 67-year-old
grandmother. Twenty-eight people were reportedly
wounded, including an 11-month-old infant. Those
attacks took place in an area surrounded by restaurants,
apartment buildings and other civilian infrastructure.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Czechia, Latvia, Poland, Romania
and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Mrs. Hedda Samson, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: On Thursday, 5 October, the small
village of Hroza, in the Kupyansk district of Ukraine’s
Kharkiv region, suffered one of the deadliest attacks
on civilians since the beginning of Russia’s full-scale
invasion of Ukraine in February of last year. At least
52 people were reportedly killed when a missile hit a
shop and café. Several others were injured. The attack
wiped out a sixth of Hroza’s population. No family in
that small community was left untouched. Among the
victims were mourners gathered at a memorial service
for a local man killed during Russia’s occupation of
the area. United Nations human rights experts on the
ground have been able to collect the names of 35 people
who were killed — 19 women, 15 men and an 8-yearold boy. The accounts they received indicated that the
location where the attack occurred was of civilian
character. I reiterate the Secretary-General’s strong
condemnation of that heinous attack.
Shockingly, less than 24 hours later, civilians
in the Kharkiv region were hit again. This time,
missiles struck buildings in the centre of the city of
2/20

09/10/2023

The recent attacks in Kharkiv add to an already
unbearable toll of civilian casualties resulting from
Russia’s invasion, a war launched in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
As of 5 October, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) had
verified that 9,806 civilians, including 560 children,
have been killed as a result of the war. The number of
civilians that OHCHR has verified as injured stands
at 17,962, including 1,196 children. The actual figures
are very likely considerably higher and, tragically, will
continue to rise if current patterns continue.
Indeed, in recent weeks, civilians and civilian
infrastructure across Ukraine have remained
under nearly constant fire. Residents of Kherson,
Zaporizhzhya, Dnipro, Lviv, Sumy, Donetsk, Odesa,
Kyiv and other regions continued to face unrelenting
and often indiscriminate attacks. On Friday, a Russian
drone attack damaged a grain silo in the Izmail district
of the Odesa region. That was the latest in a series of
strikes on Ukrainian grain infrastructure. Combined
with Russia’s withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, such attacks not only destroy the livelihoods
of Ukrainian farmers but also risk impacting the lives
of millions of food insecure people around the world.
We are also concerned about the renewed attacks
against Ukrainian energy infrastructure in recent weeks.
The Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator will
provide more details about the United Nations response
to support the affected population.
The immediate impact of such attacks is clear.
Just as clear is the fact that international humanitarian
law obligates parties to armed conflict to protect
non-combatants. It unambiguously prohibits attacks
targeting civilians or civilian infrastructure. We will not
tire of condemning such attacks. And we will not waver
in calling for accountability for anyone responsible for
harming civilians during hostilities.
OHCHR’s latest report on the situation in Ukraine
paints a grim picture of serious human rights violations
across the country, most of them attributed to the
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russian armed forces. They include of acts of conflictrelated sexual violence reportedly committed by
members of the Russian armed forces and penitentiary
services. The report, covering the period between
1 February and 31 July 2023, indicates that those cases
are consistent with previously documented patterns of
sexual violence by Russian forces and services.
OHCHR reports that arbitrary and incommunicado
detentions of civilians have continued in Russianoccupied territory, and documents that 996 civilians have
been subjected to such detention since February 2022.
Eighty of them died in detention or were found dead
with signs of violence on their bodies, and 468 remain
in arbitrary or incommunicado detention. OHCHR also
documented cases of arbitrary detention by Ukrainian
forces, mainly law-enforcement authorities, taking
place during the reporting period. OHCHR interviewed
26 Russian prisoners of war, all of whom were men.
Twelve of them said they were subjected to torture or
ill-treatment during interrogation at unofficial places
of internment and evacuation before they were brought
to official internment locations.
OHCHR is also concerned about recent legislation
enacted in the Russian Federation that would effectively
grant amnesty to Russian servicepersons for an
overly broad range of crimes, potentially including
gross violations of international human rights law or
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Under international law, the Russian Federation has an
obligation to investigate and prosecute potential war
crimes and gross human rights violations committed by
its forces in Ukraine. In its latest update, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine also
found continued systematic and widespread use of
torture and reiterated its deep concern about the scale
and gravity of violations that have been committed in
Ukraine by Russian armed forces. The Commission
emphasized the need for accountability.
From the beginning of this senseless war, we have
warned about the grave risks it poses to Ukraine, the
region and the world. In recent weeks, the impact of
the war has expanded in the Black Sea, with reports of
the widespread use of sea mines, which could threaten
civilian navigation. A military incident in the Black
Sea, whether intentional or by accident, could further
destabilize the region. We therefore reiterate our call
for restraint in order to avoid any action that could
worsen an already volatile situation.

S/PV.9431

In his remarks to the Security Council last month
(see S/PV.9421), the Secretary-General not only
discussed the suffering that the war has inflicted on the
people of Ukraine but once again sounded the alarm
about how the invasion is aggravating geopolitical
tensions and divisions and threatening regional
stability. As was predictable and as was predicted,
the conflict is doing visible, serious damage to global
peace and security. Before 24 February 2022, the world
was already facing an extremely challenging conflict
landscape, to use a clinical euphemism. But the risks
have grown exponentially since then and the cost is
measured in lives and destruction — in Ukraine most
of all, but also beyond. Is the damage irreversible? We
have no choice but to continue to try to stop the slide
towards more devastation and suffering.
During this year’s General Assembly, we heard
a clear recommitment across the United Nations
membership to the principles of the Charter, including
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all Member States. A just solution to the
war lies in adhering to that basic obligation with deeds,
not just words. We know the dangers of abandoning our
founding principles and disregarding the norms that
bind us. It is not too late to restore the integrity of the
Charter and international law. We fail to do so at the
world’s peril.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: Last Thursday’s attack on the village
of Hroza in the Kupyansk district of the Kharkiv region
was one of the deadliest since the escalation of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine, 593 days ago. We have all seen
the brutal and tragic images coming from that small
community, which is 40 kilometres from the front
line. In total, 52 civilians were killed and more were
injured. Many homes were damaged or destroyed.
Entire families were wiped out. Until last Thursday,
Hroza was home to around 300 civilians. With the
high numbers of casualties, everyone in that small
community has been affected. That is exactly what the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for Ukraine,
Ms. Denise Brown, heard from residents when she
visited the community on Friday, less than 24 hours
after the callous attack. Since then, the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations have been on the scene
alongside local authorities to ensure that people receive
some support in the face of those atrocious attacks. Aid

23-292033/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

workers have provided immediate assistance, including
psychosocial support to survivors. Emergency repair
materials have been delivered to people whose homes
were damaged, and medical, maternity, reproductive
health, hygiene and household items have been brought
in. People are also being registered for cash assistance.
Yet again, civilians are paying a devastatingly high
price for this horrendous war. As of 8 October, according
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, 27,768 civilian casualties have now
been recorded across Ukraine, including the deaths of 560
children. We know that the true toll is likely far greater. I
echo the Secretary-General’s strong condemnation of the
attack and his demand that all attacks on civilians stop
immediately. I also join him in stressing once again that
under international humanitarian law, attacks directed at
civilians or civilian objects or that are indiscriminate are
strictly prohibited. The parties must take constant care to
spare all civilians and civilian objects, including homes,
schools, hospitals and other essential infrastructure, as
well as humanitarian facilities and assets.
It is not just civilians who are paying the price. Attacks
on humanitarian workers, as well as their facilities and
assets, have risen dramatically since the escalation of
hostilities began in 2022. The number of humanitarians
who have reportedly been killed in the line of duty has
almost tripled, from four in 2022 to 11 so far this year.
That is despite the fact that humanitarian organizations
continue to notify both parties of their movements and
the facilities they use, so that the parties can factor them
into military operations and avoid harming or impeding
humanitarian personnel.
Moreover, the war continues to send shockwaves
way beyond Ukraine’s borders. Russian strikes against
Ukraine’s port infrastructure and grain storage facilities
on the Black Sea and the Danube River continue, as do
threats to merchant shipping in the Black Sea. Food
exports from the Russian Federation and Ukraine
passing through the Black Sea remain critical to global
food security and the stabilization of global food prices.
In a world of intensifying food insecurity, all sources
of food must be safely and sustainably connected with
global supply chains. Ukraine’s Black Sea ports must be
able to operate at their full capacity, and safe navigation
must be assured for inbound and outbound traffic,
especially for food. The attacks on ports we continue to
see — the latest incident was last Friday — as well as the
threats to shipping are therefore entirely unacceptable
and must stop.
4/20

09/10/2023

As long as the war persists, humanitarian needs
in Ukraine will endure and will continue to increase.
Winter is yet again upon the people of Ukraine.
Temperatures have already started to drop and will soon
be below freezing across most of the country. As the
Council will recall, the attacks last year on Ukraine’s
energy infrastructure, including on its power stations
and heating plants, left millions of civilians without
access to heat, electricity and water in the harsh winter
months. It is disturbing to see that similar attacks have
already been reported over the past weeks. Women and
girls in particular continue to be disproportionately
affected by the conflict. They continue to face pervasive
levels of gender-based violence and exacerbated risks of
sexual exploitation and abuse. There is a growing need
for sexual and reproductive health services in response.
Despite those vast challenges and threats, the
humanitarian community remains committed to
making every effort to get civilians the support they
need, for as long as it takes. In the first eight months of
2023, some 8.3 million people received humanitarian
assistance in Ukraine. And ahead of winter, our
winter response plan and preparedness efforts are
proceeding at full speed. The support we received
from donors has been crucial to ensuring that our
humanitarian work in Ukraine can continue. Thanks
to such generosity, the humanitarian response plan for
Ukraine is almost 52 per cent funded to date. Almost
500 humanitarian partners — the majority of which
are local organizations, including grass-roots women’s
organizations — will continue to provide life-critical
aid, including protection services. They aim to reach
11.1 million people in 2023. I have deep appreciation
for their bravery, endurance and commitment to the
response in extremely challenging circumstances.
However, there is much more to do. The international
community must do more to advocate for humanitarian
access for all those who need aid across Ukraine. That
includes the nearly 4 million people who live in areas
under the military control of the Russian Federation
and whom we are unable to reach.
More than anything, the people of Ukraine need
concerted action to make this devastating war — with
its unceasing death, destruction and suffering — come
to an end.
The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Allow me to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings.
Imagine the scene: in a quiet and modest village in
Kharkiv oblast, peaceful people are participating in a
wake after a funeral, united in their grief at the loss of
a son from the village. The café had been closed since
the start of the war; it reopened only for that funeral
service. A moment later, the café was obliterated, the
place was filled with thick smoke and the air burdened
by the unbearable smell of dead bodies torn to pieces.
Death came again from the sky from a precision
ballistic missile. A total of 52 civilians — one sixth
of the pre-war population of that village, as UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo mentioned — was wiped
away, massacred in a place of no strategic importance
whatsoever except for having been on the target hit list
of the Russian army.
The Hroza massacre was not the first. It may
unfortunately not be the last, as there is no sign that
this war will end soon. But it underscores once again
the terrible price civilians are paying 20 months after
the Russian invasion. The 10,000 civilians who have
already died and the many more injured have done
nothing to deserve it except for being Ukrainian.
Just as in many other similar cases, we may hear
again: it was not Russia. Yet Russia is the country that
started and continues this unprovoked deadly war. It is
the country responsible for horrible crimes, the country
that has broken the law. And in this specific case, it
has also broken the universal ancestral law of absolute
respect for those mourning.
Instead of doing the only right thing they have
been urged to do and heed the calls to stop the war,
the Kremlin is trying desperately to convince the world
that black is white through a relentless propaganda
machine in full swing that is holding nothing back.
Every absurdity is fair game. News anchors, proKremlin mouthpieces, various officials compete with
one another to vociferate daily threats of all kinds and
spread false information with scripts flipped upside
down. We are all familiar with the frequent rants of a
former President detailing his favourite nuclear threats.
We thought an all-time low had been reached; in fact,
it had not.
The Nobel Prize for absurdity, if it existed, would
certainly go to the Deputy Chair of the State Duma,
Anna Kuznetsova. She said:

S/PV.9431

“Our soldiers have found documents on the sale of
children and human organs from which Ukraine
gets 7 per cent of its national budget, with the
support of private British military companies and
Coca Cola”.
There is really something special about that Russian
obsession with fabricating stories about organ
trafficking. For those who do not have the time to do the
math, 7 per cent of Ukraine’s budget for 2022 amounts
to $4 billion, and Ms. Kuznetsova did not dwell on retail
prices. No one can do better in combining ridicule with
depravity. Alexandr Solzhenitsyn, this time a real and
respected Nobel laureate, had long warned:
“We know they are lying, they know they are
lying, they know we know they are lying, and still
they continue”.
Only a few days ago, the President of Russia said
that his aim is to change the world. For us, change
means going forward, learning from past mistakes,
strengthening peace, cooperation and friendship,
investing in human rights and open societies, improving
the life of people and, by doing so, making the world a
better place for all. But if change means disrespecting
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
attacking and destroying one’s neighbour, violating
human rights, suppressing freedoms, applauding,
supporting and embracing dictators, we do not want
any of it. That Russian-style change means simply
going backwards, undoing progress and achievements,
returning to times long since passed.
Let me conclude with an important reminder.
Tomorrow the General Assembly will vote to elect the
new members of the Human Rights Council. It may
look like one of those numerous election processes
in New York, which most often are uneventful. This
one is not. It is rather a defining moment, one to test
once more the strong and high moral grounds of the
United Nations. Those who think that human rights
have a meaning, those who celebrate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights as one of the most consequential developments
in human history, those who care for the credibility
of the Human Rights Council and its work — they all
should think twice before casting their vote. And I
say to United Nations colleagues here and outside the
Chamber: beware — the aggressors of their neighbours,
the killers of innocent people, the deliberate destroyers
of civilian infrastructure, ports and grain silos, those

23-292035/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

who deport children and take pride in doing so, those
who use torture and sexual violence as weapons and
those who blatantly disrespect human rights law have
no place in the Human Rights Council. Therefore,
the same General Assembly that has shown the world
that it does not condone aggression has an important
choice to make to demonstrate that it is not ready to
take an arsonist for a firefighter. Decisions always have
consequences. And there is no wrong time to make the
right ones.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for
their briefings.
Last Thursday, we witnessed yet again the tragic
consequences of Russia’s senseless, illegal and
unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine. This
time, the Russian Federation struck a café in Hroza, a
village of 330 people in the region of Kharkiv with no
evidence of military sites. Fifty-two people were killed
as a result, including a child. Several others were injured.
This was one of the deadliest attacks on civilians since
the beginning of Russia’s aggression. One sixth of the
population living in the village was wiped out. Every
single family was affected. The harrowing images that
came out of Hroza illustrate the devastating impact this
war is having on Ukraine’s civilian population. They
should serve as a stark reminder of the consequences
of war and the consequences of resigning ourselves to
living in a world in which might is right.
Malta condemns such deplorable acts against
civilians and civilian infrastructure in the strongest
possible terms. There is no justification for them.
Intentional attacks against civilians are prohibited
under international law and amount to war crimes. The
perpetrators of such atrocities must be held accountable,
and we support all efforts to that end, including the
ongoing International Criminal Court and International
Court of Justice processes. We stress that international
humanitarian law and the rules on the conduct of
hostilities must be fully respected.
In conclusion, we once again underscore our
conviction that to achieve a just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, Russia must immediately cease all hostilities.
It must unconditionally and completely withdraw all its
forces and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. Until then, we will continue to stand in
solidarity with Ukraine and its people.
6/20

09/10/2023

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General and the Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator for their briefings.
Once again, the Security Council is meeting
to respond to a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law by one of its permanent members,
Russia. As the Secretary-General did just last Thursday,
France has firmly condemned Russia’s missile strike
against civilians in Hroza, in the Kharkiv region, which
killed at least 51 civilians. We express our condolences
to the families and loved ones of the victims.
What was the goal of the Russian armed forces, in
striking a café and store where Ukrainian civilians had
gathered for a meal to mourn a loss? Why would they
deliberately strike the Ukrainian civilian population
yet again? There can be no justification for such acts,
which constitute war crimes. By targeting civilians in
such a way, Russia is pursuing a strategy of terror and
seeking to break the morale of the Ukrainian nation,
which has been combating that aggression bravely for
more than 19 months. Russia continues to blatantly
violate international humanitarian law.
This unacceptable act joins the long list of
atrocities committed by Russia since it launched its
war of aggression, of which the people of Ukraine are
the victims every day. The briefers just aptly reminded
us of the enormous human cost of the conflict. While
Russia alone is responsible for that tragic toll, it is our
collective duty to do everything in our power to put an
end to this aggression, as the overwhelming majority
of United Nations Member States have repeatedly
demanded. Ukraine’s future is at stake, in addition
to the credibility of our Organization and respect for
the principles of collective security enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Russia’s repeated violations of international law
only add to its isolation. Ukraine, on the other hand,
continues to unite more and more countries around its
vision of a just and lasting peace. Together with our
partners, we will continue to provide the Ukrainian
people with all the humanitarian, economic and
military support they need to exercise their right to
self-defence, as enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter,
and to preserve their freedom.
France will pursue its commitment to respect for
international humanitarian law, particularly with regard
to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
This attack, like all the crimes committed by Russia,
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

will not go unpunished. The perpetrators will be held
accountable for their actions. France will continue to
support Ukraine’s courts and the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity for such crimes.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya for their briefings.
As we have learned from the briefings, a serious
attack took place in a village in Kharkiv last week,
causing heavy civilian casualties, which China finds
concerning. The protection of civilians should be a
paramount priority under all circumstances.
In previous deliberations on this matter in the
Security Council, China has repeatedly called on the
parties to the conflict to exercise calm and restraint,
respect international humanitarian law, strictly
abide by the principles of necessity, distinction and
proportionality, and make every effort to ensure the
safety of civilians and civilian infrastructure. Today we
reiterate those calls once again.
China is deeply worried about the continuation of
the Ukraine crisis and its mounting spillover effects. We
are deeply saddened that the flames of war and conflict
continue to exacerbate the suffering of civilians. We
urge all the parties concerned to respond actively and
positively to the international community’s call for
peace, step up engagement, forge consensus and create
the conditions, step by step, for the early resumption of
peace talks. Countries that have significant influence
over the situation should also play a constructive role,
refrain from exacerbating the tensions and create
an environment conducive to peace. We call on the
international community to work together to ease the
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and to provide more
assistance to the civilians affected, to help them to deal
with the crisis.
China will always stand on the side of peace and
dialogue and work actively to facilitate peace and
negotiations. We stand ready to strengthen dialogue
and communication with all parties concerned and to
play a constructive role in achieving a final political
settlement of the Ukraine crisis.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting, at the request of Ukraine, in accordance
with Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter of the United
Nations. I acknowledge the presence of the Permanent

S/PV.9431

Representative of Ukraine in the Chamber. I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Joyce
Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their briefings.
Every day that passes in this war — this senseless
invasion — means yet another day of mourning. During
the high-level week of the General Assembly, the
delegations of the Security Council and the Member
States of the Assembly sent a strong message to put
an end to this military aggression, to withdraw the
occupying forces and to establish a peace based on
respect for territorial integrity. Today we once again
urge the Russian Federation to put an end to its invasion,
which continues to cause so much pain and destruction.
We reject in the strongest terms the recent attacks
in Hroza in the Kharkiv region, which hit residential
areas, destroyed civilian infrastructure and killed more
than 50 people. In the face of such events, accountability
is essential. In that context, we wonder how much
more critical infrastructure needs to destroyed?
How many more children’s parks or playgrounds
need to be destroyed? How many children have to
die before the Russian Federation ends this absurd
invasion? We demand compliance with international
humanitarian law.
Lastly, and in view of all of this, we insist once
again on the need for the Council to equip the SecretaryGeneral with better tools to contribute to a peaceful
settlement based on respect for the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders, including
its territorial waters.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Joyce Msuya for their presentations.
Once again, Russia’s military aggression against
Ukraine has led to numerous civilian casualties. Last
week we heard that at a time when many residents of
the village of Hroza were gathering for a funeral, the
mourning in that village in the Kharkiv region was
multiplied by yet another devastating attack. Tragically,
more than 50 civilians, including a child — one sixth
of the population — lost their lives, and many others
were injured. The entire village is reeling from the
consequences of the attack, which struck in the middle
of the afternoon, and Switzerland firmly condemns it.

23-292037/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

On behalf of my country, I would like to offer our most
sincere condolences to the victims and their families.
I would also like to pay tribute to the tireless efforts
of the emergency personnel and humanitarian workers
who mobilized to come to their aid in the wake of the
attack — just as they have after so many others and in
particularly difficult and traumatic circumstances.
This attack is one of the deadliest since the
aggression began. We are once again witnessing
the terrible consequences of a military engagement
that shows total disdain for the lives of civilians. We
note that overall, the indiscriminate attacks have not
stopped. On the contrary, they have increased over the
summer. People in all regions of Ukraine continue to
live in daily fear of the next missile strike, which could
hit residential buildings, a school, a nursery or — as
was the case last week in Hroza — a café and shop, or,
as in Berislav, a hospital. The day after the attack in
the Kupyansk district, another took place in the centre
of Kharkiv, where residential buildings were hit and
destroyed, causing more casualties.
These recurring strikes on civilian infrastructure,
including essential infrastructure, are all the more
worrying as winter approaches. We reiterate that
the parties to the conflict must distinguish between
civilians and combatants and between civilian objects
and military objectives at all times. Furthermore,
when military objectives are attacked, the principles
of precaution and proportionality must be respected.
Indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks are
prohibited by international humanitarian law and must
cease immediately. We therefore reiterate our call for
respect for international humanitarian law, particularly
as regards the protection of civilians, as well as
international human rights law.
We also demand justice and accountability for
all perpetrators of crimes at all levels when those
obligations are violated, and therefore for ensuring
credible and timely investigations, documentation and
criminal prosecution of those responsible for violations
of international law. The deployment of a field team by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights to investigate
the attack in Hroza is an important and concrete step in
that direction, and we welcome the announcement of
in-depth investigations by the Independent International
Investigation Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine into
attacks using explosive weapons, attacks on civilians,
torture, sexual and gender-based violence and strikes
against energy infrastructure.
8/20

09/10/2023

As long as this war continues, civilians will
pay a price that is far too high. We urge Russia to
de-escalate the situation, cease its combat operations
and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory.
Switzerland remains fully committed to supporting
efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in Ukraine,
in accordance with international law, particularly the
Charter of the United Nations.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
As we have heard, last Thursday we woke to news
of yet another Russian attack on Ukraine. This time,
Russia was responsible for the deaths of more than 50
people in the small village of Hroza, when a missile
struck a café. We would like to extend our condolences
to the bereaved. As my Prime Minister said, the attack
demonstrates the depths of depravity that Russian
forces are willing to sink to. Then on Friday, Russia
struck Kharkiv. A 10-year-old boy was killed and
more than 20 people were injured. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) reported last week that Russian air strikes
between February and August this year killed at least
262 civilians, injured 990 and inflicted further broad
economic and social damage.
The same OHCHR report addressed the attack
on 28 July 2022 that killed more than 50 Ukrainian
prisoners of war at Olenivka. Contrary to Russian
claims that have been made many times in the Council,
OHCHR found that the attack was launched from
Russian-controlled territory and that Russia was
holding those prisoners in a manner that contravened
international humanitarian law. Nevertheless, today
our Russian colleagues will once again drag us into
their world of disinformation, where facts are dismissed
as lies and lies are presented as facts. Russia’s words
in the Council are worthless to those who want to
understand Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and
its true cost, so let us remind ourselves of some facts.
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is illegal,
as is Russia’s control of Ukrainian territory inside
Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders. The
body of evidence of Russia’s breaches of international
law and international humanitarian law in the course of
its invasion continues to grow. Just as Russia’s claims
about the attack at Olenivka have been disproved, the
truth will catch up with Russia’s lies.
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We praise and admire the bravery and resolve
of the Ukrainian people in the face of this assault on
its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We thank
the United Nations staff whose record of Russian
human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international law shows the reality of Russia’s invasion
and supports future efforts towards justice. We will
continue to support Ukraine in the exercise of its
right to self-defence and as it brings together Member
States in support of our shared goal of a just and
lasting peace, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations. We call once more for Russia to end its illegal
invasion and withdraw from Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and AssistantSecretary-General Msuya for their briefings today.
The town of Bucha, a theatre in Mariupol, a
restaurant and train station in Kramatorsk, a shopping
mall in Kremenchuk, a cathedral in Odesa and now a
café in Hroza. Thousands of civilians have been killed
in those attacks. Schools, hospitals and apartment
buildings have been hollowed out by Russian forces.
The international community must continue to demand
accountability and justice. Last Thursday, a Russian
strike killed more than 50 people and injured scores
of others when it hit a café and store in the Ukrainian
village of Hroza. One of the victims, as we heard earlier
today, was 6-years-old. According to authorities,
people were gathered in the café for a wake following a
funeral. Those were people gathered to mourn a death.
I want everyone here to take a moment and let that
appalling fact sink in. People gathered to grieve their
loved ones must now be grieved themselves. This is one
of the deadliest strikes by Russia against Ukraine since
the beginning of its full-scale invasion last year. As the
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator has noted,
the images coming from the locality are absolutely
horrifying. We express our support for the work of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine and local investigators who travelled to Hroza
to gather information and collect possible evidence of
war crimes.
Hroza is a village of 350 people. As a result of
Russia’s aggression, in just one morning, 15 per cent
of its inhabitants have been laid to rest. We need look
no further than Russia’s own actions to understand
the depth of cynicism and insincerity when its leaders
speak of seeking a negotiated peace. Russia’s missiles

S/PV.9431

speak louder than words. As Russia continues to trample
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, it now asks countries to support its election to
the Human Rights Council after the General Assembly
suspended it for committing gross and systematic
violations of human rights, as well as for its violations
of international humanitarian law committed during its
aggression against Ukraine.
The Human Rights Council is the principal United
Nations body charged with promoting respect for, and
the protection of, human rights worldwide. Russia’s
re-election to that body while it openly continues to
commit war crimes and other atrocities would be an
ugly stain that would undermine the credibility of the
institution and the United Nations. After its suspension
last April, Russia could have ceased its flagrant
disregard for human rights. Instead, it has doubled
down. Despite its attempts to deny and shift blame, let
me be clear: it is Russia’s own actions that make it unfit
to serve on the Human Rights Council. What further
evidence does the international community need? Every
day, the massive death toll in Ukraine rises. Every day,
new unspeakable horrors are discovered. Every day,
children live through dire pain and suffering, including
after being separated from their families. Every day,
the humanitarian crisis grows. Every day, havoc reigns
supreme as Russia’s missiles and drones leave wanton
death and destruction in their wake.
Let me conclude by making clear that international
law prohibits the intentional targeting of civilians and
civilian objects and requires that all attacks comply
with the principle of proportionality. The United
States again calls on Russia to end its savage attacks
on Ukraine and withdraw its forces from Ukraine’s
internationally recognized territory. Russia alone has
the power to end the war it so senselessly started.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Assistant-Secretary-General Msuya for their valuable
briefings today. I also welcome the participation of
Ukraine in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates expresses its deepest
condolences to the families and loved ones of those lost
in Hroza and Kharkiv. As we heard from our briefers,
the strike on Hroza, which occurred during a memorial
service, was one of the deadliest attacks on civilians in
Ukraine since February 2022. According to the United
Nations, nearly 20 per cent of the town’s population

23-292039/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

was killed within seconds. Hroza and Kharkiv are
the most recent examples of the unacceptable toll that
this war has wrought on civilians. In both locations,
children and the elderly were among those killed. In
less than two years, there have been more than 27,000
recorded civilian casualties in Ukraine. Those numbers,
although shocking, do not reveal the true cost of the
conflict, including the thousands of people and families
whose lives have forever been altered. International
humanitarian law is unequivocal. Civilians and
civilian objects can never be the target of attacks,
and the fundamental principles of proportionality and
distinction must be respected.
The extensive damage and destruction of critical
infrastructure throughout Ukraine is a further concern,
particularly with winter approaching. The provision of
electricity and heating during the coming months will
be critical for the health and safety of civilians. We recall
the importance of protecting objects indispensable to
the survival of the civilian population and the Council’s
call, in resolution 2573 (2021), on all parties to armed
conflict to refrain from attacking, destroying, removing
or rendering useless objects that are indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population. First responders and
humanitarian organizations continue to provide vital
services to those wounded and displaced by this conflict.
We stress once again the importance of facilitating
their life-saving work and underline that all relevant
authorities must ensure that humanitarian actors and
humanitarian facilities receive the protections afforded
to them under international humanitarian law.
Only peace will bring a definitive end to the
suffering. And so, the pursuit of peace must be our
ultimate goal. Two weeks ago, world leaders made that
call in the General Assembly Hall. Every country has
a part to play in turning those words into action. The
United Arab Emirates remains resolute in its support
of all serious efforts to achieve a just and sustainable
peace that is based upon the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, while respecting Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Mr. Kumanga (Mozambique): I thank the
presidency of Brazil for convening this briefing. I also
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Joyce
Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their briefings.
10/20

09/10/2023

The conflict between Russia and Ukraine
tests the most basic foundations of the notion of
collective security, which is the raison d’être of the
United Nations. Therefore, we are all compelled to
contribute to finding a common acceptable solution
to this conflict, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and the responsibility that falls on the Security
Council. It is against that background that the Council,
as per its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, has insistently and
consistently called for the cessation of hostilities since
they started.
Despite all our calls for the cessation of hostilities,
we note with regret that this conflict persists and is
even worsening, which poses a serious threat to local,
regional and international peace and security. The
longer the conflict persists, the more catastrophic its
consequences become, including with regard to the
difficulties in protecting civilians. In that regard,
we once again call on the contending parties to take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians, public infrastructure and livelihoods, in
line with relevant international humanitarian law
and instruments. As a matter of fact, the protection
of civilians during armed conflict is a cornerstone of
international humanitarian law.
The great majority of casualties in the presentday conflict are civilians. We are convinced that the
most sustainable way to protect them is to prevent
the outbreak of conflicts and, when they do occur, to
solve them peacefully. With that in mind, Mozambique,
while reiterating its principled position on this conflict,
appeals to the parties involved to immediately cease
the conflict; resume direct negotiations between the
main parties, without preconditions and in good faith;
and adopt a constructive, inclusive and results-oriented
approach, focusing on mutual benefit rather than a
zero-sum perspective.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their
respective briefings.
The 52 people killed in the village of Hroza adds
to the terrible and unbearable list of suffering of the
deadly war in Ukraine. In recent weeks, the bombings
and the drone attacks have intensified in Ukraine,
indiscriminately targeting civilian populations and
infrastructure. We are concerned about the allegations
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of the risk of destroying the electrical system as
winter approaches, plunging innocent populations
into appalling conditions and further aggravating
the already alarming humanitarian situation. Such a
situation would be unacceptable.
We reiterate that war is not a lawless situation and
call on the belligerents to show restraint and strictly
respect international humanitarian law by sparing those
who are not parties to the fighting, refraining from
using weapons of mass destruction and threatening to
use nuclear weapons.
The information relating to the conclusion of new
military alliances and the reversal of certain countries’
arms policies are worrisome signs of the extent of the
retreat from international commitments to disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation. In that respect, my
country endorses the call by the Secretary-General,
which was conveyed and confirmed by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for States to impose new
international rules on autonomous weapons systems.
We are convinced of the urgent need to define
new red lines on a global scale and to more strictly
regulate the use of certain types of weaponry in order
to reduce their inhumane effects. We call once again
on the parties to strictly respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law, to facilitate
the movement of humanitarian workers and to allow
unhindered access to areas and populations in need of
humanitarian assistance.

S/PV.9431

of the conflict into a war of attrition, with worsening
security and humanitarian consequences.
The missile attack on the village of Hroza in
the Kharkiv region, on 5 October, is another painful
reminder that innocent Ukrainian civilians continue to
be in the crosshairs of the conflict and pay the highest
price of the war with their lives and livelihoods. We take
this opportunity to express our deepest condolences to
the families of those who lost their lives.
We condemn all attacks targeted at civilians and
civilian infrastructure and once again emphasize
the obligation of warring parties under international
law to refrain from causing harm to civilians. We
stress that humanitarian principles of distinction,
proportionality and necessity must be respected at all
times without variation.
Unfortunately, the attack, which has claimed the
lives of more than 50 people, including a young child, is
not an isolated incident but one of the many brutalities
which have characterized the Russian Federation’s
aggression against Ukraine and for which there must
be accountability. We therefore urge independent,
transparent and thorough investigations into the attack
and note in this respect, the speedy response of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in deploying a field team to gather relevant information.

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Joyce Msuya their sobering briefings on
the deeply concerning and persisting humanitarian
situation in Ukraine.

As we have stated in previous meetings of the
Council, there is no alternative to winning the peace in
Ukraine. It stands in our common interest to help end
the carnage that the war has brought in its wake and the
global impact it has created. We urge the United Nations
and the international community to devote resources
and steadfast efforts to secure the cessation of the
military hostilities. Ending the hostilities is necessary
and most urgent to pave the way for a political solution,
as there can be no military solution to the conflict.
We continue to believe that diplomacy and dialogue
offer the best chances of a comprehensive and lasting
resolution of the conflict and affirm our support for all
international peace efforts.

The intense military contestations of the warring
parties in Ukraine continues to create grave concerns
for the safety and security of civilians in several parts
of the country. Given the wide international support
and appeals for the peaceful settlement of the conflict,
it is most unfortunate to witness the further hardening

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reiterate
once more our call on the Russian Federation to end its
aggression against Ukraine and respect its sovereignty
and territorial integrity in line with the norms and
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

We reiterate our call for dialogue and encourage
all parties, including the regional and subregional
organizations to which the warring parties are members,
to create the conditions for negotiations in good faith
with a view to achieving a cessation of hostilities and
guaranteeing lasting peace and peaceful coexistence
in Ukraine.

23-2920311/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to start by once again expressing
my bewilderment at the presence at our meeting as
speakers not only of the representative of the European
Union (EU), but also the representatives of Czechia,
Romania, Poland and Latvia. I would also like to ask a
question. What added value will we obtain from their
statements, being carbon copies of one another? We
have already mentioned this many times. I would be
interested to know how many EU members will sign
up for the meeting we are organizing on 13 October
on arms transfers to Ukraine, a topic to which they are
directly related.
A month ago, on 8 September, in this very
Chamber, a previous anti-Russian spectacle played out
in connection with our alleged attack on a market in the
town of Kostiantynivka (see S/PV.9414). Then Western
colleagues waxed lyrical, detailing what happened in
every which way. For example, the British Permanent
Representative began her statement by saying:
“Let me first condemn another appalling Russian
missile attack earlier this week on a market in
Kostyantynivka, in eastern Ukraine.”
The
Permanent
Representative
France did not far much better, stating:

of

“Russia continues to disregard international law
and relentlessly and intentionally bomb cities
and civilian infrastructure, which constitute war
crimes. The recent attack on the Kostiantynivka
market ... further attests to that.”
I will not even mention the Estonians, Poles and
the like. They will take every opportunity to exercise
their Russophobia. All of those accusations against
our country are reflected in the record of the meeting I
just mentioned.
Today we know clearly that the massacre in
Kostiantynivka was organized by Ukraine, either
through another blunder of its missile defence or a
deliberate missile launching against a civilian target. It
would be nice, of course, to find out, but of course the
Kyiv regime does not intend to conduct an investigation.
That follows directly from the words of Mr. Podolyak,
Adviser to the President of Ukraine:
“It is clear to us that the missile was Russian. Do
we have to check every piece of rubble simply
because someone came out and said that Ukraine is
attacking itself?”
12/20

09/10/2023

Do my Western colleagues not understand that the
Kyiv junta is simply using them and retransmitting
fake news through them, which is then convincingly
debunked? Or, what is even worse, they are doing
it deliberately, becoming accomplices in this
unprecedented propaganda and mendacious anti-Russian
campaign. Unfortunately, the Secretariat also plays
along sometimes. The representative of the Secretariat
also rushed to blame Russia, during the meeting I just
mentioned, for the attack on Kostiantynivka. We all
know where the information comes from and on the
basis of what the Secretariat makes such conclusions.
As part of this meeting in the Security Council,
we have already listened to ignominious insinuations
about a missile attack on the Kramatorsk station in April
2022, which, as everyone now knows — and this is
documented — was carried out by the Ukrainian armed
forces, about the destruction of the Transfiguration
Cathedral in Odesa, which was hit by a Ukrainian air
defence missile, the explosion of a drama theatre in
Mariupol, blown up — as is now absolutely clear — by
Azov Battalion fighters, and the destruction of a maternity
hospital in the same city, repurposed by Ukrainian
nationalists as a firing point. Cases of Ukrainian air
defence missiles hitting civilian targets number in
the dozens, if not hundreds. They are documented
and published on social networks by the Ukrainians
themselves, thus leaving Zelenskyy and his clique no
chance to deceive the public.
Of course, another vile provocation pertains to
Bucha, which was never properly investigated. Neither
did the Secretary-General ever provide us with the
names of the unfortunate people whose bodies were
neatly laid out on the streets by Ukrainian fighters
after the withdrawal of Russian troops as a gesture of
goodwill, against the backdrop of the successful peace
negotiations under way in Istanbul. By the way, the Kyiv
regime withdrew from those negotiations, including
under pretext of a provocation it organized.
It is also worth recalling how the Kyiv regime tried
in every possible way to spin for its own purposes the
episode with the fall of a rocket in the Polish village of
Przewodów in November 2022, which killed two people.
It called the incident an attack on a NATO member State,
trying to provoke the alliance to retaliate, going as far as
invoking article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. But at the
end of August, Polish Minister of Justice Zbigniew Ziobro
drew a line under this incident, officially confirming the
obvious — it was a Ukrainian missile that fell on the
Polish village.
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We could cite dozens of similar episodes, in each
of which the Ukrainian Government tries to shift the
blame to Russia for attacking civilian targets, after
which the Kyiv regime’s narrative was exposed as a lie.
There is another common thread that runs through
most of these episodes, mainly the most high-profile
incidents. By magical happenstance, they coincided
precisely with the visits of high-ranking Western
politicians to Ukraine or when Zelenskyy went abroad
to beg for money or weapons.
That was the case with the strike on the market
in Kostiantynivka on the eve of Zelenskyy’s meeting
with United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken,
on 6 September. A similarly monstrous strike, on
Kramatorsk, was dealt on the day of the visit of the EU
delegation, led by Mr. Borrell Fontelles and Mrs. Von
Der Leyen, on 8 April 2022. They also tried to convince
a high-level African delegation of the danger of Russian
attacks on Kyiv, with the help of a theatrical production
that included blaring sirens.
And now, the tragedy in the village of Hroza, which
became the reason for today’s meeting, occurred exactly
at the moment when Zelenskyy was convincing the
European Union to extend support to the Kyiv regime
at the EU summit in Spain. Word on the street among
Ukrainians is that they also have to beware of not only
Ukrainian air defence missiles, but also Zelenskyy’s
foreign visits and visitors.
Immediately after those events, the Ukrainian
delegation demanded the convening of a meeting of the
Security Council, and Western countries pushed the
Council to meet immediately.
If we return to the incident in the village of Hroza,
there are a number of points that immediately leap out.
As we know, at the time of the strike, there was a funeral
being held there for one of the high-ranking Ukrainian
nationalists. Of course, his neo-Nazi accomplices
were in attendance. It is no coincidence that, in the
photographs published on social networks immediately
after the strike, the majority of the bodies belong to
men of military age.
We have already seen such situations many times.
The Kyiv regime wrung its hands over civilians killed
as a result of attacks on hotels, dormitories, cafés, shops
and other places and then a large number of obituaries
of foreign mercenaries and soldiers appeared. What

S/PV.9431

a coincidence. We are certain that will also occur
with Hroza.
We remind the Council that if the Kyiv regime
concentrates military personnel in a certain place, it
becomes a legitimate target for a strike, including from
the point of view of international humanitarian law.
But the placement of heavy equipment and air defence
systems in residential areas is a gross violation of
international humanitarian law and leads to the types
of tragedies that we have talked about today. We once
again underscore that Russia does not carry out strikes
against civilian objects and does not target civilians.
Our high-precision weapons are used exclusively to
destroy the military capacity of the Zelenskyy regime
and related objects. And if Ukraine is using granaries
and port infrastructure to store ammunition and
Western equipment, then they too will be destroyed.
We also must note that even as they highlight the
victims of the attack on the village of Hroza and call
for its condemnation, our cynical Western colleagues
do not notice anything happening in other parts of
the world. On Friday they blocked our proposed draft
Security Council press statement in connection with
the terrorist attack on the graduation ceremony at the
military academy in the Syrian city of Homs, in which
more than 100 people died?. That attack, incidentally,
was carried out through the use of French-made drones.
Similarly, Western pseudo-human rights defenders do
not notice the regular strikes of the Ukrainian armed
forces on peaceful areas of the cities of Donbas,
Zaporizhzhya and the Kherson region, where there
are no military installations. Such strikes have also
long been carried out with Western weapons, since
the Ukrainian Armed Forces have long run out of
their own. There has not been a single meeting of the
Security Council convened by the Western members
of the Council on such occasions. They simply do not
notice them.
Our American colleague spoke about the funeral
ceremony in Hroza. Does he by any chance want to
recall the wedding in Iraq shelled by valiant American
forces, or numerous other crimes of the American
military against civilians in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan
and Yugoslavia? It seems that the main phobia of our
American colleagues today is the election of Russia to
the Human Rights Council. It is no coincidence that, as
we all see perfectly well, it is the Americans who are
leading a campaign in favour of our competitor, Albania,
having finally discarded their masks, deviating from

23-2920313/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

09/10/2023

the basic standards of courtesy and unashamedly using
the platform of the Security Council to agitate others
against Russia.

“We call on all States to uphold the principles of
international law, including territorial integrity and
sovereignty, [and]international humanitarian law”.

The task of our Western colleagues is to cover
up — by hook or by crook — the Kyiv regime, to
which they have given carte blanche for any crimes
and violations of human rights since 2014 and which
they are helping today with weapons, ammunition
and intelligence, trying in vain to delay its inglorious
end. We will talk about that in detail at the meeting
we requested for 13 October. Our special military
operation seeks to stop the regime’s bloody war
against the civilian population of Donbas. We will be
implementing that goal through military means if Kyiv
and its Western backers do not agree to a resolution
through peaceful means.

Russia’s attempts to gloss over its acts will never
succeed. We reiterate here that accountability cannot
be avoided for violations of international law, including
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. I also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings.

This situation would not have happened in the first
place if Russia had not started its illegal aggression
against Ukraine in violation of international law,
including the United Nations Charter. Japan will
continue to stand with Ukraine to realize a just and
lasting peace in Ukraine that will uphold all the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. We urge
Russia to withdraw immediately and unconditionally
from the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine,
and not to cause further atrocities.
Japan has been and will continue to stand in
solidarity with the people of Ukraine.

Along with other members of the Council and
the international community, we are stunned to hear
that at least 52 civilians were killed in the Kupyansk
district of the Kharkiv region of Ukraine. We express
our deepest condolences to the families of the victims
and wish a speedy recovery to those injured. We echo
the Secretary-General’s call to condemn this attack in
the strongest terms. However, that is not an isolated
case. As Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo explained,
there have been cases of attacks on cities, civilians,
grain silos and energy infrastructure, and of arbitrary
detention, torture and gender-based violence, and so on.
The terrible list of egregious acts continues to expand,
and the number of casualties, including among women
and children, continues to increase.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.

After Russia launched its unprovoked war of
aggression, there have been numerous civilian
casualties. As stated today, more than 9,800 civilians
have been killed. According to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
statistics show that 111 people were killed and 443
were injured from 1 to 24 September alone. We need
not reiterate here that international humanitarian law
prohibits attacks against civilians.

It is urgent that the parties also engage in a sincere
effort to de-escalate hostilities without further delay.
Continuing military operations will not bring about
solutions to the multiple and complex causes of the
conflict. Brazil urges the parties to resume contacts,
either directly or through the good offices of third
parties, with a view to opening direct negotiations that
could bring an end to the conflict and a lasting solution
to the disputes that originated this terrible war. That is
the hope and aspiration of countries across the globe, in
particular those in the developing world, which suffer
from the side effects of the conflict.

Russia agreed to the Group of 20 leaders’ declaration
last month, which includes the following statement:
14/20

I join other members in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya for their briefings.
Brazil learned with dismay and serious concern
the news of last Thursday’s attacks in the region of
Kharkiv. We express our solidarity with the families of
the deceased and the dozens of people injured. That act
is yet another example of the immense burden imposed
by the war on the civilian population. Similar tragedies
have been repeated with unacceptable frequency. We
reiterate our call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and the fundamental principle of the
distinction between combatants and civilians.

23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Brazil reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States and its commitment to
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The diplomatic path
is the only one that offers real prospects for a just and
lasting peace, in line with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and taking into
account the legitimate security concerns of all.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of the criminal Russian regime in the
permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
The terrorist nature of that regime was again
manifested on 5 October with another mass murder
of Ukrainian civilians, this time in the village of
Hroza. I would like to start by thanking all those
who expressed their sympathy for the victims of that
horrendous Russian attack — one of the deadliest since
the beginning of the Russian invasion.
At least 52 local residents, including a 6-year-old
child, were killed by a Russian Iskander missile that
hit a local café and a store located in the same building.
Six others were wounded, and four more, including two
children, were reported missing. The café was full of
people assembling for a funeral reception. They were all
civilians and local residents who had gone to pay their
respects to Andriy Kozyr, a fallen Ukrainian soldier
who was killed in action last year and initially buried
in another region, as Hroza was under occupation at the
time. Recently, his son Denys decided to rebury him
in his home village. Last Thursday, the Russians killed
Denys as well, along with the entire family, including
his wife, his grandmother and grandfather and his
mother-in-law.
Hroza is a small village, located about 30 kilometres
west of Kupyansk — a city that was liberated last autumn
and that Russia is desperately trying to retake at any
cost. The particularly tragic aspect of that horrendous
attack is that Russia killed loved ones from nearly every
family in Hroza with a single strike. According to the
words of a local woman:
“With one missile they buried the whole village.
In every house, there will be one coffin — in some
even three or five. There are just a few people left
alive in the village.”

S/PV.9431

We in Ukraine remember clearly similar stories of
entire settlements being erased from the map. Those
settlements were destroyed, and their residents were
killed. That happened 80 years ago, during the Nazi
invasion of Ukraine. Now the Russian Federation
carefully cosplays its role model, the Third Reich,
by killing people, by attempting to annex territories
and by fuelling imperial sentiments and feelings of
Russians’ own superiority. It is also trying to whitewash
its aggression by pretending to defend itself from
imaginary attacks.
That is exactly how Putin explains his war of
aggression — as a form of defence, without caring at all
how crazy it sounds to audiences beyond Russia. “They
started the war, and we used force and continue to use it
to stop it”, he told his puppets from the so-called Russian
Parliament in February this year. “Today a real war has
been unleashed against our homeland”, he persuaded
the audience of a military parade later in May. All of
those narratives demonstrate how the Russist regime
follows in the footsteps of its Nazi predecessors, who
were sure that:
“it’s always a simple matter to drag the people along,
whether it is a democracy, a fascist dictatorship, or
a parliament, or a communist dictatorship. Voice
or no voice, the people can always be brought to
the bidding of the leaders. That is easy. All you
have to do is tell them they are being attacked, and
denounce the pacifists for their lack of patriotism,
and for exposing the country to danger. It works the
same way in any country.”
That was said by Nazi war criminal Hermann
Göring to psychologist Gustave Gilbert during the
Nuremberg trials.
We commend the strong message from the United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator
for Ukraine, Ms. Denise Brown, who condemned
the horrifying Russian strike as another barbaric
consequence of Russia’s invasion and reminded us that
intentionally directing an attack against civilians or
civilian objects is a war crime. As the Secretary-General
stated in response to the Russian strike, “Attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure are prohibited
under international law” (SG/SM/21974). As we have
seen throughout the Russian war of aggression against
Ukraine, Russia has shown little regard for the norms
of international law. Moreover, the civilian population
and civilian objects have remained deliberate targets for

23-2920315/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russian forces. On the same day that the mass murder in
Hroza happened, Russian shelling killed two civilians
in Kherson. The next day, 6 October, Russia struck a
residential building in Kharkiv, killing a 10-year-old
boy and his grandmother. Such attacks occur every day,
and the only way to stop them is to deprive Russia of
the capability to attack. That is the main task that the
Armed Forces of Ukraine are fulfilling, in particular by
using weapons supplied by our allies to reduce Russia’s
military potential and thereby limit its capacity to wage
aggressive wars.
Russia, in turn, is attempting to undermine our
human potential, targeting the right of Ukraine and
Ukrainians to exist. And this country that keeps
killing Ukrainians on a daily basis is now running
as a candidate in the elections to the Human Rights
Council to be held tomorrow, 10 October. Eighteen
months ago, as noted in General Assembly resolution
ES-11/3, Russia’s membership rights in that body were
suspended due to
“gross and systematic violations and abuses of
human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law committed by the Russian
Federation during its aggression against Ukraine”
(General Assembly resolution ES-11/3, second
preambular paragraph).
Russia instead responded to that decision by intensifying
its aggression and increasing the number of its deliberate
attacks on civilians. As Russia keeps killing civilians
every day, any vote in favour of its candidacy will be a
bullet in the body of the United Nations, which Russia
has already mutilated. We believe in the capacity of
the United Nations community’s wisdom and moral
integrity to prevent that from happening.
Terror has opened too many fronts against
humankind. And two days after the horror in Hroza,
we saw horrific footage from Israel, with thousands
of missiles in the sky above Israel. People killed right
in the streets. Cars riddled with holes with civilians
inside. Hostages abused. We in Ukraine are particularly
sensitive to what has happened in Israel because the
Russian terror campaign has also brought all of that
into the streets of Ukrainian cities and villages. When
such terrorist attacks occur, everyone who values life
must stand in solidarity. Our position is absolutely
clear. Anywhere in the world, anyone who brings terror
and death must be held accountable.
16/20

09/10/2023

The terrorist attack on Israel was thoroughly
prepared, and the whole world understands which
sponsors of terror could have encouraged and organized
it. And they hope to benefit from it in the propaganda
domain. According to some intelligence reports, Russia
has already transferred some weapons to Hamas.
The aim is plain and simple — to substantiate the
fake information that the Kremlin has so desperately
circulated about military assistance to Ukraine. As part
of the Kremlin’s disinformation campaign, those fakes
can be used as a basis for so-called investigations in the
Western information space. In order to make the fakes
more convincing, there is a possibility that Russia will
use Ruslan Syrovyi, a defector from Ukraine’s border
guard service who appears to have been a long-time
Russian agent. It will not come as a surprise if Putin’s
envoy uses that narrative about weapons sent to Ukraine
reappearing in the Middle East in this Chamber on Friday.
Israel has every right to protect itself from terror.
So does any other State. And it is very important for
the whole world to respond to terror in a united and
principled fashion. As the President of Ukraine said
following the mass murder in Hroza,
“We realize that words and documents can hardly
stop such evil. But air defence can, as well as
artillery, missiles and armoured equipment. And
Ukrainian soldiers who repel Russian assaults and
manage to advance themselves. And sanctions
imposed by the international community on Russia
for its acts of terror. And international justice”.
Ukraine and its civilians need viable protection from
Russian atrocities, and we hope the world will focus on
strengthening the capacities that President Zelenskyy
mentioned rather than consuming Russian propaganda
and watching new Mosfilm shows such as the one
scheduled for this Chamber on 13 October. Putin has
stated clearly and unequivocally that he would like to
kill Ukraine. And it was not even a Freudian slip of the
tongue. On the contrary, he fully realized what he was
saying when he claimed on 6 October in the so-called
Valdai forum that “If the Western defence supplies are
terminated tomorrow, Ukraine will have a week left to
live”. Ukraine will have a week left to live. He said that
on the same day that his troops killed 52 people in the
village of Hroza.
The restoration of justice and Russia’s accountability
will be key elements for the comprehensive, just and
lasting peace and security that the entire world would
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

benefit from. That is one of the 10 points of our
peace formula, the plan that Ukraine has proposed
as a universal model to restore the rules-based order
and respect for the norms of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It
should become an effective instrument not only for
putting an end to Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine but for settling and preventing any of the
multiple war-related crises that affect people and
nations across the globe. I would like to reiterate the
message that my President delivered in this Chamber in
September (see S/PV.9421), which is that every country
can demonstrate its leadership within the framework of
one or more or all the points of the peace formula. We
invite everyone to join in its implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Samson.
Mrs. Samson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
Georgia, and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as Monaco and San Marino, align
themselves with this statement.
I thank the Brazilian presidency for the
opportunity to address the Security Council today.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for the information
they provided.
Last month, the President of the European Council
described Ukraine as a crime scene. In the past
few days, we have witnessed more horrific crimes.
Russia’s appalling violence against Ukraine’s civilian
population shows no signs of abating. Last Thursday,
an attack targeted a café and a grocery store in the
settlement of Hroza in Kupyansk, in Kharkiv oblast,
killing 52 people, including a child, and injuring many
others. A day later, an air strike on an apartment
building in Kharkiv killed a 10-year-old boy and his
grandmother and injured dozens of others. Those are
heinous attacks against innocent civilians, in addition
to Russia’s continued daily indiscriminate attacks near
the front lines. Since its unilateral withdrawal from the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, Russia has also escalated its
attacks on civilian objects, including facilities for the
export of Ukrainian grain.

S/PV.9431

International monitoring mechanisms, including the
United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine and the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry, have concluded that Russia has committed a
wide range of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law in Ukraine. The Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights has verified
9,614 civilian deaths during Russia’s aggression. The
actual number is without doubt much higher. We once
again urge Russia to uphold human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Intentional attacks
against civilians are war crimes. All commanders,
perpetrators and accomplices of those atrocities will be
held to account. The EU remains firmly committed to
ensuring that Russia be held fully accountable for its
aggression against Ukraine.
The EU commends the Ukrainian people’s strength,
courage and resistance. We stand in firm solidarity and
will continue supporting Ukraine and its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Russia must immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its
troops and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. Ukraine is exercising its inherent right to
defend itself and to regain full control of its territory.
The international community has repeatedly
expressed its desire for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine, in line with the Charter of
the United Nations, the resolutions of the General
Assembly and international law. The EU will continue
its work to ensure the widest possible international
support for the key principles and objectives of
Ukraine’s peace formula. Any initiative for sustainable
peace in Ukraine must be based on full respect for its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders.
The President: Recalling presidential note
S/2017/507, on the working methods of the Security
Council, I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Czechia.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and
for giving me the opportunity to address the Security
Council on behalf of Czechia. I also thank the two
briefers for their briefings.

23-2920317/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

It is our duty to raise our voices once again against
the unspeakable atrocities that Russia is committing
on a daily basis against the people of Ukraine. Last
Thursday, the Russian army launched a brutal attack on
the Ukrainian village of Hroza, tragically ending the
lives of some 60 innocent civilians, who had gathered
to bid farewell to a soldier — a defender of his nation.
Heartbreakingly, among the victims was a 6-year-old
child. That single callous act claimed the lives of one
in six residents of Hroza. The next day, Russia shelled
residential buildings in Kharkiv, killing and injuring
even more civilians. Yet on that very same day, the
President of the Russian Federation tried to convince us
that Russia did not start this brutal war against Ukraine
and that it was trying to end it. How can we believe
that when Russia has been waging a decade-long war
against Ukraine and annexing and occupying part of
its sovereign territory, while proclaiming that it has no
interest in further conquests?
Such claims ring hollow. Russia continues its
occupation, its military operations against Ukraine
and its attacks on civilian objects and key civilian
infrastructure, including targeting ports and grain
facilities that are extremely vital for supplying food to
the world. Moreover, Russia continues its cynical and
indiscriminate killing of civilians.
We once again call on Russia to immediately stop
its aggression against Ukraine and to withdraw its
troops from the territory of Ukraine. We reiterate our
full support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and territorial waters.
There can be no impunity for war crimes, including
the attacks against civilians committed last week. All
those responsible will be held accountable.
Czechia will continue to assist Ukraine and its
citizens in their just defence against Russia’s aggression
and in their struggle for the liberation of all the occupied
territories. We call on all those who value freedom,
mutual respect, sovereignty, cooperation, peaceful
coexistence and respect for human life as essential
building blocks of international relations to join us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council today.
18/20

09/10/2023

Attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure
are prohibited under international humanitarian law
and must stop immediately — that has become one
of the most frequently used phrases in our statements
in meetings of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. Nevertheless, such heinous attacks continue
to occur. The indiscriminate attacks against civilians
in the Kupyansk district of the Kharkiv region on
5 October and, on the following day, on another
residential building in the city of Kharkiv bear the
mark of the aggressor that Ukraine has been dealing
with for the past 19 months.
Based on the statistics provided by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the illegal war started by Russia has killed
nearly 10,000 civilians. Civilians need to feel safe
again, and the indiscriminate attacks need to stop.
Life has become incredibly tough for them, especially
as winter approaches very rapidly and critical
civilian infrastructure has sustained damage from
previous shelling.
Furthermore, on the night of 5 to 6 October, there
were drone attacks on grain silos and trucks close to
the Danube River, at the Ukraine-Romania border. That
constitutes another deliberate breach of international
law and international humanitarian law, and also a clear
attempt to stop the shipments of grain around the world.
The ports on the Danube River provide alternative ways
to export grain from Ukraine. Romania stands against
the attempts to artificially increase the global price of
grains by impeding the implementation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, and therefore will do its part support
countries in need.
Romania’s message to its partners across the United
Nations membership is that we will do everything in our
power, together with our European partners, to bring
safety and calm to the world food market. Romania has
facilitated over 27 million tons of Ukrainian grain, and
we will seek to increase those export facilities.
In conclusion, Russia is the aggressor. Its actions are
based on the illegal use of force and represent serious
violations of the most important norms and principles
of international law enshrined, first and foremost, in
the Charter of the United Nations. Romania firmly
believes that justice must be done with regard to all
the core crimes committed in the context of this war,
including the crime of aggression.
23-29203

09/10/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving Poland the opportunity to make
a contribution to today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for bringing
us up to date on the current state of Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine.
Let me start by expressing Poland’s grave concerns
about the erosion of the global security system. The
current wave of violence in the Middle East, which
started with the ongoing terrorist attack against Israel,
only deepens and adds to the scale of insecurity caused by
the war in Ukraine, which is the topic of today’s meeting.
Poland’s position in that context remains firm and clear:
we stand by international law, including the universal
right to self-defence of those attacked, with respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States. We
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and call for respecting international humanitarian law.
In the light of today’s discussion, Poland joins the
international community’s firm condemnation of yet
another massacre of innocent civilians conducted by the
aggressor’s forces in the village of Hroza just a few days
ago. Close to a sixth of Hroza’s population was wiped
out in a single missile strike and, as we read in many
reports, no family in the village was spared the horror
of losing someone close to their hearts. Also among
those killed in the attack was a worker for the Polish
Humanitarian Action organization, who had been caring
for the elderly there — another horrific example of the
loss of life among humanitarian workers mentioned by
the Assistant Secretary-General.
It has been said many times in this Chamber that
such disgraceful conduct does not befit a permanent
member of the Security Council. Russia follows in
the notorious footsteps of Muscovite imperialism by
being a major disruptor of international peace and
security while wielding power to block any meaningful
response to its transgressions. That leads me to a broader
observation: Russian actions undermine trust in the
United Nations system — trust that we now so badly
need. When the global security system is degraded,
all Member States, in particular those entrusted with
special responsibilities, must act in such a way that the
credibility of multilateralism is secured, not undermined.
That is Poland’s call to everyone.

S/PV.9431

Contrary to those expectations, Russia, while
retaining its rights and privileges as a Member State,
carries its destructive behaviour over into all the
workings of the United Nations system. In other words,
the Russian approach of aggression is not limited to
the battlefield. We witness it on a daily basis here at
the United Nations. Instead of playing a constructive
role in United Nations processes, Russia’s main goal
is to undermine the very existence of the rules-based
international order, which Russia cynically perceives as
the major obstacle to conducting its aggressive policy
with impunity.
It is very distressing that Russia has yet to show even
a shred of goodwill or intent to end its aggression against
Ukraine and that it remains deaf to our appeals to it to
withdraw its military forces from the territories of the
neighbouring country that it has occupied. Therefore, if
we want to enhance the credibility of multilateralism,
we should ensure that Russia will be held accountable
for its violations of the very fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Only by getting
our act together and standing firmly by the rules we
have all agreed to live by will we be able to prevent the
current world system from disintegrating.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Ms. Pavļuta-Deslandes (Latvia): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of three Baltic
States — Estonia, Lithuania and my own country,
Latvia. We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, which is
enabled by Belarus, is a blatant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and a threat to the rules-based
international order. We strongly condemn Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression against
Ukraine, and we call upon Russia to immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw its troops and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine
with its internationally recognized borders. Let me
reiterate that the sole responsibility for this war lies
with Russia. Russia started this war, and Russia alone
can — and must — end it immediately.
We are witnessing a clear pattern of deliberate
steps taken by Russia with the aim of causing maximum
suffering to Ukraine’s civilian population and targeting
civilian infrastructure. The evidence of such attacks
is mounting. Innocent civilians, including children,

23-2920319/20

S/PV.9431

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

09/10/2023

are killed, or their rights are gravely violated by the
Russian armed forces. To this day, the United Nations
has been able to confirm the killing of close to 10,000
civilians in this war of aggression. That is only a part
of the real death toll, as Russia continues to restrict
access to the territories it illegally controls in Ukraine.
More than 11 million people have been forced to leave
their homes or flee their country. The deadly bombings
on 5 October of the settlement of Hroza in Kupyansk,
Kharkiv region, killed more than 50 people, including
a child, in yet another atrocious attack against
innocent civilians.

Russian leadership, military personnel, perpetrators
and accomplices must be held accountable for each and
every international crime committed in and against
Ukraine. Accountability will be ensured. Justice will
be brought to the victims. There will be no impunity
for war crimes.

Russia’s appalling terror against Ukraine’s civilian
population continues. Attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure are serious violations of
international humanitarian law, and thus constitute
war crimes. As long as that remains the case, there
is no place for Russia in the Human Rights Council.
The Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine has confirmed the systematic use of
torture, executions, extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances, rape and forced deportation executed
by Russia. The intentional targeting of civilians must
stop. Those crimes must stop immediately.

We are at a critical moment for the global order.
Russia’s war of aggression continues to challenge
the world in many ways. Changing internationally
recognized borders by force must not be accepted
by the international community. The international
community must firmly stand together against Russia’s
attack on the principles and norms of international law.
We will continue to provide all the necessary support to
Ukraine. Respect for the Charter of the United Nations
is in the vital interest of all States.

20/20

Let me also underscore that Russia’s threats to
revoke the ratification of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty are highly irresponsible and seriously
undermine global security. We call upon Russia to stop
its nuclear blackmail.

The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-29203
