United Nations

S/PV.6503

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6503rd meeting
Wednesday, 23 March 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its fourth session (S/2011/41)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-27495 (E)

*1127495*

S/PV.6503

Permanent Representatives of Ireland, Mexico and
South Africa, offered an opportunity to appreciate the
potentials of and the challenges facing the
Commission. The momentum generated by the 2010
review must be maintained especially as the
Commission further expands its agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
fourth session (S/2011/41)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana,
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2011/41, containing the report
of the Peacebuilding Commission on its fourth session.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig, Permanent
Representative of Germany and former Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
I now give the floor to Mr Wittig.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): On behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am pleased
to present the report of the Commission on its fourth
session (S/2011/41).
Strengthening
the
peacebuilding
agenda,
enhancing its impact in the field and providing
continued support to the peacebuilding efforts in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau
and Sierra Leone were at the core of the Commission’s
work in 2010. In September 2010, the Commission
made Liberia the fifth country on the agenda in
response to a request from the Security Council on
behalf of the Government of Liberia. Most recently, the
Commission responded to a request for advice and
accompaniment from the Republic of Guinea. This was
the first time that such a request was directly submitted
to the Commission.
In 2010, peacebuilding and the future role of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture were very
prominently discussed within and outside the United
Nations. The review, which was ably guided by the

2

The report of the Peacebuilding Commission
reflects a collective effort on the part of the members of
its Organizational Committee. Progress has been made
in addressing emerging recommendations from the 2010
review, in particular in connection with the creation of a
new PBC country-specific configuration on Liberia. The
report also reflects the Commission’s plans to take
forward the recommendations from the review in a way
that would facilitate its annual reporting to the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
The Commission is proceeding in this direction
on the basis of a road map of actions in 2011. It
focuses on meeting practical objectives and making
concrete progress in enhancing the Commission’s
impact on national capacity-development, resource
mobilization and aligning key actors behind common
peacebuilding objectives.
Allow me to highlight a few elements from the
report. First, the report underscores the thematic focus
of the Commission during its fourth session around the
theme “Partnership for peacebuilding”. In view of the
complexity of peacebuilding challenges and the
multiplicity of actors, the need for coherence and
partnerships cannot be overemphasized. Building and
strengthening partnerships has been identified as a key
area of potential value added for the Commission. In
this regard, the Organizational Committee devoted the
majority of its efforts and time to engaging the
international financial institutions, especially the World
Bank, and regional organizations, especially the
African Union. Generally, the Chairperson and ViceChairpersons focused on joining up with a range of
potential partners from civil society and academia.
Secondly, the Commission has particularly
prioritized the need to strengthen the interaction with
the principal organs of the United Nations. It worked to
generate interest in its work across the membership of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. During the reporting
period, the Commission witnessed a growing openness
and encouraging signs of interest on the part of the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

11-27495

S/PV.6503

The important thematic debates convened by the
Security Council between February 2010 and February
2011 offered recurring opportunities for the PBC, the
United Nations membership and senior leadership to
engage with the Council around critical peacebuildingrelated policies. The participation of the World Bank in
a number of these debates also confirmed the evolving
partnership with the Bank at a time when it is further
developing its approach to assisting countries emerging
from conflict. Briefings by the Chairs of the country
configurations contributed to the discussions of the
Council at its periodic considerations of the situations
and mandates involving the countries on the
Commission’s agenda.
Most recently, the Council has engaged the
Chairs in informal dialogues on certain country
situations. The outcome of the thematic debates and the
deepening of the engagement of the Chairs of the PBC
country configurations marked an important step
towards more serious consideration by the Council of
the Commission’s advisory role. I would like to
advocate for enhanced interaction between the
Commission and the Council.
The 2010 review highlighted in particular the
potential for developing a dynamic linkage between the
Commission and the Council. Eleven of the 15 members
of the Security Council are currently members of the
PBC. That joint membership provides a natural interface
that could facilitate the Council’s drawing more actively
and regularly on the Commission’s advice.
The
Commission
could
provide
early
peacebuilding perspectives in the design and review of,
or transition from, peacekeeping mandates. It could
identify and promote country-specific sustainability
factors. It could catalyse early partnerships with the
international financial institutions. And it could
benchmark and monitor the progression from
stabilization to transition and consolidation.
The reporting period also witnessed the
continuing development of the Commission’s
relationship with the Economic and Social Council
through the established briefing made by the PBC
Chairperson to the 2010 substantive session. In
addition, the Council and the PBC jointly organized a
special event on the Millennium Development Goals in
countries emerging from conflict. That event testified
to the Commission’s growing advocacy role for an
integrated approach to peacebuilding, including

11-27495

through well-deserved focus on the socio-economic
dimension of peacebuilding.
Going forward, the Commission looks forward to
further deepening its linkages with the General
Assembly. There is a clear need to bring to bear the
Assembly’s perspective on key thematic issues.
Thirdly, the Commission continues to receive
direct and substantive support from the Peacebuilding
Support Office. Notwithstanding its stretched capacity,
the Office has also been an essential linkage between
the Commission and the operational entities within and
outside the United Nations system. The Office has also
continued to provide regular briefings on the activities
and operations of the Peacebuilding Fund. Those
briefings have contributed to deepening the
understanding of the synergy between the Commission
and the Fund in the countries on the Commission’s
agenda. The recently introduced interaction with the
Fund’s Advisory Group has provided the Commission
with an opportunity to address a number of broad
policy issues for the Fund.
The Fund’s resources, combined with the efforts
of the Commission, helped to ensure that the countries
on the Commission’s agenda benefited from the
sustained attention and support of the international
community, with 64 per cent of the Fund’s total
contributions being allocated to those countries.
By linking up the Peacebuilding Commission’s
work to that of peacekeeping, development and
political actors in the field, the Commission has added
considerable value. The challenge facing the
Commission in demonstrating its full potential,
however, is to ensure that its work is backed by a
higher level of political commitment from the Member
States and the senior leadership of the United Nations.
As noted by the co-facilitators of the 2010 review
report, “the review should be a wake-up call to
strengthen the collective resolve to deal with
peacebuilding in a more comprehensive and
determined way”. (S/2011/41, para. 107)
I hope that today’s debate, like the debate that the
General Assembly convened earlier in the week, will
take us a step further towards realizing the full
potential of the Commission as an advisory body that is
uniquely positioned to help the United Nations meet
the challenges facing our collective capacity to deliver
on the promises to respond to the needs of millions of
people in countries emerging from conflict.

3

S/PV.6503

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Wittig for his statement.

members, in order to identify appropriate measures to
inject new momentum into that interaction.

I now give the floor
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana,
Peacebuilding Commission.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Gasana for his briefing.

to His Excellency
Chairman of the

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda), Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission: Over the past year, the
Security Council convened a number of thematic
debates on post-conflict peacebuilding. The frequency
of the meetings and the scope of the discussion testify
to the growing sense of commitment by the Council to
take into consideration the complex challenges facing
countries emerging from conflict. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) could certainly help the Council to
deepen that commitment by providing three main
advisory functions.
The first is an early peacebuilding perspective,
which could contribute to the Council’s consideration
of the scope of the roles of peacekeeping missions in,
and contributions to, the broader peacebuilding efforts
undertaken by other actors in the field.
The second is an inclusive and flexible platform
to forge partnerships and engagement with those key
actors, thereby ensuring broader buy-in to
peacebuilding processes and facilitating informed
drawdowns of peacekeeping missions.
The third is supporting the countries on its
agenda and monitoring the progression from
stabilization to consolidation of peace on the basis of
country-specific analyses of risks and opportunities.
I welcome the initial steps taken by the Council
thus far to engage the Chairs of country-specific
configurations in more interactive and informal
dialogues around peacebuilding opportunities and
challenges in certain countries on the PBC’s agenda.
(spoke in French)
In reviewing the peacebuilding architecture, the
co-facilitators underscored the potential advantages of
broader and more frequent interaction between the
Security Council and the Commission. In that regard,
the contributions of members of the PBC that are
members of the Council are important to achieving that
goal. As the new Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I am prepared to work closely with those
members of Council, as well as with all other

4

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking Ambassador Wittig and Ambassador
Gasana for their very helpful briefings this morning.
We are very grateful to Ambassador Wittig for his
dedicated work over the past year, as well for the work
of the Permanent Representatives of Canada, Belgium,
Brazil, Jordan, Nepal and Switzerland in their roles as
Chairs.
The annual report (S/2011/41) and the review of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) provided useful
opportunities to take stock of the PBC’s work. They
described many of the Commission’s achievements, as
well as the challenges that the PBC faces. In looking at
the focus of the PBC over the coming months, we
should, in our view, consider three particular
objectives.
The first concerns results and the need for the
PBC to demonstrate clearly its contribution to
addressing critical peacebuilding bottlenecks for the
countries on its agenda. For example, the PBC needs to
focus on galvanizing all those who need to contribute
to the establishment of regional justice hubs in Liberia.
It needs to help galvanize action to support progress in
the implementation of the Economic Community of
West African States road map in Guinea-Bissau. And it
needs to rapidly support the Guinean Government in
taking forward security sector reform.
The second objective concerns advice. We want
the Security Council to seek the advice of the PBC
regularly and proactively. But for that to happen, the
PBC, supported by the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO), needs to generate high-quality analysis on a
particular problem and advice on possible options to
overcome it and on what role different actors might
play.
The third focus concerns the capacity of the PBC
itself and the need for countries to progress off its
agenda. In the past six months, we have had the
welcome addition of two countries onto the PBC’s
agenda, and there is a possibility that other high-profile
countries may also seek referral. That will put an

11-27495

S/PV.6503

additional burden on the PBSO and on Member States.
We need to explore the steps for graduating a country
off the PBC’s agenda or shifting to some lighter form
of engagement.
We also think that the PBC has an important role
to play in championing the civilian capacity review.
For example, the PBC could help to rally support
internationally for specific recommendations in the
review. We would also welcome the PBC’s advice
when we take this up in the Security Council later this
year. We further think that the PBC would benefit from
forging greater links with the new grouping of 17
fragile States, known as the g7+. That group provided
useful insights under the Bosnian debate on
institutional capacity-building. We should hear more
from the group. The PBC could provide a platform for
it here in New York.
In conclusion, when we meet to discuss the
PBC’s annual report this time next year, we should
look to see whether these objectives — results, advice
and managing the PBC’s capacity to best effect — are
being met. The United Kingdom reiterates its
commitment to helping to support their delivery.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on the Peacebuilding Commission’s (PBC) annual
report (S/2011/41), which constitutes an opportunity
for the Council to reflect on the important role that the
Commission plays in the United Nations system. I also
thank Ambassador Peter Wittig for his excellent
leadership during his chairmanship of the PBC. My
delegation pledges its full support to Ambassador
Eugène-Richard Gasana and wishes him every success
as the Commission’s Chair for 2011.
The past year was marked by the five-year review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
which offered an opportunity for the Council to
consider ways to perfect its work. The Commission is a
relatively new body in the United Nations system, and
the review allowed Council members to reflect both on
the progress achieved so far and the challenges ahead.
We once again thank the facilitators for their work and
for the useful recommendations they presented.
In our view, there are three areas where the
Council must continue to strengthen its work, namely,
the integrated and multidimensional nature of
peacebuilding, national ownership and partnerships
with other relevant actors. As Brazil has already

11-27495

underscored on different occasions, it is of the utmost
importance that the PBC enhance its integrated
approach. During the open debate held in February by
the Brazilian presidency (see S/PV.6479), the Council
emphasized that security and development were closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
In addition to pursuing security and stabilization
tasks, we believe that it is essential that peacebuilding
strategies also focus increasingly on economic and
social policies aimed at improving the living standards
of
affected
populations.
Assisting
national
Governments to restore their capacity to fight poverty
and strengthen institutions is another responsibility that
the Council cannot avoid. To name but a few, greater
attention must be given to the provision of basic
services, such as health and education; youth
employment, including through vocational training;
economic revitalization; and the fight against poverty.
It is also essential to strengthen the voice of women.
As we know, women are key actors in the economy,
especially in agriculture, and can play a leading role in
the prevention of conflicts.
Those dimensions are clearly interrelated.
Tangible progress in economic and social issues will
have a positive impact on the security situation. In
Guinea-Bissau, for example, the improved economic
situation in the country and the debt relief provided
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative opened the way to mobilizing more resources
for institution-building, social services and security
sector reform.
As for national ownership, there is no doubt that
the actions that we undertake must be steered by the
interests and needs of the affected country. A fluid
dialogue with national Governments and support for
political processes that can help local actors to forge a
vision of their priorities should therefore be guiding
principles of our activities.
The assistance provided must be tailored to what
national stakeholders consider as their fundamental
interests, and should focus on the consolidation of
national institutions. Institutions are indispensable to
enhancing national ownership and allowing for
stronger public administration. As Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste José Luís Guterres highlighted
before the Council in January (see S/PV.6472),
international partners must help to build national
institutions by working within them, since “one cannot

5

S/PV.6503

build a nation upon the principles of another”
(S/PV.6472, p. 6).
Partnerships with different actors — and this
brings me to my third point — is also instrumental to
the success of any peacebuilding initiative. Reaching
out to the international financial institutions and to
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, should be continuously pursued. One of
the areas in which partnerships can produce tangible
results is the deployment of civilian capacities. As the
recent report of the Secretary-General on this issue
underscores, it is essential to protect and nurture local
capacities, including through flexible arrangements and
South-South cooperation.
My delegation echoes the call by Ambassador
Peter Wittig for enhanced interaction between the
Commission and the Council. We believe that the
Security Council should resort more often to the advice
of the PBC when discussing the mandates of missions
in countries on the Commission’s agenda. In February,
during the Brazilian presidency, an interactive dialogue
on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi was
held, with the presence of the Chair of the countryspecific configuration, Ambassador Paul Seger. We
hope that such initiatives will continue.
As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration, Brazil has endeavoured to help that
country to reach long-lasting peace and development.
The activities described in the annual report are just a
snapshot of what the country-specific configuration has
done in critical areas such as security sector reform,
advocacy before international financial institutions,
resource mobilization and economic revitalization.
We are committed to continue to work in all of
those areas in order to make the PBC increasingly
meaningful and effective on the ground.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Peacebuilding
and peacekeeping-peacebuilding are and will remain
core activities of the Council in the immediate future.
Let me therefore begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting today on post-conflict
peacebuilding. The results of such initiatives will play
a key role in determining the relevance and
effectiveness of the Council and of the larger United
Nations system in the decades to come.

6

Let me also thank the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for its detailed and insightful report
(S/2011/41), as well as Ambassador Peter Witting,
under whose able stewardship the report was prepared
and who has presented it to us today. I also thank
Ambassador Gasana for his statement.
The Peacebuilding Commission, through its
Organizational Committee and country-specific
configurations, has a central position in the global
peacebuilding architecture. The working relationship of
the Commission, the newest organ of the United
Nations, with the Security Council and the General
Assembly is thus of critical importance.
My delegation has been a member of the
Commission since its inception. We favour close,
regular and substantive interaction among the
Commission, the Council and the Assembly so that the
United Nations can deliver as one when it comes to
setting the peacebuilding agenda.
Peacebuilding is a cooperative effort. The United
Nations requires working with other peacebuilding
actors, including international financial institutions.
My delegation has noted the growing focus on the
special characteristics of post-conflict situations
involving an increasing number of development and
economic actors. That, we expect, will have a positive
impact on peacebuilding and on the growing need for
resources for peacebuilding initiatives.
In an arena with many players, however, the
United Nations must be conscious of the need to
maintain the high ground in developing the normative
basis for peacebuilding. An international effort is under
way to understand the linkages between development,
peace and security and to suggest solutions. The
Council itself debated this issue six weeks ago under
the Brazilian presidency. We must ensure that this
effort is able to resist the temptation to create a new
peacebuilding orthodoxy. Many of these efforts end up
talking down rather than listening. That must be
avoided at all costs.
My delegation stresses that the United Nations
must play the central role in identifying a common
peacebuilding vision, in bringing together the various
actors and in acting as a bridge between national
authorities and various peacebuilding and development
actors.

11-27495

S/PV.6503

Some of these issues were addressed by the
Working Group on Lessons Learned — an effort with
which we have been associated. We believe that its
conclusions — inter alia in relation to the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in marshalling resources,
on the imperative of national dialogue in post-conflict
situations and the role of young people — are
particularly relevant to the further evolution of
peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding emerged from peacekeeping. The
United Nations has made enormous investments of
manpower and resources in multidimensional
peacekeeping operations mandated to operate in fragile
States. We are now in the midst of another
paradigmatic shift into peacekeeping/peacebuilding
operations or purely peacebuilding operations.
India brings to the table the experience of almost
60 years of peacekeeping. We have contributed more
peacekeepers to more peacekeeping operations than
any other country. We have also participated in every
type of peacekeeping operation, from truce supervision
to the current generation of purely peacebuilding
initiatives.
Based on this experience, my delegation stresses
that peacekeeping is early peacebuilding. Our
peacekeepers in the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia, the United Nations Operation
in Somalia II, the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti have been early peacebuilders. We
believe that the process of implementing a peace
agreement must run side by side with the provision of
humanitarian and emergency assistance; with the
creation of political institutions that can resolve
conflicts, reconcile parties to conflicts and allow
dialogue between the State and the governed; with
security sector reform; with administrative and
economic restructuring; and with empowering the
weak, building a human rights culture and resuming
economic activity.
National ownership is the key determinant of
success in peacebuilding. The international community
can encourage, motivate and facilitate. It cannot solve
those problems which require national will and
national ownership.

11-27495

We believe, however, that the international
community has the duty to make available appropriate
capacities to national authorities. The solutions and
capacities that these authorities seek are those that
have been tried and tested in similar environments
elsewhere. Countries like India have successfully
surmounted many of the challenges that have produced
these conflicts. The shared colonial legacy that
produced these challenges and our experience and that
of other nations which have faced similar difficulties
has particular relevance to the problem at hand. The
success of the all-female Indian formed police unit in
Liberia is a good example of how the capacities and
experience of the global South can be leveraged in
peacebuilding situations.
It is also the responsibility of the international
community to provide the resources. Complex
peacekeeping operations usually have a lifespan that is
measured in years. Peacebuilding operations will last
for decades and require a predictable and appropriate
level of resources over extended periods of time.
India strongly supports the role and relevance of
regional players in post-conflict scenarios. We are
greatly encouraged by the African Union’s efforts to
develop post-conflict reconstruction capacities. The
success of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and the African Peer Review Mechanism
has many lessons that are relevant to the strengthening
of national ownership.
The Secretariat and the funds and programmes
must do a great deal more to become effective players.
Skill sets and expertise that are relevant to these
societies need to be augmented. In an earlier debate, I
spoke about the ponderous nature of the United
Nations bureaucracy and pointed out that an
organization that takes up to 200 days to fill positions
in the field can hardly be a model worthy of emulation
when it comes to institution-building.
In concluding, I would like to point out that India
has engaged bilaterally with a number of nations on the
peacekeeping/peacebuilding agenda in response to
national requirements. We also have contributed, along
with my fellow delegations of Brazil and South Africa,
through plurilateral mechanisms, such as the India,
Brazil and South Africa Trilateral initiative, that are
active in peacebuilding. We are committed to this
process and will continue to remain fully engaged.

7

S/PV.6503

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Germany and the Chairs of the
country
configurations
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Permanent Representatives of
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Jordan, Luxembourg and
Sweden, for preparing the report on the work of the
fourth session of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2011/41). We thank the Permanent Representatives
of Germany and Rwanda, the former and current
Chairs of the PBC, for presenting their reports and
their vision of the roles of the PBC.
We welcome the outcomes of the already fourth
year of the work of the PBC. This period has been of
particular importance to the peacebuilding architecture
of the United Nations. The first five-year review of the
PBC’s activities was a success. Its outcome should
contribute to further enhancing the effectiveness of the
Commission
in
coordinating
international
peacebuilding efforts and in crafting recommendations
on the rehabilitation of States and the restoration of
economic stability in countries that have emerged from
the hot phases of crisis.
Thorough work has been done within the country
configurations. One of the great merits of the PBC is
its ability to establish a direct dialogue with national
Governments and to ensure their leading role and
responsibilities for the peacebuilding process. We also
see evidence of the growing credibility of the PBC in
the recent addition to its agenda of two new countries,
Liberia and Guinea.
In the broader peacebuilding context, we note the
issuance of the report of the Secretary-General’s Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities in the aftermath of conflict. We
continue to explore the conclusions and proposals of
that document. Our position is that the leading role in
any consideration of its recommendations should be
played by the General Assembly and its Fifth
Committee. Furthermore, we believe that one key
aspect of the system of international peacekeeping is
the establishment of qualified staffing reserves
consisting of national teams of civilian experts. The
Russian Federation has already submitted to the
Secretariat lists of national experts in various fields.
The Russian Federation views peacebuilding as
an important tool for ensuring international peace and
stability. It should be based on the principle of national

8

ownership in defining priorities and approaches to their
implementation, as well as on building the institutional
capacities of States that are recipients of international
assistance. It is only national stakeholders that can
ensure sustainable peaceful development.
A key component of post-conflict peacebuilding
entails establishing and building national institutional
capacity. That should become a system-wide priority
for the entire United Nations in deeds, not just words.
Achieving sustained peace and stability is only
possible when the entirety of ownership lies with the
national players.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the activities of the PBC as the unique advisory
mechanism mandated to coordinate peacebuilding
activities in the United Nations system and outside it,
and for crafting peacebuilding strategies as well as
mobilizing international cooperation for post-conflict
reconstruction. At the same time, we suggest that the
Commission could be more active in taking on the
tasks of peacebuilding and socio-economic reform that
are currently entrusted to peacekeeping operations.
We attach great importance to the Peacebuilding
Fund as a mechanism for immediate financing that can
contribute to long-term mechanisms for assistance in
reconstruction and development. Our position is
underscored by our annual contribution to the Fund,
which totals $2 million.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you for
organizing this important debate, Mr. President. I also
wish to thank Ambassador Wittig for presenting his
report and for his commitment and leadership while he
was in charge of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I also thank Ambassador Gasana for his statement and
assure him of our constant support in his important
task. I would also like to warmly greet Ambassador
Viotti and the other Chairs of the country-specific
configurations present here during our debate.
We welcome the progress of the PBC as reflected
in its report (S/2011/41). Over the past five years, the
Commission has established itself as a relevant
platform for international assistance in the transition of
post-conflict societies towards durable peace. We now
have a more focused, thematic approach and a better
understanding of priorities and of how the PBC fits
into the larger set of international actors. We have, as
well, the lessons learned from five country-specific
configurations, which, we believe, is experience that

11-27495

S/PV.6503

will certainly be valuable for the recently created
configuration for the Republic of Guinea.
Portugal takes pride in its active participation in
four PBC configurations, as we are strong supporters
of an approach that takes into account the relationship
between security and development and its implications
for integrated action by the international community in
post-conflict societies, which are particularly fragile
ones. The PBC is in a unique position to ensure that
socio-economic progress effectively functions as a
promoter of stability. In the case of Guinea-Bissau, as
already mentioned by Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti,
I would also like to underline the role of the PBC
configuration in the process that led to the debt relief,
resulting from Guinea-Bissau reaching the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries completion point of the
International Monetary Fund. The debt relief, together
with a recently approved new tranche of Peacebuilding
Fund financial support, will create the conditions for
the Government of Guinea-Bissau to press forward
with social and economic programmes and enhance the
strengthening of national institutions. In the context of
political fragility, the PBC’s role is certainly an
important contribution to stability in that particular
country, which faces, as we all know, a number of
serious challenges.
Allow me now to focus on a number of
challenges that in our view merit particular attention.
First, there is a challenge for the visibility of the PBC
in its capacity to coordinate with other actors present in
the countries where it intervenes. There is no denying
that the PBC is a catalyst for mobilizing donors’
resources, identifying financing gaps and priorities for
international assistance. But this should translate into
actual work being carried out on the ground. Besides
dealing with the regular planning and articulation of
the national authorities, the PBC should be more
systematically involved early on with other actors, first
and foremost with the other United Nations agencies
but also with bilateral partners, international financial
institutions and regional organizations. We note with
satisfaction that this issue is one of the main aspects of
the PBC road map for actions in 2011.
Secondly, there is the challenge of greater
engagement of the PBC in development issues. The
report indicates a growing trend to include
development aspects in priority plans, especially
concerning the problem of youth unemployment, an
issue with serious destabilizing potential, especially in

11-27495

Africa. PBC engagement in this field, however,
requires a more consistent dialogue with development
agencies to promote a peacebuilding approach in their
assistance efforts. There are also a number of other
issues besides youth employment with great potential
in terms of peace dividends and long-term stability.
These include promoting economic activities, health
and education, and gender equality, as well as the
mitigation of the effects of climate change.
Finally, we should work towards strengthening
relations between the PBC and other United Nations
organs. On Monday the General Assembly held a very
rich debate on this same report (see A/65/PV.79). I
think we should value the Assembly’s contribution in
our reflections and efforts to strengthen peacebuilding.
In what concerns the Security Council, the report,
as well as other reports and documents produced in
each of the country-specific configurations, contains
much valuable information on how the work of the
PBC can feed into Security Council discussions,
namely, those on the establishment, renewal and
conclusion of mission mandates. We should work
collectively to improve our working methods in order
to allow us to draw regularly on the advice of Chairs of
country-specific configurations. The interactive
dialogue on Burundi, with the participation of the
Chair of the PBC country-specific configuration,
promoted by the Brazilian presidency of the Security
Council last month, was an excellent practice. We
should be able to develop other formats that would
serve the same purpose of further engagement of the
PBC with the Council.
In conclusion, the success of the PBC in fulfilling
its task represents our collective success in our efforts
towards achieving sustainable peace. We are aware of
the challenges before us in improving our capacity to
deal with peacebuilding tasks. Let us also be creative
in reaching out and devising appropriate ways to
address those challenges.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to debate the report (S/2011/41) on the
review of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for the
period between 1 July 2009 and 31 December 2010.
We also thank Ambassador Peter Wittig for his
excellent presentation of the report and for the skill
with which he has discharged his duties as Chair of the
Commission. We would also like to convey to his

9

S/PV.6503

successor, Ambassador Gasana, our best wishes for
success in his new post, and to assure him of our
support.
With regard to the ever more important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the post-conflict
peacebuilding process, my delegation welcomes the
commitment that has been expressed here on the part
of the international community for strengthening the
capacity and resources of the Commission so as to
enable it to act more effectively on the ground. It is in
that context that we welcome the work done by the cofacilitators — the Permanent Representatives of
Ireland, Mexico and South Africa — in reviewing the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture with the
goal of making it more operational. We welcome the
fact that the recommendations made as a result of their
consultations have already begun to be applied by the
Commission, as the report under discussion attests.
It seems to us that there are two particularly
important aspects associated with our desire to
strengthen the peacebuilding architecture, namely, the
partnerships that the Commission has to forge with the
various actors involved in the peacebuilding process
and the central role that the host country must play in
that process. With regard to the first point, my
delegation welcomes the approach taken by the
Commission in relation to international financial
institutions and donors, for some efforts require a
stronger international commitment and more resources
and, without prejudice to the issue of the most effective
strategies, it is important to increase the resources of
the Peacebuilding Fund and its main components.

growing and require the Commission to be more
effective in fulfilling its advisory role vis-à-vis the
conduct of peacekeeping missions. For instance, we
support the Commission’s recommendations to the
Council regarding the situation in the Central African
Republic. Those recommendations called for increased
financial support for the stabilization of the country,
for the Economic Community of Central African States
to provide military observers for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, and for the
subregional military presence of the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic.
Regarding the second point, my delegation
believes it important to mention that peacebuilding
cannot occur without the involvement of the recipient
country. Indeed, national ownership and the
strengthening of existing capacities are the two main
pillars of the recovery process for countries emerging
from conflict.
The Central African Republic configuration, of
which my country, Gabon, is a member, can once again
serve as a good example. Indeed, the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding and the poverty
reduction strategy paper were created by the Central
African Government, in partnership with the
Commission. In that context, we suggest that the
Council consider the Commission’s potential role in
the Sudan in terms of post-referendum issues.

Similarly, cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations and, indeed, with all other
actors involved in peacebuilding activities, is essential.
That is why peacebuilding should be a focal point of
the dialogues held periodically by the United Nations
with regional organizations. The Commission’s
ongoing cooperation with those entities is an essential
factor in efforts to improve resource mobilization and,
above all, to more effectively coordinate and
harmonize actions on the ground. In that context, we
support the Commission’s relationship with the main
organs of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, our Council and the Economic and Social
Council.

National or local ownership, a key component of
the strategy adopted by the Commission, should
transcend the governmental sphere. All segments of the
population should therefore be involved in programmes
launched as part of the peacebuilding process. The
issues of youth unemployment, the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the situation of such vulnerable
groups as women and girls must be accorded the
highest priority. Attention should also be paid to the
issue of political governance in the actions of the
Commission, because it is a factor that could play a
role in any return to conflict. That was the intent
behind the 2009 review of the Peacebuilding Fund’s
guiding principles, which was undertaken to ensure
that the Fund would be able to respond to real needs.
Greater account must also be taken of existing national
capacities in peacebuilding activities.

In the Security Council, we recognize that the
links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding are

As the international community is not usually
called upon to remain indefinitely in a country

10

11-27495

S/PV.6503

emerging from conflict, it would be useful in the future
for such countries to work with the countries
concerned to formulate a priority action plan to
establish sustainable peace. The action plan should
include security sector reform, socio-economic
development,
youth
employment,
national
reconciliation, good governance and the rule of law.
The Commission’s activities should create no local
dependency that would make it difficult for the
international community to leave.
I would like to highlight the challenges and issues
that should be further discussed in terms of the role of
the Commission. One is how to coordinate the various
actors involved in such a way as to not complicate the
conduct of operations, and how to reconcile the
approaches and modus operandi of the various actors.
Another is how to better take into account the
specificities of each situation. A further issue is how to
ensure participation at the national level so that
ownership is not limited solely to the elites.
Finally, I reiterate our support for the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is playing an
increasingly important role in the international
community’s efforts to help countries devastated by
conflict to regain their footing.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I, too,
should like to thank Ambassadors Wittig and Gasana
for their comprehensive briefings.
At the outset, I would like to underline that fact
that Bosnia and Herzegovina considers the
Peacebuilding Commission to be one of the most
important components of the security architecture of
the United Nations. Over the past few months, several
important debates and initiatives have been undertaken
with the aim of enhancing the coherence and
effectiveness of United Nations engagement in
peacebuilding activities. Consequently, the evolving
nature of the Peacebuilding Commission has continued
to focus the attention of the international community
on the countries on its agenda.
We further believe that, in order to improve the
Commission’s impact on the ground, a common vision
for engagement in a given country is essential. It is
equally important to build and strengthen partnerships
with key peacebuilding actors, international financial
institutions and regional and subregional institutions.
In that process, the focus should be on building upon
existing national strategies and priorities so as to

11-27495

reinforce national ownership and capacity. Another
important issue is identifying critical funding and
policy gaps and leveraging the resources of multilateral
and bilateral donors to address those gaps in a timely,
flexible and predictable manner. The division of roles
and responsibilities is necessary to bridge short-term
activities in the aftermath of conflict and long-term
visions that lead to sustainable peace and development.
In that regard, measuring the impact of
peacebuilding activities in the field is crucial. Reviews
of the Strategic Frameworks for Peacebuilding and
efforts to harmonize them with the views expressed in
the poverty reduction strategy papers can be important
activities leading to better planning and greater
delivery of results on the ground.
We are also of the view that greater synergy is
needed
between
the
Commission’s
country
configurations and the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding in order to ensure that
collective efforts are coherent and mutually
reinforcing. In particular, that process involves
reinforcing shared accountability between the countries
concerned and international partners, strengthening
coherent planning for peacebuilding strategies,
financing for peacebuilding and leveraging capacities
and expertise. We emphasize that planning for
peacebuilding must not be a supply-driven process. On
the contrary, it has to be focused and centred on the
needs of the host country.
We consider that the cooperation between the
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) needs
to be maximized through enhanced consultations and
dialogue in order to provide sustained support for the
countries on the Commission’s agenda and to align the
Commission’s engagement with the plans of the Fund.
With regard to country configurations, the
Commission has continued to increase its engagement
by supporting the electoral process in Burundi and
activities related to the peacebuilding elements of the
Agenda for Change of the Government of Sierra
Leone, including good governance, the rule of law and
youth employment. We welcome the efforts of the
Commission that fostered integration of the political
mandate
of
the
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone with the
development mandates of the United Nations agencies,
making the Agenda a central peace and development
framework for the international community.

11

S/PV.6503

We are of the view that engagement in GuineaBissau will help in building democratic governance
and effectively addressing the key challenges facing
the country, including enhancing the civilian
institutions of the security sector. As for the Central
African Republic, it will boost support for
peacebuilding priorities identified by the Commission,
the Government and civil society.
The constructive work of the Commission
contributed to adding two new members to the
Commission’s agenda, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. We
believe that a new instrument of engagement, the
statement of mutual commitment, will contribute to
better identifying the main risks and challenges facing
the peacebuilding process and therefore expedite the
engagement process. However, enhancing national
ownership and building national capacities will lay the
foundations for economic growth, peace consolidation
and sustainable development.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the practice of
inviting the Chairs of the country configurations to
brief the Council. This is important not only for the
Commission’s role in highlighting the correlation
between security and development, but also for
confirming the Commission’s tangible results in a
specific country.
In light of the PBC 2010 review, it is necessary to
develop a practical mechanism to track progress in the
work of the Commission with regard to creating a
single planning document for a specific country,
intensifying resource mobilization efforts, development
aspects of peacebuilding or activities with the PBF.
Finally, while we emphasize that much has been
achieved in the past, we believe that the Commission
should perform better analysis, provide important
advice to the principal organs of the United Nations,
and improve its working methods and the linkage
between work at Headquarters and in the field in order
to achieve better results. Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains fully committed to supporting its work.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Wittig for his excellent work as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2010 and
Ambassador Gasana for the vigour with which he has
taken over the role.
Today we welcome with satisfaction the report of
the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2011/41). The year

12

2010 was important for the Commission, which saw its
policies come of age and its objectives better defined.
We are pleased to note the interest the Commission
attracts. This year saw the development of an
ambitious reform project led by the Ambassadors of
Ireland, Mexico and South Africa. We wish to reiterate
our support for the implementation of the
recommendations of the report, and in particular the
2011 road map drawn up under Germany’s leadership.
We encourage the new chairmanship to examine
possibilities for the Commission to establish new
partnerships with financial institutions, in particular the
African Development Bank.
The appeal of the PBC was confirmed by the
addition to its agenda of Liberia in September 2010
and Guinea in February 2011. We recall our
commitment to those countries and strongly encourage
them to stay the course towards peace and democracy.
Despite these positive developments, we must
keep in mind that the recommendations of the cofacilitators’ report have not yet taken effect and that the
PBC has yet to find its place in the United Nations
system. The Commission is still too often considered
by States emerging from conflict as an additional
donor. However, the true added value of the PBC lies
in its political support and advocacy functions. I stress
that the PBC is first and foremost a political platform.
In this context, if the PBC is to be able to keep
international attention focused on countries emerging
from conflict, host countries should be prepared to
make real commitments, because peacebuilding does
not end with the successful holding of democratic
elections.
The six countries on the Commission’s agenda
have thus had to step up their efforts, with the support
of the country-specific configurations of the PBC. For
host countries, being placed on the agenda is the
beginning of a long process that can be concluded only
by the national authorities. National ownership, which
is often highlighted, needs to be embodied in the
ambitious implementation of programmes promoting
good governance, anti-corruption efforts, security
sector reform, the rule of law and national
reconciliation.
Let me take this opportunity to commend the
report of Jean-Marie Guéhenno on civilian capacity
development (S/2011/85). The report is an important
step, which we wish to support. Many of its proposals

11-27495

S/PV.6503

could be implemented immediately, and we encourage
the Secretariat to be ambitious in implementing it.
Some of the recommendations, however, will have to
be validated by all of the States of the international
community. It will therefore be important to build
consensus that goes beyond the traditional rifts.

We saw it in Burundi, where the Commission worked
with international stakeholders to ensure free and fair
elections and where the Commission’s work to support
political dialogue among the ruling party and
opposition elements has proven particularly important
as Burundi has solidified its peace.

The Peacebuilding Commission is the most
representative and legitimate body of the United
Nations for promoting national civilian capacitybuilding, triangular cooperation — among international
organizations, donor countries and host countries —
and South-South cooperation. In this respect, we
believe that the Organizational Committee of the
Commission should consider adding the evaluation of
that recent, innovative report to its agenda in the near
future.

We also applaud the Commission’s quick start in
Liberia. Liberia was added to the PBC’s agenda within
six months of that country’s request, and an innovative
statement of mutual commitment was endorsed by the
Commission and Liberia’s Government. Liberia has
already, with the PBC’s help, begun construction on the
first of five regional security hubs to address the root
causes of conflict at the community level and help
transfer security management from the United Nations
peacekeeping mission to the Government of Liberia in
the coming years.

Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Wittig for his briefing and his
commitment to peacebuilding and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I also wish to thank Ambassador
Gasana for his leadership this year, as well as the
Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission’s countryspecific configurations, who facilitate the PBC’s work
in the field and in New York. The United States
continues to support the Commission wholeheartedly.
Promoting sustainable peace is at the heart of the
United Nations work. The Peacebuilding Commission
continues to gain strength as an institution. It plays a
crucial role in several important ways, calling our
attention to countries emerging form conflict, offering
advice, and proposing strategies to build sustainable
peace after the guns have fallen silent. We commend
the Commission for its efforts to address many of the
shortcomings identified in last year’s annual review,
and we appreciate the progress it has made this year, in
particular in the countries on its agenda.
We commend the Commission’s efforts to
alleviate the administrative burden on those it hopes to
help by drawing more from existing strategic planning
processes and documents. We saw this in Sierra Leone,
where the Commission aligned its engagement with the
Government’s agenda for change and leveraged the
expertise and experience of international actors and
regional bodies to tackle poor governance, youth
unemployment and widespread drug trafficking. We
saw it again in the Central African Republic, where the
Commission tailored its strategic framework to
correspond to the country’s poverty reduction strategy.

11-27495

We also appreciate the efforts of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned, which shares and
disseminates information and success stories on highpriority areas on the Peacebuilding Commission’s
agenda. We urge the Working Group to continue to
foster meaningful dialogue and to link its discussions
and findings more directly to programmes in the field.
Such ties are essential if the valuable lessons put forth
by the Working Group are to be incorporated into the
Commission’s ongoing work.
Despite considerable progress, the Commission
still faces real challenges. In order to better serve as the
leading authority on peacebuilding, the Commission
must work harder to link ambitions in New York with
programmes and national leadership in the field. It must
also
improve
coordination
with
international
institutions on needs assessments and programmes in
post-conflict countries. The PBC should continue to
promote national ownership by focusing early on
developing national capacities and measuring the
impact that peacebuilding has in the field.
We also believe that the Commission should work
more closely with its key partners, in particular the
international financial institutions. This will allow the
Commission to build on the experience and knowledge
of partner institutions and work towards common goals
to create sustainable peace. We must also work to
achieve a coherent vision and to coordinate efforts
across all players in countries with a United Nations
peacebuilding presence. A key aspect of achieving this
vision is working closely with leadership within

13

S/PV.6503

countries emerging from conflict. As the Commission
continues to grow and add more countries to its
agenda, it is even more critical that it possess the
peacebuilding capacities to advance international peace
and security and improve the prospects for success in
post-conflict countries.
The time is now, as more countries are turning to
the United Nations for resources and assistance in
dealing with conflict. The Commission must continue to
build on the progress it has made to help the countries
on its agenda build peace that will truly endure.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on the report
(S/2011/41) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We wish to express our sincere gratitude to the former
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Wittig, for his leadership of the Commission during the
past year. We also thank the Chairs of the five countryspecific configurations for Burundi, Sierra Leone, the
Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia,
for their dedication and hard work. We thank the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its invaluable support
to the PBC.
South Africa looks forward to the leadership of the
new Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Gasana, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda. My delegation stands ready to contribute
concretely to peacebuilding activities through our
membership in the sixth country-specific configuration.
The Peacebuilding Commission has made a
considerable
contribution
to
United
Nations
peacebuilding efforts since it was established. The
recent of addition of Liberia and Guinea to the
Commission’s agenda is another indication of the
significance of the work of the Commission. However,
more still needs to be done if we are to achieve the
objective of preventing the relapse of countries into
conflict and building durable peace.
We welcome the support provided by the
international community to the Commission through
the PBC country-specific configurations. The five
countries currently on the PBC’s agenda have received
assistance in various ways, including through the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and other programmes. The
Commission played a critical role in Burundi and in the
Central African Republic by providing support for the
election processes and mobilizing financial resources
to bridge the funding gap in the electoral budgets. That

14

contribution of the Commission went a long way
towards ensuring that the two countries held successful
elections.
The Commission’s interaction with the Security
Council has improved. However, there is still scope for
further improvement. We still believe that the PBC has
a crucial role to play in advising the Security Council
on peacebuilding elements that could be integrated into
peacebuilding mandates. We are certain that such
advice is important to enhancing the Council’s
peacebuilding efforts.
We encourage the Commission to continue to
strengthen its relationship with other bodies of the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. We appreciate the
Commission’s efforts to build collaboration and
partnership with a wide range of stakeholders through
outreach activities. South Africa believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission could improve its reporting
by also focusing and reflecting more on the following
five areas.
First, it should focus on better coordination of
peacebuilding initiatives among the stakeholders.
Secondly, greater consideration should be given to the
visibility of women and civil society in peacebuilding,
including in providing leadership on socio-economic
development issues. Thirdly, the report should focus on
further enhancing cooperation and information-sharing.
For example, lessons learned should be shared among
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
agencies, such as the United Nations Development
Programme. Fourthly, the role of regional authorities
and stakeholders in peacebuilding processes should be
emphasized. In this context, local ownership and
prioritization become important, and more could be
done jointly in consultation with the authorities in
countries emerging from conflict. Fifthly, the report
should also elaborate on the Commission’s activities in
partnership with the international financial institutions.
That partnership is certainly important in light of the
nexus between peace and security.
The Peacebuilding Fund has provided critical
assistance to countries emerging from conflict. South
Africa encourages greater interaction and collaboration
between the PBC and the PBF in ascertaining how
countries emerging from conflict can be assisted
financially in accordance with their priorities and

11-27495

S/PV.6503

national vision. It is important that the existing
complementarities
between
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund be sustained
and maintained. South Africa believes that the
Peacebuilding Support Office, in partnership with the
broader United Nations system, adds enormous value
to peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, it is our sincere hope that the
recommendations of the 2010 review of the
peacebuilding process will add value to the work of the
Commission by enhancing and improving coherence,
coordination and collaboration, including by enhancing
the relationships among the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and other partners.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my appreciation to Ambassador
Wittig, the former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his briefing and for the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2011/41). His work at
the helm of the Commission is worthy of praise and
recognition. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Gasana, the current Chair, and to wish him the greatest
success.
The activities of the Peacebuilding Commission
during this past year and a half show the important
progress it has made in fulfilling its mandate and the
need to take comprehensive steps to implement the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council regarding the recommendations that emerged
from the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
The various actors involved in peacebuilding
highlight the ongoing need to identify areas for joint
work, cooperation and coordination so as to avoid
duplication of efforts, enhance synergies and make the
best possible use of available resources. In that respect,
we underscore the leadership role played by the
Commission in making maximum use of the capacities
available in the United Nations, the international
financial institutions and the donor community, and in
forming partnerships and improving coordination with
the entities participating in those initiatives. We
therefore place a high value on cooperation between
the Commission and regional organizations and
international financial institutions, especially the
African Union, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.

11-27495

With the recent addition of Liberia and Guinea to
the Commission’s agenda, the pressing need for
national ownership is clearer than ever, given that the
role of the international community is to help create a
national process based on the needs identified by the
particular country. An important step forward in the
implementation of that principle came with the
statement of mutual commitment in Liberia. We
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to continue
to focus its activities on such initiatives.
A central aspect of the review of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission was its institutional
relationship with the main organs of the United
Nations, especially the Security Council. Within the
Council, there should be increased efforts to seek the
participation of the configuration Chairs in those
meetings at which we consider the peacebuilding status
in the respective countries so as to coordinate the work
of United Nations agencies on the ground, improve
planning and clearly establish actions to be undertaken
for early peacebuilding components of peacekeeping
operations.
We welcome the Commission’s intention to
submit more analytical reports, addressing matters such
as the use and fostering of national capacities and the
sustainability of resources. The assessment of these
and other matters should be undertaken in cross-cutting
manner by the configurations so as to promote
evaluation of the activities within the jurisdictions
delineated in their mandates.
Lastly, allow me to underscore the need to
increase our political, economic and technical
commitment to the Commission. It is only with
determined support that we will be able to develop the
Commission’s full potential and grant it its proper role
in preventing relapses into conflict.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2011/41). I would like to add my voice to those of
my colleagues who have extended their appreciation to
Ambassador Peter Wittig for his briefing and especially
for his remarkable contribution in his former role as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also
want to thank Ambassador Gasana, the current Chair,
for his insights. We want to assure him of our
unalloyed support in his new responsibilities.

15

S/PV.6503

Over the past year, we have been afforded
numerous opportunities to better understand how the
work of the Security Council interfaces with
peacebuilding goals. This Council has been enriched
by its acknowledgement of how, in achieving security
ends, we can contribute to the fulfilment of long-term
development through peacebuilding activities. The
recent Council debates on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict and women’s
participation in peacebuilding, institution-building and
the interdependence of security and development have
all been excellent opportunities for the Council to
develop a keener appreciation of the part that we play
in the peacebuilding agenda. Indeed, all of these
debates have attested to the value of peacebuilding as a
tool for preventive diplomacy.
The review of international civilian capacities
and the five-year review of the peacebuilding
architecture dovetail neatly with the conclusions in the
annual report of the PBC. What Nigeria takes from
these three work streams is the overarching and critical
importance of cooperation. It is clear from the work of
all the configurations of the Commission that their
goals cannot be achieved in isolation without the
participation of other key actors, including national
Governments, regional organizations, international
financial institutions, other United Nations agencies,
bodies and funds, and civil society.
Liberia is proving to be an excellent case for
cooperation and innovation. With the adoption of the
statement of mutual commitment, the Government of
Liberia is firmly in the driving seat in terms of
identifying priorities and ensuring that service delivery
is demand-driven. Such cooperative efforts, which
emphasize national ownership, attest to the
commitment of the Liberia configuration and to the
vision of the Commission itself.
The cooperation of regional organizations
remains an essential element of the peacebuilding
toolkit, and one that we must encourage in this
Council. We welcome, for example, the partnership of
the African Union (AU), among others, in closing the
funding gap for Burundi’s 2010 elections. In addition,
we believe that the March 2010 meeting on partnership
for
peacebuilding,
which
was
attended
by
representatives of the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the European Union, the AU and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, was an
important forum for exploring and advocating for

16

stronger, more enduring partnerships to build and
sustain peace in fragile or conflict-sensitive societies.
If we are able to identify more effective ways of
mobilizing resources for Africa’s peacebuilding
initiatives,
and
to
identify
the
appropriate
peacebuilding priorities, countries emerging from
conflict will no doubt be better served by the United
Nations system. In this vein, Nigeria fully supports the
annual joint meeting of the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council, which follows the annual
consultative meeting of members of the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council. We
believe that these meetings can help to bridge the gaps
inherent in addressing the nexus between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and, indeed, the broader relationship
between security and development in Africa.
The Working Group on Lessons Learned has
rightly drawn from national experiences to highlight
the centrality of development aspects of peacebuilding.
Reducing youth unemployment, developing incomegenerating activities, debt relief, skills training and
promoting women’s employment and economic
empowerment are essential strategies for laying a solid
economic foundation for peace and stability. It is with
this in mind that Nigeria approved 0.7 million units of
account in debt relief under the Nigeria Trust Fund for
Burundi and Togo.
Despite the significant gains in peacebuilding in
this reporting period, many challenges evidently
remain in nations such as Guinea-Bissau — as
Ambassador Viotti will attest — and the Central
African Republic. In Guinea-Bissau, we look forward
to the outcome of the planned joint mission of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. We truly believe that
Guinea-Bissau can and will overcome its security
sector reform challenges so that the country can benefit
from the gains achieved by the PBC, ECOWAS and
other actors in pursuit of democratic governance.
We accept that there are serious challenges to be
addressed in the Central African Republic in the era
following the drawdown of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad. Specifically,
the configuration must prioritize its support to the
Government’s efforts in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and in institutional capacity-building.
While these challenges are no doubt daunting, we

11-27495

S/PV.6503

stress that they can be overcome through concerted and
collective action. We firmly believe that the PBC is
best placed to bring together the efforts of all
stakeholders in order to devise appropriate strategies to
assist post-conflict countries.
The PBC, as we have all acknowledged, has
already shown us its effectiveness in harnessing the
strengths of multiple development and security actors.
The PBC can marshal and has marshalled the resources,
the know-how and the political will of the international
community in a way that anchors the Security Council’s
quest for lasting peace. We therefore lend our full
support and commitment to its efforts and trust that we
will soon maximize the PBC’s potential and, ultimately,
fulfil the basic objectives for which it was established.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): I thank you, Sir, for having
organized this meeting. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Wittig for ably chairing the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2010 and to extend to the
current PBC Chairperson, Ambassador Gasana, my
sincere wishes for success in his endeavours.
Tangible results have been achieved through the
PBC’s engagement in country-specific situations. From
the supportive role it played during the elections in
Burundi to the economic revitalization it helped foster
in Sierra Leone, the PBC has proved its added value as
the main platform for peacebuilding activities within
the United Nations system. Furthermore, steady
requests made by countries emerging from conflict for
inclusion on the Commission’s agenda reflect the level
of expectation associated with it.
However, different levels of challenges remain in
the countries on the Commission’s agenda. The review
of the peacebuilding architecture concluded this year
created valuable momentum on which we could build
to face those challenges in a comprehensive manner. In
this regard, we are pleased to note that the
Commission’s report on its fourth session (S/2011/41)
takes into account the recommendations emanating
from the recently concluded review process. We also
note with appreciation the progress made in response
to a number of those recommendations. However, we
need to redouble our efforts to meet the expectations
generated by the review and its recommendations. In
our view, sustained attention needs to be given to the
progress achieved in the following vital areas.
First, the PBC must keep national ownership at
the forefront of its activities by involving populations

11-27495

as quickly and extensively as possible within their own
governance architecture. Such engagement should be
context-sensitive and orient different actors and
partners towards re-establishing national capacities for
governance and service delivery, according to the
specific needs of the country concerned.
Secondly, it is essential to enhance synergy
between the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund in a way
that ensures supply-driven funding that would support
broader peacebuilding objectives. Mutual commitments
between national stakeholders and their regional and
international partners need to be coupled with mutual
accountability.
Thirdly, it is also essential that all Organizational
Committee members and senior United Nations leaders
use their political weight and commitment to align
actors around common peacebuilding objectives.
Fourthly, the Security Council should make better
use of the advisory capacity of the PBC through a more
proactive and dynamic linkage between the
Commission and the Council, as has been stated and
pointed out by Ambassador Wittig. In that regard, we
encourage closer engagement by the Chairs of country
configurations with the Council, which can benefit
from their input and views during relevant countryspecific discussions.
It is important at this stage to build on previous
achievements in a way that the activities of the
Commission acquire a cumulative nature. Therefore,
we regard the road map of actions for 2011 as a living
document. We look forward to the forthcoming
progress report and to the practical approach to be
developed by the PBC to track the progress made in the
implementation of the PBC review’s recommendations.
The evolution of the PBC in the coming years
will greatly influence the shape and direction that
peace and stability take in many post-conflict
countries. Let us provide it with the necessary tools for
the success of that undertaking.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Ambassador Wittig for presenting the
annual report (S/2011/41) of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I appreciate the effective activities
carried out by the PBC under his leadership. I also
welcome the statement delivered by Ambassador

17

S/PV.6503

Gasana, Chairman of the PBC. I should like to make
four brief points.
First, the United Nations should formulate a
comprehensive, coordinated and integrated strategy for
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
United Nations peacekeeping operations can contribute
to the early stages of recovery, development and
reconstruction. China supports the PBC playing a full
role in helping post-conflict countries in the areas of
peace, reconstruction, financing and coordinating
international
assistance.
Peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding operations should both include an exit
strategy to encourage post-conflict countries to stand
on their own at an early date.
Secondly, the countries concerned bear the
primary responsibility for peacebuilding. While
formulating peacebuilding strategies, the PBC should
respect the sovereignty and independence of the
countries concerned. China believes that, in providing
assistance to post-conflict countries, the international
community should give priority to national capacitybuilding, youth employment and economic and social
development.

18

Thirdly, the United Nations and the relevant
international organizations should strengthen their
cooperation in the area of peacebuilding and use their
respective advantages. We support close cooperation
between the PBC, the Security Council, other major
organs of the United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions, other international agencies and regional
organizations. China welcomes the PBC’s provision of
useful advice to the Security Council.
Fourthly, China supports continued efforts to
improve the working methods of the PBC. We hope
that the Commission will continue to improve its
efficiency and focus on results in the relevant activities
on the ground in the countries concerned.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

11-27495
