14

General AeaePlhly-Sixth Session

with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of
annex XI of the Treaty of Peace with Italy. 15
370th plenary meeting,
1 Febtuary 1952.

517 (VI). Repatriation of Greek children
The General Assembly,
Viewing with concern the reports of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of
Red Cross Societies 16 and of the Secretary-General,17
and in particular the fact that, with the exception of
Yugoslavia, none of the countries harbouring Greek
children has yet taken the necessary steps to enable
those children to return to their homes, as provided for
in resolution 193 C (III) of 27 November 1948 and the
subsequent resolutions 18 of the General Assembly on
the matter,
Recognizing that the United Nations must continue
its efforts, from a humanitarian point of view, to enable the Greek children to return to their homes,
Noting the report19 of the Standing Committee on
the Repatriation of Greek Children that, of the governments invited to send representatives to enter into consultations with the Standing Committee on the problem
during the present session of the General Assembly,
only one has actually participated in the consultations,
1. Thanks the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies, the Stand'"See Treaty Series, Treaties and international agreements
registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the
United Nations, volume 49, 1950, I, No. 747, pp. 214-215.
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, documents A/1848 and A/1932.
"Ibid., document A/1933.
11
Resolutions 288 B (IV) and 382 C (V).
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/ AC.53/L.44.

ing Committee on the Repatriation of Greek Children
and the Secretary-General for their efforts to give
effect to General Assembly resolutions 193 C (III),
288 B (IV) and 382 C (V);
2. N ates with satisfaction that a further group of
Grtek children has been repatriated from Yugoslavia;
3. Expresses the hope that it will be possible to
make rapid progress with the repatriation of the Greek
children in Czechoslovakia ;
4. Deeply regrets that all the other States harbouring Greek children have declined to enter into consultations with the Standing Committee with a view to giving effect to the resolutions of the General Assembly
on the matter;
5. Considers that the technical and other grounds
advanced by those countries harbouring Greek children
which have declined to co-operate fully in the solution
of the problem are not insurmountable or such as to
constitute a reason for further delay in permitting the
return of children in respect of whom requests for repatriation have been submitted and verified by the international Red Cross organizations;
6. Urges all countries harbouring Greek children to
take steps to facilitate the early return of the children
to their homes;
7. Decides to continue the Standing Committee
with the terms of reference previously laid down;
8. Requests the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies to continue their work for this humanitarian purpose;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report from
time to time to Member States on the progress made
in the implementation of the present resolution, and
requests the international Red Cross organizations and
the Secretary-General to submit reports on the progress
achieved before the seventh regular session of the
General Assembly is convened.
371st plenary meetmg,
2 February 1952.
