UNITED NATIONS

SECURI.TY

COUNCIL

-OFFICIAL

-RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2131st

MEETING:

NEW

19 MARCH

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 131) ,,...................,.................
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . ..5.......*..........................
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13115) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........

1
1

1

S/PV.213 1

NOTE
Symbolsof United Nations documentsare composedof capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a sym’+olindicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplementsof the Oflctal Recordsof the Security Council.The date of the
document indicatesthe supplementin which it appearsor in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordancewith a system
adopted in 1964,are published in yearly volumes of ResolutionsandDecisionsof the
Securfty Counctl.The new system,which has beenapplied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965,becamefully operative on that date.

t

2131st.MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 19 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2131)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/131 15)

sia), Mr. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Martynenko (Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic). Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam), Mr. AIHaddad (Ye-men) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the
places reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea and Romania, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right ta vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of proceduQe.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thiounn’Prasith
(Democratic Kampuchea) and Mr. Marinescu (Romania)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to draw attention to the
revised text [S/IJZ7l/Rev.
Z} of the draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13115)
1, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon,
Mauritania,
Pakistan,
Qatar, Senegal, Somalia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Viet Nam, Yemen
and Yugoslavia, as well as the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. BIum (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council table and Mr. Abde1 Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Florin (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Hollai (Hungary),
Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia), Mr. Shemirani (Iran), Mr. Bafi
(Iraq), Mr. Tuhi (Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania),
Mr. Naik (Pakistan), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Sahloul (Sudan),
Mr. EI-Chouj? (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Mestiri (Tuni-

4. Mr. ALGARD
(Norway): This debate on an imuortant aspect of the Middle East conflict is taking place-at a
time of dramatic and promising developments. We are,
hopefully, witnessing the beginning of an era of peace for
the countries and peoples of the Middle East.
5. The Norwegian Government would like to commend
President Carter for his persistent and dedicated efforts
towards bringing peace to the Middle East. The agreement reached represents a milestone in the process that
was initiated by President Sadat’s bold visit to Jerusalem
and led to the Camp David agreements containing a
framework
for peace in the Middle East. During President Carter’s negotiations at Cairo and Jerusalem, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin demonstrated their
willingness to deal decisively and concretely with the
challenges to peace.
6. The Norwegian
Government considers the peace
treaty between Egypt and Israel as the essential first step
in the continuing efforts to bring about a comprehensive
peace settlement to the whole area.
7. In the end, only a settlement which recognizes Israel’s
right to exist within secure and recognized boundaries
and the legitimate national rights of the Palestinians can
bring. a just and lasting peace. to the. Middle East.
We think that the provisions’and objectives of the Camp

David agreements, if carefully implemented and faithfully pursued, could initiate a process towards a comprehensive settlement in the region. We hope that all parties
to the conflict will seize this historic opportunity and
participate in the realization of this goal.

involved in the question, in particular the principal protagonist, the Palestinian people.
13. I should like to make absolutely clear here-as so
many previous speakers have stressed-that it is essential,
if not indispensable, that any plan of action aimed at
resolving the situation in the Middle East take account a
certain number of fundamental principles, which I shall
venture to recall.

8. The Council has on several occasions considered the
situation in the occupied territories. As a result of the
intensive negotiations over the last few months and days,
we hope that the peoples of the occupied territories can
look forward to a new future. In the meantime, the occupied territories must be subject to the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.’

14. First, the question of Palestine is at the very heart of
the Middle East problem and, consequently, it is impossible to contemplate any solution without taking account of
the legitimate interests ofthe Palestinian people. In other
words, there can be no lasting settlement in the Middle
East until the fundamental aspirations of the Palestinian
people have been satisfied.

9. We are now at a crucial stage in the Middle East
conflict. My Government hopes that all parties concerned
will actively contribute to the peace process and refrain
from any steps that might complicate the prospects for a
just and lasting peace. We therefore encourage the Council to formulate its decision under the item under consideration in a way consistent with this overriding concern.

15. Secondly, the realization of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to return home and to enjoy selfdetermination, independence and national sovereignty
will contribute to the settlement of the Middle East crisis.
Indeed, the Palestinian people has been uprooted from its
ancestral land and has constantly claimed a homeland-a
right which is universally acknowledged as belonging to
all peoples. How then, if we consider the concatenation of
events over the last few years, can we fail to understand
that this people, which has been dispersed to the four
comers of the. world, should continue to refuse obstinately the mantle of refugee with which people have
attempted to clothe it? Why should we refuse to understand its aspirations to live within a State inasmuch as it
has already become familiar with living in that kind of
organized political entity? How long will the Organization, being devoted to peace and justice as it is, continue
to permit that people to live herfed into camps, thus
swelling the nuniber of those called by Frantz Fanon The

10. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretarionfromFrench):
Once again the Security Council has met to re-examine
the complex affair of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories. This re-examination, which meets the wishes
of the 42 Islamic States Members of the United Nations,
demonstrates firstly and undoubtedly that the concern of
the international community is to see the Palestinians
finally fully enjoying their inalienable rights-rights
which have so often been recognized and reaffirmed in
resolutions of many bodies of the Organization. This
re-examination also reflects-if there is still a need for
this-the great importance which the Organization has
for more than 30 years accorded to the search for a just
solution of this thorny problem, which, in my delegation’s
view, remains one of the most distressing tragedies of the
twentieth century. Finally, this debate is, because of the
solemn character of the question, a further opportunity to
draw the ,attention of international public opinion to this
problem, which has exploded into bloodshed in the form
of four wars.

Wretched of the Earth?2

16. Thirdly, the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people, on an equal footing with all other parties is indispensable for all efforts, deliberations and conferences on
the Middle East undertaken under the auspices of the
United Nations.
I

11. As everyone will recall, the question of Palestine is a
problem which has concerned the Organization since
1947, practically since its creation. The Organization has
spared no effort to help in finding a solution to the
problem, and the Gabonese delegation, which has always
supported and whole-heartedly supports these initiatives
of the United Nations, can only welcome the Organization’s efforts; but it cannot but regret,also the factfhat the
situation is still in a deadlock because of the failure to
apply the relevant resolutions of the Organization.

..,

17. Fourthly, the withdra,wal by Israel from all Arab
territories occupied since 1967 is a prerequisite which
reaffirms the cardinal principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force, and consequently the
obligation which flows therefrom is for Israel to evacuate
all territory occupied by such means. I should like, in this
regard, to recall .that, by’ resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967, the Security Council consecrated “the
inadmissibility ,of the acquisition of territory by war” and
balled, inter alia, for the “withdrawal ofIsraeli armed
forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict”. It
is highly regrettable that Israel has not seen fit to modify
its policy with regard to.settlements in the occupied Arab
territories following the.sixday war.

12. The problem of the Middle East still remains unresolved, inasmuch as it would appear that a kind of conversation between deaf persons has begun between the
protagonists, thus accentuating the instability of the
situation in the region, with the constant risk of igniting
the powder keg at any time, as long as one of the parties to
the conflict refuses to accept the participation of all those
’ United

Nations,

Treury

.,.

18. Fifthly, there is recognition of the right of all States
of the area to exist as independent States within secure

Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

‘New

2

York,

Grove

Press, Inc., 1966.

and recognized boundaries. In this regard, we cbntingc@.
believe that recognition of the rights of a people is som.ee
thing which cannot be brought about by the violation of
or the failure to respect the rights of others. Consequently, in the search for a:solution to this problem, the
Security Council must always base itself on the principles
of the Charter and all the relevant resolutions of the
Organization, particularly’i3ouncil
resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).

great Powers, considerable strategic importance, and
consequently everything that happens there is seen as
having a direct bearing on the precarious balance of
forces in the world. This conduct also constitutes a serious
obstacle on the winding road leading to general peace in
the Middle East.
23. In order to put an end to this persistent state of
belligerency between the protagonists, a state which dangerously threatens peace in the world, the Security Council, the surest guardian of international peace and security, must rise to its responsibilities. It should above all
reaffirm the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
Organization and of its relevant resolutions on the problem of the Middle East. In so doing, it would oppose any
consecrating of the policy of fait accompli. The real
problem which we have to solve is that of knowing
whether today the United Nations is going to continue to
accept this policy of fait accompli and whether, after
having recognized that the Palestinian people has the
-most inalienable rights, it is going to continue to tolerate
the policy which continues to deprive that people of its
homeland and allow them to live in a state of shameful
deprivation.

19. We believe that only firm respect for these principles
and the implementation of the decisions and recommendations of the Organization will make it possible to guarantee to all the peoples of the Middle East, without any
exception, the opportunity.to
exercise their inalienable
right to self-determination,national
independence and to
live in peace with their neighbours within secure and
recognized boundaries. In this regard, paragraph 1 (ii) of
resolution 242 (1967) is quite clear. It states:
“Termination
of all claims or states of belligerency
and respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of every State in the area and their right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries free from
threats or acts of force”.

24. Furthermore,
the Council should contemplate
appropriate measures likely to put an end to this policy of
‘occupation of foreign territory which generates tension
and crises. The Council must, finally, redress the injustices’ which have been committed by declaring null and
‘void all measures taken in violation of international law,
the relevant provisions
of the Charter and its own
resoiutions.

20. All these principles whikh I have just enumeratedare
found in the statement of El Hadj Omar Bongo, President
of the Gabonese Republic, which he made in the General
Assembly on 14 October 1977. He said:
“However,
we also feel that the roa-d to such peace
lies through unequivocal recognition of the right of the
Palestinians to possess a country and through the withdrawal of the Israelis from the Arab lands they have
occupied since 1967, as well through strict application
by the belligerents of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) to which they have subscribed”.’

25. ‘The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the represen‘dative of Mauritania. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
126. Mr. KANE
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, the period that you have chosen
for ‘this meeting of the Security Council, devoted to the
situation in the Arab territories occupied by Israel, comes
at an ideal time because this is a crucial period in the
history of the Middle East. Indeed, the comings and
goings of diplomats during the last few days with respect
to the Middle East have aroused, because of their scope
and level, certain hopes in some quarters, but at the same
time they have revealed major contradictions which exist
in the area, and those contradictions are due to the obstinacy, intransigence and arrogance of the Zionist entity.

21. After certain bold initiatives, with which we are all
familiar, in the attempt to search for a solution to this
problem, one might reasonably have thought that we
were nearing the end of thatpolicy of gradually encroaching on the occupied Arab territories. The gloomy but
detailed picture sketched for us by the representative of
Senegal in his capacity as Chairman of the Conference of
Islamic Countries [ZI26th~meeting] and the gloomy factual analysis presented to us by the representative of Jordan do not suggest that we’are witnessing the dawn of a
peaceful future. On the con&y,
it would seem to emerge
from what we have heard here that this policy of gradual
encroachment by Israel has not been modified in the
slightest, either with regard ‘to the settlements or with
regard to the Holy City of gerusaiem.
,. ‘. 1
22. My delegation believes that the persistence of such
conduct casts a dark shadow over international relations
and constitutes a flagrant ‘&eat to international peace
and security, not only in the area but also throughout the
world, because we must always bear in mind that the
Middle East region has, undeniably, in the eyes of the
:..: :
.,.I
’ Oflcial
Records of the Generizl Assembly,
Plenary Meetings, 34th meeting,
para.!
18.

Thirty-second

27. It is because this situation could degenerate into a
conflict with incalculable consequences fo; mankind that
the United Nations has, for more than a generation, with
all its talents, skills and energies, considered the Middle
East problem as one of its most important and immediate preoccupations.
But in spite of the efforts which
have been made over the past 30 years and more, the
situation in the Middle East arouses pessimism much
more than optimism, because the contradictions
today
have reached a particularly dangerousthreshold
owing to
the escalation of violence in the past few days in occupied
Arab Palestine. And the escalation of terror comes at a
time when the Israeli Government has publicly pro-

Session,

.s:. .

3

eiaimed that it is prepared to make concessions so that
parties to the conflict can reach a just arid lasting peace.
Today, even more than yesterday, houses of Palestinians
have been destroyed, and young Palestinians are pursued,
hunted down and killed in cold blood. That attitude is
neither new nor surprising; it has long been a constant
feature of the Zionist policy for more than a generation.
At every international juncture the Israeli Government
has used its “stick and carrot” policy.

Arab territories are only the consequence of the solidarity
of the Arab peoples with the Palestinian people in their
legitimate struggle to recover their most sacred rights.
That is part of a simple, logical and obvious pattern.
35. How, in the circumstances, can we agree on a just
and lasting peace if we disregard the rights of the Palestinians, if we continue to put in parentheses the destiny of
an entire people?

28. This period, which is full of uncertainty and is a
turning-point in the Middle East in the struggle of the
Palestinian people, is one in which the Security Council is
once again called upon to reach decisions which, I am
convinced, will be a landmark in the Organization’s
history.

36. Certainly, imperialist circles and their natural ally,
the State of Israel, have always sought a solution that
would preserve their interests in the area. It has been with
that thought in mind that more and more Jewish settlements have been established in occupied Arab territories,
houses belonging to Palestinians have been bombed and
destroyed, young Palestinians have been pursued and
hunted down, and Israel’s role as the policeman of imperialism has become ever clearer; intense and widespread
publicity on an unprecedented scale has been orchestrated in the area to divide the Arab nation, and a psychological war cleverly maintained has been imposed upon
the Palestinians to force them to abandon their struggle
and live in a state of resignation and utter poverty. The
recent expropriation measures and killings have been
used by Israel as part of its over-all strategy. On 15 March,
two young Palestinians were killed in cold blood, simply
because they dared to shout their disapproval, as would
anyone jealous of his dignity and independence.

29. I am particularly convinced of this because you,.
Mr. President, are a son of the third world and the African
continent, presiding over the Security Council for this
month. Everyone recalls the tragedy of your great country,
Nigeria, during a crucial period in the history of the liberation of the African continent. The Nigerian people’s genius,
determination and willingness to sacrifice and the cohesiveness of the African continent were needed to defeat the
forces which wished to weaken Nigeria in order the better
to dominate Africa.
30. That same policy of division, domination and
exploitation has been pursued for more than a generation
in the Middle East, with all its attendant suffering, grief
and misfortune.

37. The policy of the Zionists in the area is so clear that
there is no ne,ed to sound out the Israeli Government to
establish their true intentions. Israel’s true intentions are
clear in substance,*simple in form, and are the intentions
of all those who have ever wished to dominate the
world-to sow terror and despair among peoples, empty
the territories and then occupy them.

31. So vou are nresidinp. over the Council as it considers
a problem which is in every way similar to one that
you-and we-have experienced. That is why it is our
fond hope that the Security Council will, at the conclusion
of its work, reach positive results of benefit to the
Organization.

38. Palestine has not escaped that co\nstant policy of the
dominators and colonialists. In Palestine, as well as elsewhere in the world, notably in Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa, the form of colonization, domination and
exploitation is one and indivisible.

32. I said a moment ago that the Security Council was
meeting at a crucial time for the United Nations and the
Middle East. Indeed, since the occupation of Palestine
and certain Arab territories, the path to peace has never
been so intensely exploited. In the present situation,
which is marked by hope and a prudence inspired by all
the disappointment
of the past few years, the ‘great
unknown today is what will happen to the Palestinian
people. How often have we imagined compromises without successand solutions without any future to the problem of the Middle East.

39. The new outbreaks of violence in recent times in
Palestine, Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa have
taken place at a time when the alliances formerly made
with imperialism are breaking down, peoples which are
tired with bowing to domination and exploitation are
rebelling, and the Powers which have engaged in exploitation find themselves in a difficult international economic
situation.

33. Those who in good faith or in self-interest have built
up those solutions have simply forgotten that the problem
of the Middle East has its origin in the question of Palestine. It is because Arab Palestine has been occupied by
Zionism, it is because millions of men, women and children have been obliged to leave their ancestral homes, it is
because, in a word, the Palestinian people have been
victims of the most outrageous injustice of our times that
the Arab peoples have been mobilized to meet the challenge thrown at them by the occupying Zionist forces.

40. In this situation, the Zionists, the South African
racists and the Rhodes&is can only make a tactical
retreat, readjust their positions and adapt to the new
situation.
41. The violence being brought to bear against the
Palestinian and Lebanese peoples, the recent bombings of /I
Angola, Mozambique
and Zambia by the racists in’
Rhodesia and South Africa, and the killing of the Namibian and South African peoples are all aimed at intimidating the freedom fighters in Palestine and southern
Africa.

34. The wars that have followed since the tragedy of the
Palestinian people and the occupation by Israel of other
4

I

.’

50. Southern Africa and Palestine have today become
concentration camps where blacks and Arabs are treated
like beasts of burden, humiliated and exploited, forced to
choose between resignation, complete destitution or
extermination.

42. At the same time, together with that hardening of
positions in the occupied territories and the front-line
countries, a policy of so-called dialogue and openness
towards certain countries has been pursued with great
wiliness. In spite of this attempt to roll back the course of
history, the friends of Palestine, Namibia, South Africa
and Zimbabwe have become more numerous. That support for the freedom fighters has increased, and thanks to
the determination, courage and spirit of sacrifice of the
Palestinian people and the peoples of southern Africa,
every day sees new victories.

51. If the Security Council, faced with such a situationwhich demeans not only blacks and Arabs but human
beings everywhere-does not take a decision in keeping
with the dictates of justice and law, the African and Arab
peoples will have no choice but to resort to violence.

43. If the situation in Palestine and certain countries in
southern Africa has not been successfully resolved over
the past 30 years, it is because the South African and
Zionist racists have always applied a policy of divide and
rule in the Arab world, on the one hand, and in Africa, on
the other, so as to strengthen their domination. That
domination is something that they are trying to perpetuate, with the support of imperialism in all areas.

52. I am convinced that the Council will live up to its
historic responsibility in the present crucial international
situation. I am sure that it will bring its full weight to bear
to ensure that the initiatives for peace under way in the
region are successful. Need we once again emphasize that
this peace can be just and lasting only if it is comprehensive and takes into account above all the higher interests
of the Palestinian peopte.

44. The divisions within Africa and within the Arab
world which have long served the cause of the Powers that
have dominated and exploited us-divisions that have
run counter to our most vital interests-are, fortunately,
being overcome little by little.

53. If the Council reaches such a solution, the world will
be spared a confrontation which could only be fatal for
the human race. The genius of man will have triumphed
once again, because he wili have overcome passion,
hatred and ruinous quarrels and established an atmosunderstanding
and goodphere of co-operation,
the sole expression of genuine
neighbourliness:
civilization, beneficial for society as a whole.

45. To revert to the Middle East, the struggle of the
Palestinian people is no longer a struggle for the liberation of Palestine alone-as some would have wished. The
struggle being waged by the Palestinian people goes
beyond the framework of Palestine; it is a much wider and
deeper struggle. The victory or defeat of the Palestinian
people is first and foremost the victory or defeat of the
Arab nation as a whole; it is also the victory or defeat of
freedom and dignity, wherever they are being violated in
the world.

54. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
55. Mr.

MESTIRI

(Tunisia)

(interpreration‘ from
questions on the Security Council’s agenda, we are happy indeed, Mr. President,
to see you presiding over its work. We are certain that
your great talent and your long experience in the struggle
for, justice and peace will be particularly useful in the
Council’s consideration of the situation in the occupied
Arab territories, a situation that is rightly of concern to
the international community as a whole. We wish also to
pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Bishara of
Kuwait, who presided over the Council last month with
his well-known competence and talent.
French): With so many important

46. Hence, we cannot speak of the victory of an Arab
country so long as the Palestinian people has not,regained
its most sacred and legitimate rights, just as we cannot
speak of peace so long as that peace does not have the
support of the Palestinian people as a whole.
47. Those who have taught,us that the most genuine
expression of democracy is the safeguarding of the freedom of every individual should realize that, until the
Palestinian people is able to exercise its right to selfdetermination, freedom and democracy everywhere will
be threatened.

56. The entire world is aware of the intolerable situation
that continues to prevail in the occupied Arab territories
and in the Holy City of Jerusalem. At the risk of repeating
ourselves we must emphasize the reasons for that
situation-namely,
that the Palestinians, reduced to the
status of refugees for decades now, have been denied their
most fundamental and legitimate rights. Since the necessary redressing of that flagrant injustice is at the heart of
any solution to the Middle East problem, it is clear that
half-measures are not enough to ensure respect for the
aspirations of the Palestinian people and the other Arab
countries whose territories have been occupied by Israel.

48. Thus, the situation in Palestine and in southern
Africa is a challenge to the Organization, because it constitutes a threat which can at any moment jeopardize the
fragile balance on which international security rests.
49. We have for a lonn time been denouncing here and
elsewhere the injustice-being inflicted on the-people of
Palestine, Zimbabwe, Namibia and southern Africa. It is
paradoxical, indeed inadmissible, that in the world in
which we are living today, oniy Africa and the Arab
world-I repeat: only Africa and the Arab world-are
subjected to colonization, exploitation and racism: the
most virulent and abject forms of domination ever
known.

57. We regretted to hear the representative of Israel
repeatedly describe the debate in the Security Council as a
“barren ritual”; that can hardly reassure us about his
Government’s intentions or its approach to the problem.
5

ported to alter the legal status of Jerusalem were invalid,
and it urgently called upon Israel torescind those measures. In its resolution 271 (1969) and 298 (1971), the
Council condemned Israel ‘for having failed to comply
with those resolutions and once again issued a very clear
warning to it. Unfortunately, Israel has never paid any
attention to those resolutions, and they have therefore
remained dead letters.

Similarly, the representative of Israel stated that “the
current debate has been deliberately staged at this time
with a view to impeding the ongoing peace efforts in the
Middle East” [2124th meeting, para. 114. We all know
very well that nothing could impede peace more than the
constant policy of his Government and its systematic
practices, which are clearly part of an over-all plan to
change the physical nature of the occupied Arab territories. Each day, Palestinians are driven from their homes
and their lands are confiscated to make room for Jewish
settlements; water resources arediverted in order to crush
a population that is already on the brink of despair, a
Holy City which has always been regarded as one of the
most precious heritages of mankind is annexed, with
complete contempt for the Charter of the United Nations,
human rights and the most elementary rules of international morality.

63. The situation in the other occupied Arab territories
is no less alarming. There, Israeli settler,policy has been
developing unremittingly
since 1967. It is a relentless
policy, for its constant aim -is to modify the legal status
and the geographical and demographic composition of
the territories. There also new settlements have arisen,
and new lands, among the most fertile, have been expropriated unlawfully; water resources have been diverted,
Palestinians have been driven from their lands or arbitrarily arrested in spite of the fact that the Security Council and the General Assembly have adopted many
resolutions on the subject, the most recent of which,
General Assembly resolution 33/l 13 B, calls upon Israel
“to comply strictly with its international obligations
in accordance with the principles of international law
and the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War”

58. Thus, the situation has obviously deteriorated; it has
assumed alarming proportipns, justifying this series of
meetings of the Security Council and requiring action by
the Council.
59. I shall not take the time to list the deliberate actions
of the Israeli Government and the suffering being cxperienced every day by the Palestinians. These facts have
been brought to the.attention of members of the Security
Council by various sources, particularly the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories. Moreover, the representative of Jordan and the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization-the
sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people-have proved, with facts
and figures, the seriousness and scope of the policy of the
occupier. Their well-documented statements painted a
complete picture of the present situation, and it is a
gloomy picture indeed, revealing intentions and designs
that are dangerous for the region, in the short as well as
the long term.

and
“to desist forthwith from taking any action which
would result in changing the legal status, geographical
nature or demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem*’ [Cenera1 Assembly resolution 33(113B].
64. The Israeli Government’s response to these intemational legal instruments has been no better. The fourth
Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949,’ to which the
State of Israel is a party, is anenlighteningexample
in this
connexion. In particular, article 49 stipulates that “the
occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies”. In
many resolutions the Generalassembly has-declared that
the Geneva Convention applies to the occupied Arab
territories.

60. But we should like to observe that that policy goes
even beyond those considerations, for it affects not only
the fate of an entire people, but also something that is
regarded as most sacred and profound by hundreds of
millions of Moslems and Christians: their faith and their
spiritual heritage.

65. Furthermore. cases of ill-treatment
and torture
inflicted by the occupying authorities on Palestinian political prisoners have become increasingly frequent. The
information in chapterV1 ‘of the report of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories’ supports certain very definite conclusions in this
connexion. Even more recently, articles in the press based
on official documents of the United States State Department confirm that such cases of torture and inhuman
treatment have indeed taken place in the occupied territories. All of this is part of asinister pattern of numerous
acts contrary to the. United Nations Charter and the
principles of international law.
5
66. It would be profoundly regrettable and a grave matter if the Security Council were again to fail to put an end

61. For that reason, the situation in Jerusalem has
acquired increased importance and urgency. The historic
and religious nature of the Holy City is threat.ened with
obliteration, with total di-sappearance, because of the
constant desecration of the Islamic holy places-and
these places could even be demolished-for
the benefit of
frenzied Judaization and the concentration of new Israeli
colonies designed to isolate the Arab citizens, whether
Christian or Moslem, and to drive them from their city.
62. And yet the Security Council has adopted many
resolutions banning any measure to annex Jerusalem or
change its status. In its resolutions 252 (1968) arid 267
(1969), the Security Council decided that all legislative
and administrative measures taken by Israel which pur-

‘A/33/356.

6

to these actions. It IS hieh time that the Council to&
concrete and effective at&n to put an-end to this policy of
faits accomplis and these actions, which threaten intemaGonal peace and security. In this connexion the President
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, in a letter to the President of the Security CounciI, quite rightly pointed out
that

principles for a just ana lasting settlement in the Middle
East and ways and means of bringing it about provide for
the clear-&t obligation of Israel to withdraw from all the
Arab territories it occupies.
72. Of course, the tension persisting in the Middle East,
which at any moment might lead to an aggravation of the
conflict, can be explained by the prolonged occupation of
the Arab territories and the refusal to recognize the aspirations of the Palestinian people and its legitimate right to
self-determination.
But the situation in the region can
only deteriorate following the actions and measures taken
by the Israeli authorities in these territories.

“the need for concrete action by the Security Council
is becoming increasingly urgent. It is especially so in
view of the recent illegal measures taken by the Israeli
Government for the establishment of Jewish settIements in the occupied Arab territories, measures which
are scarcely conducive to a climate favouring the search
for a peaceful solution in the region” [S/13I641.

73. Romania has always considered acts and measures
aimed at modifying the status of the occupied Arab territories as’illegal, because in our view neither Israel nor any
other party has the right to change the situation in these
territories by force.

67. There is no need here to stress that the question of
Palestine lies at the heart of the problem of the Middle
East. Fulfilment of the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people and the withdrawal of Israel from all
occupied Arab territories is the only way of restoring
peace and security. We all want peace, and the Palestinian
people more than anyone-real peace, a peace that would
restore their national rights and their right to live as a free
people with all the peoples of the area.

74. The creation and increase of settlements, the expropriation of land and the refusal to permit refugees to
return to the occupied territories are obviously incompatible with obligations flowing from the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Those measuies
are. entirely contrary to the provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilians in Time
of War. In its consensus declaration of November 1976
[1969rh meeting], the Security Council clearly reaffirmed
that the provisions of that Convention are applicable to
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967 and
called upon Israel to refrain from any measure liable to
change the demographic composition or the geographical
character of these territories. Romania, as a member of
the Council at the time, gave its whole-hearted support to
that consensus declaration in the conviction that such
measures were incompatible with the objective of bringing about lasting peace in the Middle East.

68. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Romania. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
69.

Mr. MARINESCU
(Romania) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, permit me to extend my sincere

gratitude to you and to the other members of the Security
Council for having given ye the opportunity to address
the Council on the important item it is considering. It is a
particular pleasure for me to see you, Sir, presiding over
this meeeting of the Council, which is devoted to protecting legality and justice and promoting peace and security
in the Middle East. Your devotion to the cause of the
equality of peoples and respect for the dignity of the
human person on the great African continent and elsewhere shows that the presidency of the Council for this
month is in the best possible hands. It is also a great
pleasure for me to take this opportunity to mention, the
excellent relations of co-operation and sincere friendship
existing between your country and mine.

75. :We believe that the Israeli authorities must also
respect the resolutions of the United Nations prohibiting
any modification of the status of the city of Jerusalem.
The,decision to transfer governmental departments to the
occupied Arab part of Jerusalem cannot be tolerated,
because it conflicts with Security Council resolution 242
(1967) and with the provisions of other United Nations
resolutions on Jerusalem. The Israeli authorities’ intention of getting diplomatic missions transferred to Jerusalem might produce the same result.

70. This is not the first tiine that the Security Council
has been faced with an examination of the situation in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel following the I967
war, and if the Council finds itself obliged once again to
deal with this grave problem it is because the situation
prevailing in these territories,, far from having improved,
has in fact continued to be a subject of the most serious
concern.

76. In view of their illegal character, the continuance by
Israel of these actions in the occupied territories is liable
to aggravate the serious problems of the region and to
give rise to further complications and contradictions.
They can only lead to the creation of new obstacles to a
political settlement of all the problems of the Middle East
and can only have the worst effect on peace and security in
that area.

71. As we know very well, pursuant to the Charter of the
United Nations grid the generally recognized norms of
international law, the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible, and all territories thus occupied must be
restored to the peoples to which they legally belong. This
is precisely the case with the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967. The resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council that have laid down the fundamental

77. In our view, the major interests ofthe establishment
of peace in the Middle East and the creation among all
States and peoples of the area of new relitions of friendly
co-operation, mutual respect and good-neighbourliness
call for a reconsideration by Israel of its position and the
7

abandonment of all illegal measures and actions. That is
the only way of bringing about a climate of confidence
and, consequently, an over-all, just and lasting settlement
in the region, with the participation of all the parties
concerned.

pate. Since the Palestinian problem is one of the cardinal
elements, the touchstone, even, of the future edifice of
peace in the region, it is naturally indispensablefor the
Palestinian people, through its legitimate, authentic and
recognized representative,the PalestineLiberation Organization, to take part in negotiations designedto find a just
solution to this problem. Within this context, the participation of the Palestinian people in negotiations is essential for the establishment in the Middle East of a climate
of peace and for ensuring the territorial integrity, independence, sovereignty, security and tranquillity of all the
States in that part of the world.

78. In expressing its views on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, the Romanian delegation, at the
same time, believes that respect for the status of those
territories should certainly not become an end in itself.
Foreign occupation, carried out in any conditions whatsoever, is none the less of itself a defacio situation which is
illegal, unjust and contrary to fundamental principles of
the Charter. That is why we are more than ever convinced
that the attainment of an over-all settlement of the Middle
East conflict should remain the central objective of the
United Nations in the area. Such a settlement should lead
to the restoration of legality through the withdrawal
of
Israel and the restoration of the occupied territories to the
peoples to which they rightly belong.

83. In the view of the Romanian delegation, at the present time it is more necessary than ever to continue and
intensify the efforts aimed at bringing about an over-all
political solution to the Middle East problems and to
work for the creation of favourable conditions for the
participation of all interested parties in peace negotiations. In this, we attach particular importance to the
question of the resumption of the Geneva Conference or
the convening of a new international meeting which
would take place with the participation of all interested
parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Such a conference should be held under the aegis and with
the active participation of the United Nations.

79. At the same time, we consider the solution to the
problem of the Palestinian people-the
exercise of its
inalienable right to selfdetermination,
the creation of its
national State-as an essential prerequisite for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the area. Such a
solution would be in the interest of the independence,
security and tranquillity of all States of the area, including
Israel, which should understand that its own security and
tranquillity are inseparably bound up with recognition of
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to live
in total freedom in its own independent State.

84. We hope that this debate in the Council will be
followed by other sustained and constructive efforts for
the purpose of achieving, without further delay, substantial progress towards a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East problems.

80. I should like to recall that Romania has always
demonstrated constant concern for a solution of conflicts
and states of tension throughout the world exclusively by
political means. On the basis of this position of principle
we have constantly favoured a peaceful, negotiated settlement of the Middle East problems as the only genuine
approach to the establishment of peace in the. area; Ever
since the outbreak of war in 1967, my country has
believed that the only means of settling the particularly
complex problems of the Middle East lay not in the
continuation of armed conflict, but rather innegotiations
among the parties directly concerned. In this context,
Romania has always favoured a comprehensive solution
to the problems of the area on the basis of three fundamental elements: Israel’s withdrawal from the Arab territories occupied following the 1967 war; solution of the
problem of the Palestinian people by the recognition of its
right to self-determination,
including its legitimate right
to establish its own independent State; and theensuring of
the independence and territorial integrity of all States in
the Middle East.

85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Kampuchea, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. THIOUNN PRASITH (Democratic Kampuchea) (intkpretation from French): First of all, I should
like to thank the Security Council for having been good
enough to allow me to take the floor to reiterate the
position of the Government of Democratic Kampuchea
with regard to the situation in the occupied Arab
territories.
87. The problem of Palestine and the Middle East is
certainly the issuewhich hastaken up most of the United
Nations time, both in the General Assembly and its committees and in the Security Council. Numerous resolutions have been adopted with a view to resolving this
problem created and maintained by Israel’s constant
aggressionagainst Palestine and the Arab countries.
88. It is clear that, if so far the problem has defied
solution and peace has not been achieved in the Middle
East, it is becauseIsrael not only is trampling underfoot
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
refusing to implement all the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, but is also
trying to find all the measuresit can to bring about the
final annexation of Palestinian territory and the Arab
territories it has occupied by force in defiance of the
unanimouscondemnation‘of the international community.

81. The events which have occurred over the last few
years have served to strengthen our conviction that only a
settlement of this kind canensure all States and peoples of
the region the peace, justice and security which they have
been seeking for so long.
82. As I have just said, an over-all solution to,theproblems of the Middle East can only be brought about by
negotiations p which all interested parties should partici8

89. Everyone knows that the people ofXampuchea and
the Government of Democratic Kampuchea have always
sympathized with the valiant and just struggle of the
Palestinian people and the other Arab peoples against the
constant aggression of Israel. With all our modest resources and capacities we will support that struggle until the
Palestinian people, together with the Palestine Liberation Organization as its only representative, is able to
exercise fully its legitimate and inalienable rights to return
to its home and exercise its right to decide its own future,
its right to independence and national sovereignty, and
particularly its right to create a Palestinian State on Palestinian soil. Similarly, the people of Kampuchea and the
Government
of Democratic
Kampuchea will always
support in the same way the just struggle of all the peoples
of other Arab countries to recover all their territory occupied by Israel since 1967.
90. We have always thought that the problem of the
Middle East could not be solved unless the Palestinian
problem, which lies at its root, is also solved. We continue
to believe that no just and lasting peace can be established
in the Middle East without the withdrawal of Israel from
all the Arab territories occupied since 1967.
91. The firm and constant solidarity of the people of
Kampuchea with the just struggle of the Palestinian
people and the other Arab peoples is based on the sacred
principles of non-alignment and the Charter of the United
Nations, scrupulous respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States, the right of
each people to decide on its own destiny and that of its
country, total opposition to the policy of force and fait
accompli and also respect for the principles governing
international relations. It is on the basis of those principles that Democratic Kampuchea, a founding member of
the non-aligned movement, has always given its firm
support to all relevant resolutions adopted by the conferences of non-aligned countries, particularly the summit
conferences at Belgrade and Colombo and the Foreign
Ministers’ Conference at Belgrade in July 1978 on the
problems of Palestine and the Middle East. However, the
solidarity of the people of Kampuchea with the Palestinian people and the other Arab peoples is particularly firm
and unwavering because they have in common both the
causes and objectives of their struggle.
92. The clear and detailed statements of the representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Jordan
and other Arab and non-aligned countries have strengthened our feeling that the struggle of the Palestinian
people and the other Arab peoples is one common struggle with that of the Kampuchean people against foreign
occupation and invasion. The crimes committed by Israel
in seeking to annihilate the Palestinian people and the
measures taken by Israel .with a view to legalizing, its
annexation of Jerusalem and other occupied Arab territories are similar to the crimes committed against the people
of Kampuchea and the measures, taken by the invaders
which are at present occupying Kampuchea. Just like the
Palestinian people, the people of Kampuchea are struggling to ensure and guarantee their own survival. That is
why the people of Kampuchea profoundly understand the

struggle of the Pa1estinia.n people and the other Arab
peoples and feels most deeply as a first-hand witness the
indescribable sufferings and pain of the Palestinian Arab
peoples, because we have endured andcontinue to endure
ourselves the same sufferings and distress caused by the
monstrous crimes of Israel’s twin in South-East Asia.
This indicates how much the people of Kampuchea are
fully identified with the struggle of the-Palestinian Arab
peoples in wishing to drive out the Israeli occupiers and
recover their independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It is the same struggle against annexationists
and devourers of territory.
93. My delegation will associate itself with all relevant
measures to be taken by the Security Council, with the
consent of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
other Arab countries, with a view to preventing Israel
from continuing its policy of aggression and annexation
and to permit the Palestinian people to exercise their
fundamental national rights and the Arab countries to
recover all their territory occupied by Israel since 1967.
94. However that may be, the people of Kampuchea and
the Government of Democratic Kampuchea remain convinced that by persevering in the heroic struggle and with
the firm support of all peoples which love peace, independence and justice, the struggle of the Palestinians and
other Arab peoples will triumph over Israeli aggression.
95. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel on whom I now call.
96. Mr. BLUM (Israel): This debate it appears is now
nearing its close. While our deliberations were taking
place, another serious and intensive effort was under way
in the Middle East. We have had before us at one and the
same time two very different approaches to issues of the
same conflict.
97. On the one hand, there has been dialogue, a willingness to listen, to recognize the rights and interests of both
sides and to search for mutual accommodation.
A
genuine effort was made by all the participants to establish the facts and identify the problems in order to arrive
at an agreed solution. No effort was spared by statesmen
of world stature, who bear enormous burdens and
responsibilities, to try to understand the views and concerns of the other side. And only having done that could
they achieve what has been achieved.
98. On the other hand, here in the Council, Israel’s
rights and interests have once again been ignored from the
outset. Too many members of the Council have been
prepared, if not eager, to accept uncritically the totally
distorted presentation of the situation by countries at war
with Israel and their allies. Predetermined positions were
brought into play and a helping hand given to an initiative
clearly designed to subvert the only constructive peace
process to date. The results will be commensurate with
these circumst&ces.
99. The world-I
dare say the whole world-followed
the first process intently. This debate went by unnoticed.
Anyone concerned for the future of the United Nations is
bound to ask why.

100. ‘For the Security Council to regain some of its
resonance, its deliberations must be conducted in an
atmosphere of moral, political and intellectual integrity.
They must also be conducted in accordance with the
Council’s rules of procedure. The Councii is not acourt of
justice. Still less are Council members prosecutors,
judges, jurors and witnesses rolled into one. However,
members will forgive me if1 observe that thatis how some
of them tend to act.
101. One has attempted to juggle the posture ofimpartial adjudication with his true role as the mouthpiece for
the Arab group in the Security Council. He has denied
that role on previous occasions and claimed that he comes
not as a partisan of Arabs but as a champion and partisan
of the Charter. As a self-styled partisan of the Charter he
should know that, as a party to a dispute, he shouid
refrain from voting on any matters connected with that
dispute-unless, of course, he can assure us that he is no
longer a party to the Arab-Israeli dispute. After all, Article
27(3) of the Charter provides that in decisions of the
Security Council under Chapter VI, “a party to a dispute
shall abstain from voting”.

view. The letter was indeed written on 1 March 1899 by
Yusuf Al-khalidi, an Arab notable from Jerusalem, who
in his time had been mayor of the city and also one of its
deputies in the Ottoman Parliament under Abdul Hamid.
It was addressed to the then Chief Rabbi of France,
Zadok Kahn, a colleague and supporter of Theodor
Herzl. As usual, the representative of Yemen was highly
selective in his quotation. In order not to spoil the picture so
meticulously contrived -by the combined efforts of more
than a dozen coilaborators in this debate-including,
of
all countries, Democratic Kampuchea-he withheld from
the Council the following passage from the same letter:
“Who can challenge the rights of the Jews on Palestine?
Good Lord, historically it is really your country!“’
107. I have mentioned in passing the appearance in this
debate of Democratic Kampuchea. We have indeed noted
this appearance with relief and satisfaction. We were
intrigued at the absence thus far of Democratic Kampuchea from this debate, for the star-studded galaxy of
participants from enlightened regimes would not have
been complete without it. I am tempted to comment that
this is a case of Pol Pot painting the kettle black.

102. The Government of Kuwait ‘spares no effort to
show that it does not lag behind-any other Arab Government in its active militancy against Israel. None the less, it
is their representative who sponsored a resolution for the
Council to adopt and who commended his product to
Council members, To say the very least, this procedure
throws moral and legal doubts on the whole process.

108. But those are minor matters. It is a far graver crime
against the integrity of the Council when the initiator of a
debate is.prepared to litter his statements with what I shall
again, out of courtesy to him, eall “gross inaccuracies”.
When the representative of Jordan is prepared to claim
time and again that Jerusalem today is 20 per cent of
Judaea and Samaria, while in fact it is less than 2 per
cent; when he is prepared to say that the mosques and
churches of Jerusalem are-closed, while everyone knows
that they are open; when he is prepared to say that the
inhabitants of Judaea and Samaria are cut off from their
Arab brethren, while they have enjoyed freedom of movement in all directions and are streaming-into
his own
country-across
the two bridges of the Jordan, which
have been open virtually since tl?e end of the six-day war
of 1967; when he is prepared to rewrite contemporary
history, like the circumstances in which his country
entered the six-day war or what the Arabs did in Palestine
in the days immediately after the adoption of the General
Assembly resolution of 29 November 1947, facts which
are common knowldege and not hidden away in obscure
archives-when all this is the case, what credibility can be
placed on anything he says? It.is a further affront to the
Council’s intelligence when other representatives claim to
accept the Jordanian representative’s so-called “facts”
and regurgitate them as .gospel.

103. Some of those States-and
particularly nonmembers of the Council-which
have volhnteered “evidence”, as it were, in this debate have been discomforted
when their credentials and bona jides have been challenged. They have protested vociferously against what
they call tactics designed to divert or mislead thecouncil.
Surely they must realize that, if this were a real court, their
testimony would not stand up or even be admitted. Most
of those who have participated in this debate. would.be
dismissed as hostile witnesses. And the mere repetition of
false allegations in parrot fashion .does not prove
anything.
/
.
104. I have referred to intellectual integrity. The latest
meetings of the Council have provided us with two further
examples of what I have in mind.
105. Last Friday [212&h meering], the representative of
the German Republic-which
so incongruously calls
itself “democratic” -made a long, petulant statement in
response to remarks I had made the: previous day 12127th
meeting]. He based his reply on the assertion that I had
claimed that his country is a country without a Jewish
population. I did not say that at all, and I suggest that he
check the record. I might add today that the presence of a
handful of Jews in East Germany, the frail remnants of
what had for centuries been a strong and vibrant cdmmunity, in no way detracts from what I had to say about-his
country.

109. We have been accused of not addressing ourselves
to the issues. But I submit that it is our detractors who
have not listened, and it is they who have avoided the
root-cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict, namely, the 30year-old Arab refusal to recognize Israel’s right to
exist. As I said at the beginning of this debate, it is they
who have been selective inchoosing the issues, the aspects
they preferred to have discussed and the timing of the
discussions. We addressed ourselves to all the issues at
some length on Tuesday, 13 March [222&h meeting) and in
our subsequent interventions.

106. Last Thursday [ibid.], the representative of Yemen
quoted at us a passage from a letter written in 1899 which,
presumably; he thought would win the Council over to his
,

5Quoted

10

in French

by the speaker.

c

110. We refuted the allegation that ludaea, Samaria
and the Gaza district are being depopmated by pointing
out that the population of those areas has risen by about
20 per cent, from 965,000 in 1967 to approximately
1,150,OOOtoday.
111. We refuted the allegation that the areas were being
“de-Arabized” by reminding the Council that Arab and
Moslem institutions, educational, cultural and religious,
as well as communal organizations, press and arts, not
only continue to function and to maintain their identity
but have in fact substantially grown since 1967.
112. We refuted the allegation that the inhabitants of
the areas are being exploited economically by detailing
some of the remarkable economic progress which has
been made since 1967.
113. We refuted the allegation that human rights have
been trampled on by underscoring many of the fundamental freedoms enjoyed, in some cases for the first time
ever, by local Arabs, freedoms unfortunately not enjoyed
by the citizens of the overwhelming majority of our
detractors in this debate.

.

use by tightly controllingthe drilling of new wells and the
exploitation of springs. Israel has maintained this policy,
as befits a nation that has made pioneering progress in the
field of water conservation and irrigation science and
whose experts are invited by many countries to help to
make the desert bloom.
118. No political rhetoric here can belie facts which are
clearly demonstrable on the ground. The area of irrigated
land cultivated by the Arab population of Judaea and
Samaria has increased by 160 per cent since 1967.
Improved drilling and pumping installations
have
assured the Arab inhabitants of a more stable and regulated flow of water, which has been a major contributing
factor to the spectacular agricultural progress of the past
decade. The supply of drinking water has tripled. In many
Arab villages no longer does water need to be handcarried from wells, for running water has now been
brought to households.
119. It is nonsense to suggest that Israel has “plundered” the water resources in Judaea and Samaria. Altogether the available water supply in those areas is about
100 million cubic metres a year. Israel’s annual requirements are in the region of 1,700 million cubic metres a
year. Indeed when shortfalls occur in Arab towns in the
areas in question, they are supplied from Israeli sources.

114. ,And we refuted the racist charge that Israel is
“Judaizing”
the Holy City of Jerusalem-unless
that
means that Israel has transformed the inaccessible, stagnant section of the city under Jordanian occupation
between 1948 and 1967-into an integral part of a vibrant
city, in which there is complete freedom of access and
komplete freedom of religion and worship for the believers
of ail faiths, where all Holy Places and historical sites are
maintained with respect, dignity and in good repair.

120. And if there has been an unwillingness to hear our
arguments, still more has there been a reluctance to consider them. When, for example, Israel is on the record
with a well-defined legal position with regard to the inapplicability of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949and I refer members, for example, to the statement to the
General Assembly made by my predecessor on 26 October 19776-then it is not enough for members to
reject it out of hand, as has been done in most cases here.
Differences of opinion are legitimate, and they deserve
serious consideration.

115. We explained in detail why Israel has better title
than do Jordan or Egypt in the territory of what was
Palestine, including the whole of Jerusalem. We
explained the right of Israelis to return to the areas in
question and to set up communities there. And we
explained why these communities are not an obstacle to
peace.

121. Suffice it for me to say here that the terms “occupying Power” and “occupied territory”, in fact have a we&
defined meaning in international law and refer to the
seizure by one Power of territory under the sovereignty
of another Power. Since, for the reasons I set out at great
length on 13 March, Jordan in no way constituted a
legitimate sovereign in, Judaea and Samaria, the fourth
Geneva Convention cannot be said to apply to Israel’s
present administration of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
district.

116. There is no need for me to repeat our positions-on
these issues, but. I should likcto say something about the
question of water, because that highly emotive issue has
been exploited in this debate.
117. First, a few plain facts about the water problems of
Judaea and Samaria. The reality is that the untapped
water resources in these areas are meagre. The rainy
season is relatively short andonly a small portion of that
water can physically be captured and used for irrigation.
The wells and springs of the region are not abundant.
They cannot be over-exploited lest they reach too high a
degree of salinity. Such over-use can create an irreversible
deterioration. Pohtical considerations aside, any governing authority in the region must be aware of these facts.
Under Jordanian occupation, less than 1.5 per cent of the
nearly 4,000 square kilometres which are potentially arabte, were irrigated. Indeed, the*gross exaggeration by the
Jordanian representative of the available quantity of
water is completely at variance with his Government’s
sound hydrological policies before 1967 of avoiding over-

122. Furthermore, even if the laws of belligerent occupation were for some reason applicable here, it would
have-to be pointed out that article 49 of the fourth Geneva
Convention bans forcibie transfers, not voluntary acts of
individuals taking up residence in the areas under consideration. Moreover, it must also be remembered that artitie 49 of the Convention was written in the wake of the
mass expulsion from their lands of population groups by
the Nazis, in order to make room for the settlement of
Germans in those areas, in place of the original inhabitants. As the leading treatise, Oppenheim-Lauterpacht’s
bOficial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-second Session.
Plenary Meetings, 47th meeting.

11

’

International Law, states, the provision contained in article 49 of the Geneva Convention is:

my neopie as “vamnires”, “vultures”, “malignant, out of
co&ol-cancerous cells”,’ “ bubonic plague”and similar
terms of Dhrase taken directlv from the Nazi vocabularv.
Last Friciay [212&h meetingj, however, he sank to neww
depths and dredged up the foulest calumnies in the poisonous arsenal of anti-Semitism. As if he,were reading
straight out of the Protocols of rhe Eiders of Zion, that
notorious anti-Semitic forgery from the end of the nineteenth century which still enjoys popularity in the Arab
world today, he conjured up, inter alia, false images of a
Jewish cabal controlling the world’s finances and politics.
Those are loathesome and vicious notions, and the world
has paid bitterly for their dissemination.

“a prohibition intended to cover cases of the occupant bringing in its nationals for the purpose of displacing the population of the occupied territory”.’
I repeat-“ for the purpose of displacing the population of
the occupied territory”. However, no Arab inhabitants
have been displaced by the establishment of the villages in
question. Thus, for this reason too, article 49 of the
Convention does not apply here.
123. In addition, consideration should be given to the
fact that Israel not only applies the principles of the fourth
Geneva Convention, but goes significantly beyond them.
The Geneva Convention, for exampie, allows for the
application of capital punishment. Israel has never applied
the death penalty in the territories in question, despite
some atrocious crimes committed there. The Geneva
Convention does not provide for access by local populations to courts of the administering Power. Israel allows
the people in these territories to have access to Israeli
courts, whether the cases are against individuals, against
the Government of Israel or against any of its officials,
including military officers in these regions.

129. As I pointed out at the beginning of this statement,
while our deliberations were taking place another serious
and intensive effort was under way in the Middle East.
The Council has a choice. As the organ entrusted under
the Charter with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, it can recognize that for the first time in 30 years a constructive
approach, on the basis of Security Council resolution 242
(1967) is being pursued towards solving the Arab-Israeli
conflict and bringing peace to our war-torn region. The
Council can resist attempts, such as the present one, to
manipulate it and it can allow the successof the ongoing
peace process-where all the‘issues will find their rightful
place and appropriate solution. Alternatively, the Council can continue to give way to the opponents of peace. It
can go on engaging in shadow-boxing. But then it should
bd aware that, in doing so, it will only relegate itself toA
irrelevance.

124. There is no provision in the Geneva Convention
requiring that movement of the local population outside
the territories be facilitated. Israel facilitates such movement in both directions, including movement to the Arab
countries which regard themselves as being in a state of
war with Israel. In particular, it facilitates pilgrimages to
Mecca. The Geneva Convention says nothing about trade
abroad by the territories in question. Israel facilitates
such trade, including trade with Arab countries.

130. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Jordan on a point of order.

125. The Geneva Convention accepts the jurisdiction of
military tribunals of the administering Power. Israel goes
further than that and requires that the presidents of those
tribunals should have been lawyers for at least six years
and that they should be members of the Bar and fully
qualified. Similarly, the civil and religious tribunals,
made up of local judges, continue to function in these
regions, applying civil and religious laws that were
already in force.

131. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The representative of
Israel has stated that the debate in the Security Council
has gone completely unnoticed. That did not of course
surprise me at all because the answer is simple: the media
are a captive of Zionist manipulation. It is noteworthy
that a prestigious newspaper, The New York Times, with
the motto “All the News That’s Fit to Print” on page 1,
did not see fit even to mention that there was a meeting of
the Council, even though it did print that there was going
to be a Trusteeship Council meeting, as well as a Security
Council meeting on another subject. Not a word was
printed about what went on? not even a few lines. 1 need
hardly tell the Council that, with this massive cover-up,
there should be no reflection on the supremacy, integrity
and ultimate executive powers of the Council on behalf of
humanity.

126. The Geneva Convention makes no provision for
elections. Under the Israeli administration freeand democratic elections have been held twice for the municipal and
local councils, and in 1976 women were allowed to participate in them for the first time.
127. Finally, we believe that some minimal degree of
dignity must be preserved in our deliberations. We have
had no hesitation in challenging the credibility of the
Jordanian representative and the credentials of several of
the speakers in this debate, but never have we stooped to
the crudities of language and thought which the Jordanian representative has exhibited here.
128. In my statement on Monday,

132. The second point made by the representative of
Israel was that my information was incorrect. Very well, if
that is what he believes about it why does he not have the
courage to prove me wrong by accepting a neutral.commission made up of members of the Security Council, all
of whom are men of integrity? We are willing to have all
those members, friends of Israel, go and see for themselves and prove who is right and who is wrong. There is
hardly any courage at all in trying to deceive the Council
by the kind of distortions and falsehoods to which we
have been subjected.

12 March [212&h

meeting], I commented briefly on his repeatedreference to
’ L. Oppenheim,
In’nternazionaf
pacht, cd. (London,
New York
Co.. 1952), vol. 14 p. 452.

Low: A Treatise, 7th cd., H. Lauterand Toronto,
Longman’s,
Green and

12

apoiogize to the Council for the fact that his Government
has deprived the Palestinian citizens of Jerusalem of their
natural water resource at Ras el-Ein and in the twin Arab
cities of Ramleh and Lydda, in the plains of Palestine. The
Israelis cut off this water supply when they expelled,
literally by force, a quarter of a million Palestinian men,
women and children, across the mountains. I still
remember that Mustafa Al-Khalidi,
the mayor of
Ramleh-a
man in his seventies or eighties-had
to walk
for three or four days across those mountains, without
water or food. He died shortly thereafter.

133. With regard to the human rightsissue, I very much
regret that I did not bring with me a very, very thick tile on
the despicable torture of thousands of Palestinians, young
men and women, which is unequalled anywhere. I think
that I did read a long statement about those tortures in
almost every city, every location, in Israel which has a
notorious prison. I mentioned their names, the number of
inmates and the methods of torture used on those young
boys and girls who have been languishing there for 11
years, many of whom will never emerge unscathed as a
result of the treatment and torture to which they have
been subjected.

139. This is water to which the Palestinians of Jerusalem
are entitled. If the Israelis have reconnected that water,
the fact is that it should never have been severed in the :
first place from the people who legitimately own it.

134. The representative of Israel has raised a very, very
interesting question: To whom does Palestine belong? I
think I would advise him to read a few reputable books
about Palestine, and those books will tell him to whom
Palestine belongs. It belongs to its indigenous people who
have been living there for literally 8,000 years. In Jericho
alone eight layers of cities, coterminous with 8,000 years,
have already been uncovered. They were Palestinians,
indigenous inhabitants of the land. I do not have to go
beyond that, but Palestine belongs to the Palestinians, not
to the people who are being imported from all over the
world.

140. The representative of Israel talked about sovereignty. The question of sovereignty is very, very interesting. I want to enlighten him on the matter of where
sovereignty lies.
141. Under international law, residual and ultimate sovereignty lies in the Palestinian people, the people who
have lived uninterruptedly
in the land for thousands of
years. That is the ultimate sovereignty over the territory.

135. Yesterday I was amused to see on television that
the people who are sorry to leave Yamit, that settlement in
Sinai, happen to be Americans. Will the representative of
Israel tell me that Americans are the indigenous inhabitants of Palestine? One of them is sorry that he is going to
lose his little grocery, a little business, there-even though
it is built on Egyptian soil.

142. The second level of sovereignty, according to the
United Nations, is inscribed in General Assembly resolution 181(11) and 194(III), adopted in 1947 and 1948
respectively,
which partitioned
Palestine and which
would have given to the Palestinians far larger amounts of
territory than the Israelis have usurped by force, by terrror,
by their military machine. This is the only sovereignty recognized by the United Nations. I maintain-and
I am
sure I shall be supported in this by every representative in
this chamber-that
even resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) in no way invalidate the basic, ultimate sovereignty; they in no way change the situation regarding
which land belongs to whom. The Security Council resolutions did not drop from the clear blue sky. They did not
abrogate the older resolutions, which are on the books
and which are reconfirmed every year. In the resolutions
by which Member
States allocate funds to the
United Nations ‘Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the very first reference is to
resolution 194 (III), which provides that every Palestinian
refugee and displaced person has the right to go back to
his home.

136. The representative of Israel has once again said
that “We have made the desert bloom”-this
fraudulent
statement which has been made repeatedly since the
inception of Zionism. I ask: what desert? We know the
geography of Palestine. There are areas with a rainfall of
up to 900 millimetres every year. From the year 1700
onwards, these areas were among the most productive
growers of cotton in the world. Great countries like
France, England and Holland-whose
industrial revolution was based on the textile industry-vied
for the produce of these areas. They have always been perennially
green; they have never been a desert. That applies to the
West Bank as well. The only desert that we had in Palestine was the Negev-and the Negev is still largely a desert,
except for a small area around Beersheba. Israel stole the
water of the watershed of Syria from its basin and transported it to the area of the Negev around Beersheba,
which has no entitlement to that water whatsoever.

143. The third layer of sovereignty relates to the unity
created between the West Bank and the East Bank. As I
believe I have already mentioned, when that unity was
achieved in 1950 it provided specifically that the brethren
on the two banks of the River Jordan would work
together towards the restoration of the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. It was provided that this unity, which came in the wake of one of the
freest elections.. that I know of, would remain until we
started talking about solving the Palestine problem-and
we seem now to be coming to the point where we are
talking about the Palestine problem. So, as far as international law is concerned, within the context of that
unity-where
the seats in Parliament, the posts in the

137. One can say anything one wishes to about the
Palestinians, but this is a fact: they are the best farmers in
the world. Incidentally, the drip irrigation system that
Israel introduced has proved to be a complete failure. It is
now being dumped by the Israelis. Some persons on the
East Bank of the Jordan have been the victims of this
faulty, fraudulent system.
138. In reference to the question,of water, the representative of Israel said that water is‘now going regularly in
pipelines to Jerusalem. I would have expected him to
13

,

Cabinet and everything else were shared equallysovereignty resided in the people on both sides of the
River Jordan. Under international
law, when Israel
occupied the West Bank in 1967, it occupied a sovereign,
united State: the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Of
course, there was the proviso, enacted in Parliament, that
the unity that had been effected did not in any way
prejudice the ultimate and just solution of the Palestine
problem.
144. It seems that the piecemeal peace is at hand. Never
in history have efforts to achieve peace been viewed with
so much apprehension by so many. This is not because
those who are not involved in the present bilateral efforts
towards a treaty are not interested in peace. On the contrary: their desire for a just and lasting peace is even
greater. They know, however, that there can be no short
cut to peace. They know that if peace is to be genuine the
defence for it must first be constructed in the minds of
men. They know that no treaty, however carefully
drafted, can guarantee peace if the parties concerned do
not tangibly demonstrate to all concerned the necessary
good faith.

right to set up their own State and to restore their legitimate right:, their land and their homes; .and, thirdly, the
right of all States in the area to live in peace with, if
necessary, guarantees of security to all Parties.
149. Jordan’s reluctance to join in the peace efforts
following Camp David is based not only on its conviction
that the peace settlement should be comprehensive and
should embrace all aspects of the conflict but also on a
careful analysis of Israel’s .motives and practices- in the
occupied territories, which Jordan does not find conducive to a just and durable peace. That is the reason why
Jordan initiated action in the Security Council-so that
focal attention could be given and adequate action taken
by the United Nations. in this respect. The Council is
discussing the question of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories with particular reference to the motives
underlying Israel’s actions in this regard and the pivotal
significance of some West Bank resources to Israel,
resources which play an important role in Israel’s calcuiations. It is not security. I will come to what I am talking
about.
I,
e,...:

I50. As far as the peace ,efforts are concerned, it should
be noted that any settlements established. during a military occupation are in violation of the Geneva Convention relating to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War. It is already a vioiation of that Convention when
the representative of Israel talks about the West Bank as
Judaea and Samaria. Why does he not talk about Jaffa,
Haifa, Zefat, Acre, and Nazareth, and all the other Palestinian land taken over iu 1947 and 1948? Even Om elRashrash, which is now called Elath, was seized after the
General Armistice Agreement of 1949. It is the neighbour
of Al-Aqabah,

145; Israeli practices in the occupied territories, carried
out in defianceof world opinion, with which we have been
seized for almost 10 days, clearly show that its peace
efforts are yet another exercise in realpolitik. The broad
framework resulting from the Camp David accord, full of
ambiguity as it is, does not address the main issues, which
inevitably should serve as the corner-stone of any.peace
effort.
146. Yes, the 4 million Palestinian people are the core of
the problem, and not Sinai. The fact that out ofthe four
front-line States facing Israel three did not at all, at any
stage, participate in the effort, even though they had for
one whole decade been doing their utmost to achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace, is in itself’an eloquent comment on the inadequacy and the fragility of the
Camp David arrangement. On the other hand;paradoxitally, the three States involved in the proposed peace
treaty have spent a lot of time and effort in discussing,
inter alia, the position of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, to which none of them has or can have a legal claim.
147. As I have said, we are now seized with the real
thing, with the Palestine problem, even though Iegally up
to this moment the West Bank is anoccupied territory, as
are the Golan Heights and Sinai.

151. It should, as I havi said, be noted that any settlements established during a military occupation are
in violation of theGeneva.Convention relating to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Tifne of War. The. United
States Government has in the past consistently and fully
supported this position,,and has so declared publicly on
many occasions. In defiance of international law and
practice, and disregarding unanimous world opinion,
Israel has continued to .establish many more such settlements. It has continuedto pursue its policy in this regard,
even during the time it was actively engaged in the socalled peace negotiations, and they were concerned with
Sinai and not with the,sersitive issue of Palestinian rights.
Sinai and other territories are an extra bonanza.

148. Nor have the Palestinian people, whether,inside the
occupied territories or outside them, been consulted or
involved in the process, although they are the core of the
problem. As far as Jordan is concerned, it goes without
saying that it has the biggest national stake m-any peace
effort. Its total and constant devotion to the cause of
peace needs no explanation. Through the years Jordan
has steadfastly stood by the three main elements which it
considers essential: first, total withdrawal of Israel from
the Arab territories occupied in June 1967; secondly, the
right to selfdetermination
under conditions of free
choice for the Palestinian people, who are at the centre of
the Middle East conflict, and, of course, their inalienable

152. But this is really.the issue. There are 79 Israeli
settlements on the West.Bank, with a budgeted plan for
future expansion in 1979, which has already been published officially. The Israeli press talks about a range of 27
new settlements, many:of which are earmarked to accommodate those who wo.ul,d be vacating Yamit. In particular, Israel has been concentrating satellite housing estates
and little towns in and ‘around Holy Jerusalem, sheltering
some 76,000 persons. I!,. the West Bank, of its-total area of
550,000 hectares, some 148,866 hectares, or 37.1 per cent
of the total area, have been confiscated by the Israeli
authorities. The total area of settlement is, as I mentioned
earlier, at present est&ated
to be 34,748 hectares. Mul_y

? ,‘,

14

tiply that by 10, and it becomes the Ggure I mentioned..
earlier: 334,000 or 335,000 dunums. Likewise, the total.
population of the West Bank is estimated to be 673,000.
Up to 1967 the population of the West Bank was somewhere between gOO,OOOand 900,000; if those people had
remained in their homes there would now be 1.5 million.
The Palestinians, as everybody knows, do multiply.

forced to seek employment in Israel. Israel is taking
a‘dvantage of our 60,QQOWest Bank workers, at far lower
wages than Israeli workers. Most of the confiscated land
set aside for Israeli settlements has been the best agricultural land on the West Bank. For instance, 80 per cent of
agricultural land on the West Bank of the Jordan valley
has been confiscated for alleged military purposes. Water
resources are being syphoned off to supply Israeli settlements with their water needs. While existing artesian wells
have been tapped, the Arabs have been restricted, and no
new wells are allowed to be drilled without prior permission. Almost all such. Arab requests have been
“pending”- of course they remain pending-while
Israel
so far has drilled scores of new artesian wills on the West
Bank to meet the water needs of its settlements thereon, in
addition to taking over substantial amounts of existing
Palestinian water, springs and wells. Even the philanthropic project of Al-Mashruu’
al-Inshaai of Musa
Alami, at Jericho, which had 20 wells and which is of
international renown, with international figures, had 18
of its 20 wells destroyed. This has resulted in adjacent
Arab wells being depleted and drying up, in many cases.

153. In 1978 there were already 90,147 Israeli settlers. In
other words, Israeli settlers already constitute 13.4 per
cent of the total population of the West Bank.
154. We are seeking here to have the international community, represented by its highest executive organ, halt
the Israeli practices and policies of establishing these
settlements, which seriously add to the existing impediments to peace, and to invite a Security Council factfinding commission to go to the area. That is the least
recompense the United Nations, which originally brought
about the undoing of the Palestinians, owes the
Palestinians-to
go and see them, to talk to their mayors,
to the villagers, to the people whose lands and water have
been taken over. Let them go into the closed cells of the
30 or so notorious prisons in Israel, and they will find the
facts for themselves. I am not asking the Council to take
my word; all I am saying is: I challenge Israel to accept a
commission from the Security Council. If my information
is incorrect, well, let them prove me wrong.
..
f55. What is significant in the Israeli policy is not only
the establishment of these settlements as an impediment
to peace, but also a whole gamut of administrative and
related measures intended to diminish the influence of the
Arab majority, the indigenous inhabitants, transforming
them into malleable bantustan communities dependent
on Israel. Ever since the occupation Israel has set out to
reap what economic benefits it could from the resources
of the West Bank. According: to available 1977 figures,
Israel took about 62 per cent of the West Bank’s exports
and provided 90 per cent of its imports, while the East
Bank provided a market for 37,000 of the West Bank’s
people to alleviate the suffering and compensate for the
lost markets of our people under
. .. occupation.

159:. The hardship conditions for Palestinians in the
West Bank created by the Israeli occupation authorities
are best summed up by the accelerating change in the
geographic, demographic, economic and, above all, the
historical, cultural and religious legacy dramatized by the
continuing tragedy in our Holy Jerusalem, which is far
more’ precious to us than all the gold in the world. .This
has aggravated the internal haemorrhage of the occupied
Arab territories. Apart from continued deportation of
West Bankers since 1967, conditions in the West Bank
forced, last year alone, some 122,000 persons to cross to
the East Bank of Jordan. In 1968 I was Minister of
Reconstruction in the Jordan Government, and we had to
cater to almost 300,000 displaced persons from the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. And I am not talking about the
1,750,OOO refugees who have been sleeping, literally,
under. the skies and on the ground for 30 years-for three
decades-while the Israelis have been living in their furnished homes.
160. ’ With increasing‘settlement
of the West Bank by
Israelis, one wonders what would stop Israel from forcing
more and more Arabs out of the West Bank, in its various
devious ways, in the event of the proposed bilateral peace
treaty taking effect. Such an exodus would further swell
the ranks of the hundreds of thousands of embittered
refugees, embodying the contradiction that Israel presents and claims, of fearing radicalism, while Israel itselfis
creating and exporting that very brand of bitterness that it
claims to fear.

156. The West Bank trade deficit with Israel is financed
simply by its surplus with Jordan and by remittances of
West Bank Palestinian workers abroad. The West Bank,
under the present circumstances,~offers Israeli industries
an almost completely protected market, which results in
the West Bankers paying higher prices for Israeli goods.
How do you expect to have a prosperous economy when
the rate of inflation is 40 or 50,or 60 per cent per annum?
What kind of prosperity is that? 9 ‘,

161. There is a fundamental conceptual difference
between the so-called autonomy on the West Bank established on the ground to achieve a fait accompli and the
sratus quo and the implementation
of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), in addition, of course, to the previous resolutions relative .to the stators quo ante. The
accords and the proposed peace treaty have not halted the
major changes in the occupied territories, nor will the
ensuing period redress the facts created by the oceupation. The purported autonomy envisaged by the accord

157. Thus, in short, the West Bank offers Israel a captive market totally dependent on’developments in Israel,
and incapable of standing on its own feet, with restrictive
and oftentimes oppressive conditions under occupation. I
am talking about the civilian ‘Sector, not the prisons,
which are such a nauseating tale that I do not even like to
mention them.
158. Job op=rtunities
on the West Bank itself are on
the decline; obliged to earn a living, West Bankers are
15

process subjects the occupied territories to a clear separation of the Palestinian people, their rights and their political
future, from the land,\from their links to the land and its
resources, which can only in harmony represent the life, the
vitality, of the West Bank. The incontrovertible fact
today is that the mood of the area is smitten with unprecedented doubts and fears about the future and stability of
the Middle East in consequence of the planned dumping

and eventual obliteration of the Palestinian people. This
criminal plan will not succeed, but it is the Israeli official
plan all the same.
162. I should have liked to go much further, but I know
that the hour is late and I apologize for speaking at length.
iY4e meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

Unlted
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lea publications
des Nations
Unies aont en vente dana les librairiea
et les agencea
ddpoaitairea
du monde entier. Informea-voua
sup&a de votre libraire ou adreaaez-voua
h . Nations Uniea. Section dea ventea. New York ou Cenbve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIOKES

DE LAS

NACIONES

CNIDAS

Las pubiicaciones
de laa Nacionea
Unidas
eatin en vcnta en librerias
y caaaa distri.
buidoraa
en todas partea de1 mundo. Cons&e
a au lihrero
o dirijase
a’ Naciones
Unidaa. Serri6n de Ventaa. Nucvn York o Ginehra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00400

79-70W2-February

1983-4255
