A/65/PV.74

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records
:

Sixty-fifth session

74

th plenary meeting
Friday, 14 January 2011, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/65/691)
The President (spoke in French): In keeping
with established practice, I now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to document A/65/691, in which
the Secretary-General informs the President of the
Assembly that 18 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of the
information contained in document A/65/691?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 125
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Letters from the Secretary-General (A/65/529
and A/65/587)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/65/661)
Draft decision (A/65/L.57)
The President (spoke in French): We shall now
proceed to consider draft decision A/65/L.57. I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
decision A/65/L.57, entitled “International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994”, I wish to put on record
the following statement of financial implications on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-20747 (E)

*1120747*

A/65/PV.74

rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
By the draft decision, the General Assembly
would decide that, notwithstanding the expiry of their
term of office on 31 December 2010, Judge Joseph
Asoka de Silva and Judge Taghrid Hikmet are
authorized to complete the Ndindiliyimana et al. case,
which they began before the expiry of their term of
office; take note of the intention of the International
Tribunal to complete the case in March 2011; decide
that, notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office on
31 December 2010, Judge Joseph Masanche is
authorized to complete the Hategekimana case, which
he began before the expiry of his term of office; take
note of the intention of the International Tribunal to
complete the case in January 2011; and decide that, in
order for the International Tribunal to complete
existing trials or conduct additional trials, the total
number of ad litem judges serving at the International
Tribunal may from time to time temporarily exceed the
maximum of nine provided for in article 11, paragraph 1,
of the Statute of the International Tribunal, to a
maximum of 12 at any one time, returning to a
maximum of nine by 31 December 2011.
The extension of the terms of office of Judge
Joseph Asoka de Silva and Judge Taghrid Hikmet
through March 2011 and of Judge Joseph Masanche
through January 2011 would require a total payment in
honoraria amounting to $84,300 for an aggregate
period of seven additional months. This additional
requirement is in addition to the amount included in the
revised estimates relating to the budget of the Tribunal
for the biennium 2010-2011 (A/65/178).
With regard to temporarily exceeding the
maximum of nine provided for in article 11, paragraph 1,
of the Statute of the International Tribunal to a
maximum of 12 at any one time, returning to a
maximum of nine by 31 December 2011, the Tribunal,
based on the latest trial schedule, envisages requiring
the services of two additional ad litem judges over and
above the maximum nine ad litem judges for a period
of eight months during 2011. This would entail the
payment of eight additional months of honoraria, in the
amount of $154,100. This requirement is in addition to
the amount included in the revised estimates relating to
the budget of the Tribunal for the biennium 2010-2011
(A/65/178).

2

Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft decision A/65/L.57, additional requirements in
the amount of $238,400 for honoraria would arise
under the budget for the Tribunal for the biennium
2010-2011. The Tribunal would make every effort to
meet these additional requirements from within the
overall resources amounting to $257,804,100 approved
for the Tribunal for the biennium 2010-2011.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/65/L.57.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 125.
Agenda item 126
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/65/588)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/65/662)
Draft decision (A/65/L.58)
The President (spoke in French): We shall now
proceed to consider draft decision A/65/L.58.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
decision A/65/L.58, entitled “International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By the draft decision, the General Assembly
would decide that, notwithstanding the expiry of his
term of office on 31 December 2010, Judge Kevin
Parker is authorized to complete the Đorđević case,

11-20747

A/65/PV.74

which he began before the expiry of his term of office,
and take note of the intention of the International
Tribunal to complete the case by the end of February
2011; and decide that, notwithstanding the expiry of
his term of office on 31 December 2010, Judge Uldis
Kinis is authorized to complete the Gotovina et al.
case, which he began before the expiry of his term of
office, and take note of the intention of the
International Tribunal to complete the case by the end
of March 2011.
The extension of the term of office of Judge
Kevin Parker would require the payment of two
additional months of honoraria, while the extension of
the term of office of Judge Uldis Kinis would require
the payment of three additional months of honoraria,
amounting in total to $146,400 above the amount
appropriated in the revised appropriation for the
biennium 2010-2011.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft decision A/65/L.58, additional requirements in
the amount of $146,400, representing an aggregate of
five months of honoraria, would arise under the budget
for the Tribunal for the biennium 2010-2011. The
Tribunal would make every effort to meet these
additional requirements from within the overall
resources amounting to $320,511,800 approved for the
Tribunal for the biennium 2010-2011.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/65/L.58.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 126.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Request for the inclusion of an additional
sub-item submitted by the Secretary-General
(A/65/232)
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now take up a request submitted by the
Secretary-General in document A/65/232, relating to

11-20747

the appointment of a judge of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal.
In his letter, the Secretary-General informs the
General Assembly of the resignation of Judge Rose
Boyko as a judge of the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal effective 15 January. A vacancy in the
Tribunal will therefore occur on that date.
As the agenda of the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly does not contain a sub-item on the
appointment of a judge of the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal, the Secretary-General has deemed it
necessary to request, pursuant to rule 15 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the inclusion in the
agenda of the current session of an additional sub-item
entitled “Appointment of a judge of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal”, under agenda item 113, entitled
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments”.
Owing to the nature of the item, unless there is an
objection, I shall take it that the General Assembly
agrees to waive the relevant provision of rule 40 of the
rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of
the General Committee on the question of the inclusion
of this additional sub-item on the agenda.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, wishes to include in the agenda of
the current session an additional sub-item entitled
“Appointment of a judge of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal”, as a sub-item of agenda item 113
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and
other matters)?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The SecretaryGeneral has requested that the sub-item be considered
in plenary meeting. May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to consider this sub-item directly in
plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform members that this additional sub-item becomes
sub-item (g) of agenda item 113 of the current session.

3

A/65/PV.74

Agenda item 122 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/65/L.26/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held the debate on agenda
item 122 and its sub-items (b) to (w) at its 63rd and
64th plenary meetings on 13 December 2010.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland
to
introduce
draft
resolution
A/65/L.26/Rev.1.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As
representative of the Swiss chairmanship of the
thirteenth Summit of the International Organization of
la Francophonie and as spokesperson of the group of
Francophone Permanent Representatives, I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.26/Rev.1,
which I would now like to summarize.
The heads of State and Government of countries
using French as a common language met at the
thirteenth Summit of la Francophonie, held in
Montreux from 22 to 24 October 2010. At that meeting,
which coincided with the fortieth anniversary of the
establishment of the International Organization of la
Francophonie, leaders reaffirmed the links established
by the French language between their peoples, States
and Governments on the five continents. They also
reiterated their desire to promote cultural diversity and
multilingualism.
The 75 member States and Governments of the
International Organization of la Francophonie, which
represent more than a third of the Member States of the
United Nations, are important participants in United
Nations multilateral cooperation, in particular in the
areas of development, democracy and the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in supporting human
rights and the rule of law.
The draft resolution before the Assembly for
adoption reflects the close links between the United
Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie. It also calls for further strengthening
existing ties and follows up on the resolution on
cooperation between the two organizations that was

4

adopted by consensus two years ago (resolution
63/236). Moreover, the draft resolution highlights the
role of la Francophonie as both an actor on the
international stage and as a forum for consensus
between countries of the North and South.
The draft resolution also expresses the desire of
the International Organization of la Francophonie to
implement the principles of the 3 November 2000
Bamako Declaration — which, as the Assembly is
aware, pertain to the practice of democracy, rights and
freedoms in Francophone countries. Those principles
were underscored in the 14 May 2006 Saint-Boniface
declaration on human security and the prevention of
conflicts. La Francophonie is also keen to participate
actively in resolving economic, social and
humanitarian problems, in particular by working with
the United Nations, thereby making a contribution to
coordinating efforts in that regard.
The International Organization of la Francophonie
also serves as a forum for sharing best practices with
regard to combating serious cross-cutting issues, such
as piracy, terrorism, organized crime, corruption and
trafficking in drugs and human beings — threats facing
many French-speaking countries.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
another area of interest to the International
Organization of la Francophonie, given that they
concern many French-speaking countries. Our
organization believes that it is highly desirable that
troops deployed in French-speaking countries be able
to communicate in French. In reality, that is not yet the
case today. La Francophonie believes that it is up to the
United Nations to ensure respect for multilingualism in
peacekeeping operations. The draft resolution also
maintains that there should be sufficient Frenchspeaking troops in peacekeeping operations taking
place in French-speaking countries.
I should like to conclude by reiterating that the
International Organization of la Francophonie will
continue to pursue its efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, especially with regard to
education, as well as to bear in mind the needs of the
most vulnerable States, several of which are members
of our organization.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.26/Rev.1. I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.

11-20747

A/65/PV.74

Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since its publication, the following
countries have become sponsors of draft resolution
A/65/L.26/Rev.1: Australia, Ireland, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Mauritius and Portugal.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.26/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/65/L.26/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 65/263).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position following the adoption of resolution 65/263.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): I take the floor in my capacity as the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in connection with the Assembly’s
adoption today of resolution 65/263, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
In that connection, I should like to point out that
my country will host the fourteenth Summit of heads of
State and Government of countries that share the
French language. First of all, on behalf of my country,
allow me to commend Switzerland for its excellent
efforts in organizing the thirteenth Summit, at which
the Montreux declaration and resolutions were
adopted. I would also like to duly acknowledge His
Excellency President Abdou Diouf, Secretary-General
of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
who continues to work tirelessly to raise awareness of
our organization, including its profile in the press.
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
emphasized at Montreux my country’s willingness to
host its Francophone colleagues at a summit of la
Francophonie. I should like to take this opportunity to
thank all the member States of la Francophonie for
choosing the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
host of the 2012 Summit, which is something that has
for many years been the hope and desire of the
Congolese people. We assure the members of la
Francophonie of the commitment of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to establish the optimal

11-20747

conditions for the success of that meeting in order to
make it a landmark event for the organization.
I would like to assure the Assembly that the 2012
Summit in Kinshasa will not be an event for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone; it will also
be an event for the countries of the Great Lakes region
and Central Africa, as well as for all of Africa. In the
purest expression of the African and Congolese
tradition of hospitality, I would like to take this
opportunity to say to all those who will come to the
Summit — whether they speak Lomongo, Lingala,
Kikongo, Chiluba or Swahili — that they are welcome
in Kinshasa, a city in the heart of the first continent.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomes
the fact that the General Assembly has acknowledged
the main outcomes, resolutions and decisions of the
thirteenth Summit of la Francophonie as comprising
elements aimed at demonstrating the determination of
countries that share the French language and at making
their contribution, including the value added of their
multilateral cooperation vis-à-vis the efforts of the
United Nations.
Taking into account the commitments in previous
resolutions, resolution 65/263, which we have just
adopted, provides new impetus to the participation of
the International Organization of la Francophonie with
regard to preventing and resolving conflicts, United
Nations peacekeeping operations and joint efforts
aimed at peacebuilding, including election assistance
and monitoring in Francophone countries.
In that connection, I would like to take the
opportunity afforded by the adoption of this resolution
to reiterate the readiness of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — a post-conflict country — to support
cooperation with the United Nations as a model tool in
the hands of Member States to implement the
Organization’s relevant decisions, resolutions and
recommendations.
I would like in particular to commend the
provision in the resolution by which the General
Assembly expresses its satisfaction with continued
cooperation between the United Nations and la
Francophonie in the area of electoral assistance and
monitoring. I should like to point out that 2011 will be
a significant electoral year in my country. In line with
the elections process, the Congolese people will once
again be given an opportunity to speak in order to
choose the men and women who will preside over their

5

A/65/PV.74

future at the local, regional and national levels. The
assistance and solidarity that the international
community will extend to our people in that regard —
from la Francophonie but first and foremost from the
United Nations — will no doubt provide invaluable
support in strictly abiding by our country’s
Constitution and laws.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Member States for the solidarity and assistance they
continue to provide in resolving the many problems
that my country continues to face.
La Francophonie is not just a group of countries
that share the use of the French language. It is also a
forum for solidarity and common understanding among
peoples from different cultures who are linked by a
common destiny and who share in both sadness and
joy. It is against that backdrop that la Francophonie is
increasingly involved in energy and sustainable
development issues, efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals and the question of biodiversity.
In that regard, la Francophonie provides our
countries with support and advice in international
negotiations on climate change, debt issues and
economic and trade matters. In addition to areas in
which it has traditionally been active, these new
spheres of activity constitute additional elements of
complementarity and convergence between la
Francophonie and the United Nations.
The Francophone family has continued to grow
throughout the years, adding four members during its
thirteenth session. We are convinced that, as has been
the case in other Francophone countries, cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie will contribute to the
success of our electoral exercise.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with resolution 33/18, of 10 November 1978, and
decision 53/453, of 18 December 1998, I now call on
the observer for the International Organization of la
Francophonie.
Mr. Camara (International Organization of la
Francophonie) (spoke in French): The privilege of
taking the floor at the 74th plenary meeting, which is
the first meeting of 2011, also provides me the distinct
honour and great pleasure to convey to the General
Assembly the best wishes of His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diouf, Secretary-General of the International

6

Organization of la Francophonie, as well as my own
best regards.
The Secretary-General of la Francophonie, who
met you in Paris a few weeks ago, has asked me to
reiterate his great appreciation for the exemplary and
masterly manner in which you, Mr. President, are
guiding the work of the sixty-fifth session. Your
mastery of debate honours la Francophonie and its
member States. Rarely is the French language — one
of the two working and six official languages of the
United Nations, as well as the umbilical cord of our
community — heard in the Assembly’s debates. Allow
me in particular to convey the greetings and gratitude
of President Diouf to His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon.
I should also like to thank Switzerland. In its
capacity as Chair of the Summit of heads of State and
Government of la Francophonie, Switzerland ensured
the success of the preparatory process and introduced
the resolution that the Assembly has just adopted
(resolution 65/263). I thank Ambassador Paul Seger for
his willingness and dedication in taking responsibility
for this issue.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Seger for
drawing members’ attention to the importance and
relevance of the Montreux Declaration and the various
resolutions on several areas of concern, including the
Bamako Declaration on the Practices of Democracy,
Rights and Freedoms in the French-speaking
Community, which was adopted 10 years ago; crisis,
post-crisis and peacebuilding situations in the
Francophone community; the strengthening of
cooperation between States in order to combat bogus
and counterfeit medicines; bolstering international
cooperation to fight transnational organized crime;
combating piracy and terrorism; and taking advantage
of such opportunities as innovative financing and
sustainable tourism.
I am pleased that such concerns of the heads of
State and Government of la Francophonie have
garnered broad consensus in the General Assembly,
thereby underscoring the fact that la Francophonie is a
forum for harmonizing countries’ efforts to common
ends, as called for in the resolution just adopted.
According to a well-known saying in my country,
counting one’s friends in the village carries the risk of
increasing one’s enemies. As paradoxical as that may
seem, I cannot fail to avail myself of this opportunity

11-20747

A/65/PV.74

to thank our main partners who directly and indirectly
support the efforts of la Francophonie.
In that regard, I assure the Assembly that my
gratitude is not intended to leave anyone out; it also
includes all those who, although I have not thanked
them directly, nevertheless merit our thanks. First and
foremost, I wish to thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon for being
accessible and for his promptness in responding to
requests from la Francophonie. We also express our
thanks for the availability of his main colleagues, both
in his Office and in the principal Departments and
Services dealing with la Francophonie.
I have been privileged to see them at work, but
those present here have also been able to see for
themselves the progress that Mr. Ban has made in
learning the French language, to the point that he can
now give interviews and hold conversations in French.
I respectfully commend his fervent desire to learn,
master and put into practice a language used by 72
Member States in order to build solidarity, establish a
vision and carry out efforts. May the SecretaryGeneral’s determination spread to the many staff and
senior officials of the United Nations in order that
countries too may be united around that which most
characterizes them, and which they hold most dear,
namely, their language.
This desire to cooperate has facilitated and
encouraged
the
numerous
productive
efforts
undertaken jointly by the United Nations and la
Francophonie — whether with regard to preventing or
managing crises and conflicts; keeping or building the
peace; promoting democracy and the rule of law
through electoral assistance and monitoring; promoting
rights and freedoms; mobilizing countries to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals, especially in
countries with the greatest needs; promoting and
supporting sustainable development, renewable energy
and biodiversity; or supporting cultural and linguistic
diversity and promoting multilingualism. With regard
to the latter, I wish to thank the Ambassador of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for demonstrating
his multilingual abilities in celebrating the
International Year of la Francophonie and all the other
years devoted to other United Nations languages at the
Assembly. In that way, la Francophonie and the United
Nations have worked together closely in the Frenchspeaking community, to the satisfaction of the States
and Governments concerned.

11-20747

The resolution that the Assembly has just adopted
is the best example and acknowledgement of this
exemplary cooperation. I note that it is also the
outcome of numerous fruitful meetings and contacts
between Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Abdou Diouf, as
well as the result of the synergies and points of
convergence that the staff and senior officials of our
two organizations have identified as part of their
respective programmes to build an effective and
constructive partnership.
The course charted and pursued by our two
Secretaries-General and the results that have been
achieved and welcomed by the Assembly would not
have been possible without the ongoing and resolute
support of Francophone Ambassadors at the United
Nations in New York, Geneva and Addis Ababa. Those
representatives have succeeded in judiciously
managing their respective national mandates to provide
the essential collective support for the goals of la
Francophonie in its relationship with the United
Nations.
I should like to express my deep gratitude to the
President, the members of the Bureau and those of the
group of Francophone Ambassadors in New York for
the support they extend to me in carrying out my
duties.
I am also conscious of the interest shown by the
Permanent Mission of the United States of America in
the Permanent Observer Mission of la Francophonie. In
that regard, I wish to thank the host country for the
support and attention given to la Francophonie and its
Permanent Observer.
I am also very grateful for the interest that the
authorities of the State and City of New York have
shown with regard to the observance of the
International Day of la Francophonie, which is now an
important cultural event in both the City and State of
New York.
As part of his once national and current
international responsibilities, President Abdou Diouf
has always worked on behalf of men and women whom
we do not often see. When a crowd of people gathered
around him to express its affection and gratitude,
President Diouf reserved his first words to courteously,
amicably and sincerely express his own gratitude to the
leaders, officials and staff of the secretariat of the
Summit. I would like to emulate his gesture by
expressing, on his behalf as well as my own, the same

7

A/65/PV.74

wise words he used in order to say to each and every
interpreter and translator and to every member of each
of the language services that they are the bridge and
channel that make it possible for the representatives of
nations to communicate, understand each other and
decide.

8

The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (l) of agenda item 122?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

11-20747
