THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING: 27 MAY 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
““““;
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 1) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , , , . , . . . , . . . , .
Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . , . . . ( . . , . , , . . . . , . , . . , . . . , , , . . , .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Second special report of the Security Council Committee established in
pursuance of resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia on the expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia (S/l 2296)

1

l

SIPV.20 11

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2011TH

MEETIING

Held in New York on Friday, 27 May 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
moment for me to express to you my compliments on the
expertise and diligence with which you have guided the
Council in its deliberations. It is all the more fitting,
therefore, that it should still remain within your ambit to
preside over the Council during its consideration of this
notorious question which, for more than 10 years, has
frustrated the aspirations of the African people, withstood
the concerted efforts and express decisions of this body,
thwarted the intentions and purposes of the international
community as a whole and outraged the morals of
right-thinking people generally. For my part, I am naturally
gratified at ,the privilege of introducing the subject for the
Council’s consideration today. Nevertheless, on account of
the dismal success-if any at all-achieved m the matter so
far, I take no pride at this late hour in being counted among
those still groping for a solution to his vexatious problem.

President: Mr. Thomas S. BQYA (Benin).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2011)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Second special report of the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia on the expansion of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia (S/12296)

3. The item on the agenda consists of the second special
report on the expansion of sanctions against the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia, submitted to the Council in
document S/ 12296 by the Council’s Committee established
in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968). The report contains
a recommendation for the expansion of sanctions in the
field of the transfer abroad of funds from Southern
Rhodesia, In particular, the recommendation aims at
suppressing the propaganda, promotional and similar activities performed abroad by the various offices and agencies of
the illegal racist rdgime that depend on funds transmitted to
them by that abhorrent regime.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 am.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia
Second special report of the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia on the
expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
(S/12296)

4. In this connexion, I should also like ‘to draw the
Council’s attention to the draft resolution in document
S/12339, which, in a show of exemplary unanimity, has
been sponsored by all the members of the Council. It is a
clear and straightforward text, It is my great. expectation,
therefore, that the Committee’s special report will be
approved and the draft resolution adopted without difficulty. Given the spectrum of political attitudes that exist in
the Committee, aswell as in the Council itself, it is laudable
that the Committee, for its part, has risen to the occasion
by demonstrating its grave concern at the deteriorating
situation in Zimbabwe and the threat that that situation
posesdaily to international peace and security.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the two documents before them. First, there is
the second special report of the Security Council Corn.
mittee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia on the
expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, of 31
December 1976 (S/12296]. Secondly, there is the draft
resolution circulated in document S/12339.

5. Indeed, the seriousness and diligence with which the
Committee pursues the mandate entrusted to it are amply
exemplified in the nine regular reports and eight special or
interim reports that it has submitted to the Council since its
establishment in May 1968. Although its regular reports
have hardly been considered formally by the Council, the
Committee’s special and interim reports have provided
fertile ground for the adoption of no less than four

2. Mr. RAMPI-IUL (Mauritius): At a time, Sir, when your
presidency for this month is drawing to its end, it is a
matter of great fortune that the Council has been able to
include in its agenda for today the question concerning the
situation in Southern Rhodesia. This has been a very busy
month, during which the Council has been called upon to
consider matters of great urgency, and this is a proud
1

resolution 253 (1968) made several exceptions. We are told
by the Committee in one of its annual reports, for instance,
that one Government exported several thousand tons of
wheat to Southern Rhodesia, under the humanitarian excep
tions of that resolution, on the alleged ground that wheat
was an indispensable ingredient in the diet of the majority
of the people of Zimbabwe. Well, everybody knows that
the staple food of the African people of Zimbabwe is
cornflour.

resolutions on Southern Rhodesia. I trust that the draft
resolution before the Council today will result,in the fifth
such resolution,
6. Yet, what is the scope and what is the purpose of the
present draft resolution? I must hasten to say that,
regrettably, at least in my personal view, the present draft
resolution does not go far enough, I would prefer a draft
resolution that covered all the peaceful measures of
coercion instanced within and conceivable outside Article
41 of the Charter. My delegation would particularly
welcome positive action by the Council against those States
which deliberately and adamantly continue to stifle its
purposes by accommodating the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia or by facilitating its international trade and
services. Nevertheless, given the sadly inelastic lack of
consensus in the Committee, the present draft resolution is
all we have. Despite its inadequacies, it is a step in the right
direction. If adopted, it will be the eighth resolution by the
Council imposing progressive sanctions, most of them
mandatory, against the rebel, racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia.

11. The resolution adopted by the Council last year388 (1976)-prohibiting,
among other things, the insurance
of goods exported from or intended for importation into
Southern Rhodesia, excepted the prohibition of the insurance of persons travelling to or from Southern Rhodesia,
and the present draft resolution does not appear to cover
transfers of funds by individuals or bodies in Southern
Rhodesia or even by the illegal rdgime itself, for use by, or
benefit of, persons or bodies abroad not connected with the
illegal rdgime. It is those types of loopholes that contribute
to the subsistence of the illegal regime.
12. In advocating the plugging of such loopholes and the
expansion of sanctions against the illegal rbgime, the
Committee on Sanctions is not the only body calling the
tune. The Committee of 241 of the General Assembly
various governmental and non-governmental organizations
and prominent individuals in the world at large have
similarly made incessant appeals. As an instance of this, the
Programme of Action adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia recently held at Maputo recommended certain
measures against the “illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia”. Those measures included, among
others, the following recommendations:

7, However, the purpose of the Council in adopting this
draft resolution should not consist merely in increasing the
number of such resolutions. Rather, it should serve notice
to the illegal regime and all those supporting it that the
international community is still alive to the aspirations of
the people of Zimbabwe and that the Council has further
peaceful measures in reserve against the misguided rebels in
physical control of the Territory of Zimbabwe,
8. There are those who argue that the present scope of
sanctions is wide enough and would bring down the illegal
regime if faithfully implemented. We have heard this line
repeated scores of times. Indeed, the optimism inherent in
it at one time caused naive expectations in certain
government quarters of the capitulation of the regime
within not months but weeks, That was more than eight
years ago. Some of us believe that the best way to achieve
the desired result is by applying the full force and the entire
extent of all‘the sanctions, not only against the rebel regime
but also against those shoring it up. .

“The Conference calls upon the United Nations:
“(a) To reiterate its conviction that the scope of
sanctions against the illegal regime must be widened to
include alI the measures envisaged under Article 41 of the
Charter of the United Nations-the Conference also
requests the Security Council to consider, as a matter of
urgency, taking the necessary measures in that regard;

9. We, of course, welcome any measures that may resolve
the problem through peaceful negotiations. We are therefore watching with interest the joint initiatives which we
hear are being undertaken by the United Kingdom and
United States Governments, But talk of negotiated settlement cannot go on indefinitely. For that reason, the
freedom fighters of Zimbabwe and all their supporters have
become convinced that it is worth while to try any other
possible means, whether at the conference table or on the
battlefield, for, whatever the means used to achieve the
desired goal of majority rule in the shortest possible time,
they will have been nobly justified.

“(b) To extend sanctions to marine and air insurance in
order to prevent ships; aircraft carrying passengers or
cargo destined to or coming from Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe) from being insured.” [S/12344/Rev.I,
annex V, para. 47.1

13. Furthermore,
as evidence of the vigilance being
exercised by private individuals and non-governmental
organizations, the Committee on Sanctions was gratified by
the information it received from the Anti-apartheid Movement of the United States and the Church of Christ Center
for Social Action in New York-among the several nongovernmental organizations, to which it is greatly indebted-concerning possible violations of sanctions through
the supply of oil and oil products to Southern Rhodesia by
certain oil companies in the United States, the United

10. We are baffled by the elusiveness of consensus in the
Committee,
and also in the Council, resulting in the
adoption of mandatory measures only progressively or in
doses. This affords the illegal regime an opportunity to
adjust its economic programme and also provides convenient loopholes through which the sanctions can be
effectively evaded. The mandatory sanctions established by

1 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries end Peoples.

2

Kingdom, France and, the Netherlands, using elaborate and
clandestine manoeuvres. Despite initial denials by the
Governments of the companies concerned, there is
mounting evidence to show that those companies have
actually been regularly supplying oil and oil products to
Southern Rhodesia through their subsidiaries in South
Africa.

20. We note that, while the Tanzanian proposal in its
original form could not be adopted, it is encouraging that,
upon the suggestion of non-aligned and other countries,
including Pakistan, operative paragraph 3 has been included
in the draft resolution [S/12339], providing for consideration by the Security Council, before 1’1 November
1977, of the application of further measures under Article
41 of the ,Charter.

14. Another pair of non-governmental organizations in the
United Kingdom, the Haslemere Group and the Antiapartheid Movement there, have come up with a strong
deposition to the commission of inquiry in the United
Kingdom into the involvement, if any, of British oil
companies. The Netherlands Government is also reputed to
have pledged its co-operation with the commission in its
inquiries. It is greatly hoped that the United Kingdom
Government will soon conclude its investigations and
forward its findings to the Security Council Committee on
Sanctions, while the findings of the United States investigating authorities are equally eagerly awaited.

21. This draft resolution sponsored by all the members of
the Council, is the outcome of the efforts of the United
Kingdom supplemented by those of the non-aligned and
other members. It represents, in our view, the unanimity of
all members of the Council on the basic issue under
consideration and we recognize the fact that it deals mainly
with the stoppage of the outflow of capital from Southern
Rhodesia and represents a limited, but important, measure
which the members of the Council have agreed to take. It is
our ardent hope that this decision will be implemented
expeditiously and without exception by all the concerned
States.

15. Such details and future prospects are the proper
functions of the Committee on Sanctions. For that reason,
the present draft resolution contains operative paragraph 3
which, among other things, requests the Committee to
examine the application of further measures under Article
41 and to report to the Council in time for its further
meeting on the matter before the inglorious anniversary this
year of the infamous unilateral declaration of independence
by the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.

22. While it is heartening to take note that all members of
the Council view the question of Southern Rhodesia in the
same light, it is a matter of regret that differences still
persist regarding the extension of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. The sanctions that have been imposed
so far have been somewhat limited and have not succeeded
in achieving their objective, namely, the dislodging of the
illegal Smith regime, which continues to defy the will of the
international community and persists in short-sighted and
repressive policies directed at keeping the majority of the
people of Zimbabwe in a state of subjugation and domination,

16. With these few words, and with due appreciation for
the indulgence extended to me by you, Mr. President, and
all my other colleagues around this table, I appeal to the
Council to adopt the draft resolution before it which,
though limited in scope, is an important contribution to the
cause of freedom and justice of all the people of Zimbabwe.

23. We have no doubt about the fact that the people of
Zimbabwe will one day regain their inalienable rights, and
that that day is not far away. It is extremely desirable that
this should happen through peaceful means with the help of
the concerted will and action of the international community as a whole. The determination of the international
community can be manifested by widening progressively
the scope and effectiveness of the sanctions under Article
41 of the Charter in their entirety.

17. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Permit me first of all to
express our gratitude to the members of the Security
Council who did my country and Ambassador Iqbal
Akhund a great honour by electing him Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee for 1976.
18. As a result of the diligence and devotion of its
members during 1976-as, indeed, during previous yearsthe Sanctions Committee worked efficiently and discharged
its responsibilities well under the mandate entrusted to it
by resolution 253 (1968). The report2 of the Committee as
well as the special report on the expansion of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia [S/12296/ are a testimony of
that fact, and we felicitate all the members and supporting
staff of the Secretariat for so ably performing the task
assigned to the Committee.

24. Lastly, we are of the view that those countries that
have influence at Salisbury must make renewed efforts
towards the attainment of .independence and majority rule
that is the undeniable birthright of the people of Southern
Rhodesia. My delegation is therefore happy that the
expected unanimous adoption of the draft resolution
before us will strengthen the hands of such States and serve
at the same time as another strong call to the Smith regime
to abandon its obdurate stance and agree to the changes
that would bring majority rule, equality, peace and prosperity to all the people of Zimbabwe.

19. Last November, the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania proposed in the Committee that the
Security Council should expand the scope of mandatory
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia so that Article 41 of
the Charter could be applied in its entirety. My delegation,
along with some others, extends its fulI support to that
proposal.
--

25. Mr. BADI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Once again the
Security Council is meeting to discuss the grave situation
caused by the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia.
26. From the very beginning, the Council condemned the
unilateral declaration of independence made by the racist
minority in Southern Rhodesia and determined that the
situation resulting from that illegal act wasextremely grave

2 official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year,
Special
Supplement No. 2.

3

and constituted a serious threat to international peace and
security. Therefore the Council, in its resolution
217 (1965), called upon the United Kingdom to quell the
rebellion by the racist minority in Southern Rhodesia, to
take all appropriate measures for the elimination of the
authority of the usurpers and to put an end to the illegal
minority regime.
27. More than 11 years have elapsed since the Smith
clique illegally took power in Rhodesia, Every year since
then, the Security Council and the General Assembly have
adopted resolutions aimed at rectifying the situation and
affirming the inalienable rights of the Zimbabwean people
to self-determination and independence in accordance with
resolution 15 14 (XV) of 14 December 1960. The legitimacy of the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe to achieve
their inalienable rights as set forth in the Charter has also
been affirmed.
28. The situation in Southern Rhodesia has further deteriorated since Smith and his racist clique refused to come
to an agreement with the Zimbabwe national liberation
movement to achieve a peaceful solution based on majority
rule, The racist minority regime continues in its defiance of
the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, as well as of the Charter and world public
opinion. The racist Ian Smith regime continues to escalate
its campaign of brutal oppression against the people of
Zimbabwe and has in fact committed and continues to
perpetrate abominable acts of brutality and aggression
against the neighbouring countries, Members of the United
Nations.
29. At this critical stage, the Security Council can no
longer delay the adoption and implementation
of those
concrete measures that will put an end to the domination
of Southern Rhodesia by the illegal racist rt5gime. The
existing sanctions imposed by the Council must be made
more comprehensive and must be fully implemented by all
Member States if the sanctions instrument is to remain
effective. In this regard I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia [see S/123&/Rev. I,
annex V] adopted by the International
Conference in
Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia recently
concluded at Maputo, Mozambique. That Programme of
Action specifically calls for the adoption of a number of
concrete and effective measures against the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia. In the view of my
delegation, the Council must meet the challenge presented
by the continued defiance of the illegal Ian Smith regime
by intensifying and making more effective the sanctions
imposed against that racist r6gime in full compliance with
Article 41 of the Charter.
30. Furthermore, the Council cannot remain indifferent to
the continued defiance of the Pretoria regime in its
non-implementation
of the mandatory sanctions imposed
by the Council on the illegal Smith rggime. Those mandatory sanctions should be extended to cover the racist
minority regime of South Africa, which continues to
support the rebel rdgime in Southern EQodesia, providing it
with facilities that enable it to evade sanctions. The unholy
alliance of those two racist minority regimes in southern

Africa has been further strengthened and consolidated since
the attainment of independence by the People’s Republic
of Mozambique and since the decision of that State to close
completely its borders with Southern Rhodesia. The illegal
Smith regime has found itself with only one outlet to the
outside world, namely, through South Africa. This total
reliance of the racist Salisbury regime on the apartheid
rhgime in South Africa wasconfirmed in a New York Times
article of 8 May 1977 in which a Southern, Rhodesian
exporter was quoted as saying: “Without South Africa-our
only transport link, after all-we’d have been sunk a long
time ago.”
3 1. In view of the fact that the Vorster regime openly
defies United Nations resolutions and world public opinion,
my delegation demands and will endorse the widening of
the mandatory sanctions to include the racist regime in
South Africa in order to compel that rggime’s compliance
with the mandatory sanctions imposed by the United
Nations.
32. In conclusion, 1 should like to reaffirm the position of
the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in its
continuing support of the people of Zimbabwe in their just
struggle against the illegal racist minority rBgime of Ian
Smith in order to achieve their freedom and self-determination.
33. Mr, TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The maintenance
of the illegal racist rBgime in Southern Rhodesia is fraught
with the most dangerous, consequences for peace in Africa
and throughout the world. The Security Council, in its
resolutions, has repeatedly reaffirmed the inalienable rights
of the people of Zimbabwe to freedom and independence.
It has condemned and outlawed the racist rBgime of Ian
Smith and proclaimed mandatory sanctions against it.
Nevertheless, the rCgime continues to exist to this day. Not
only does it exist; it is blatantly violating the lawful rights
and interests of the people of Zimbabwe, attempting to
crush its national liberation movement and perpetrating
armed attacks on neighbouring African States. This means
that the international struggle against the racists in
Southern Rhodesia must also embark upon a new stage.
34. As has already been indicated by the delegation of the
USSR in the Security Council and in other organs of the
United Nations, the Soviet Union strongly condemns the
policies pursued by the Southern Rhodesian regime and
calls unreservedly for genuinely effective measures aimed at
the isolation and boycott of that regime and at strict
compliance with the decisions of international forums
demanding that the people of Zimbabwe should at last
enjoy the opportunity of determining their own destiny
without impediment and of living in conditions of peace
and freedom. That is also the position we take in regard to
mandatory sanctions vis-l-vis the racist r&me.
35. The Council now has before it for consideration the
second special report on the expansion of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia submitted by the Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968). In our view,
this document, which is the result of lengthy discussions in
the Committee, reflects evident weaknesses tltat are in-

herent in that organ of the Council. In fact, the attempt to
depoliticize the Committee and to give it the nature of a
purely technical organ which has been repeatedly made by
certain delegations at meetings of the Committee could not
but divert the Committee from its main task which has
been clearly set forth in Council resolutions. It is therefore
not surprising that the draft resolution recommended by
the Committee to the Council on the initiative of the
United Kingdom is virtually destitute of any major new
elements in regard to the expansion of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia.
36. We consider that the just demands of the Zimbabwe
people can be satisfied only through the adoption against
the Smith regime of all measures under Article 41 of the
Charter, including the complete or partial interruption of
road, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio and other means of
communication with Southern Rhodesia. That is the road
that the Security Council should take if it and all its
members really wish quickly and effectively to put an end
to the racist r&me in Southern Rhodesia.
37. That is why we cannot fail to note that, thanks to the
initiative of the African States and a number of other States
members of the Council, the drawbacks of the initial draft
resolution have, to some extent, been corrected. The
Council, for the first time in many years, now has before it
a draft resolution [S/12339] which raises the question of
the application against Southern Rhodesia of sanctions
under Article 41 of the Charter. This is, of course, not yet
an action by the Council, but it is an obligation to consider
such action within a certain specified period of time.
38. The Soviet Union, like many of the African countries,
is firmly convinced that the time has long been ripe for
such action ensuring the complete implementation
of
Article 41, One cannot fail to refer in this connexion to the
fact that the International Conference in Support of the
Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, recently held at
Maputo, appealed to the United Nations once again to
reiterate its conviction that the scope of sanctions against
the illegal Southern Rhodesian regime must be expanded to
include all the measures envisaged under Article 41. The
Conference called on the Security Council to consider, as a
matter of urgency, the question of adopting the necessary
measures in this connexion [S/12344/Rev.l,
annex V,
para. 471.

39. Since the draft resolution which is before the Council
represents a certain decisive step in that direction-albeit an
insufficient one-the Soviet delegation supports it. Operative paragraph 3 may have the further positive feature of
fostering a correct orientation of the work of the Committee by entrusting it with a concrete and important task.
40. It seems to us that today’s discussion of the problem
of Southern Rhodesia is of cardinal importance. We hope
that the decision to be taken by us will make it more
difficult in future to opt again for a further delay in the
application of effective measures against the racist regime
of Southern Rhodesia. If anyone does employ such tactics
in the future, it will only serve to bear out the well-founded
warnings of those who clearly see that delays and reservations of any kind play into the hands of the Smith regime

and are detrimental to the people of Zimbabwe. The
patience of the peoples of Africa is becoming exhausted,
and the members of the Council tnust bear that in mind if
they really want this organ of the United Nations to
discharge the role assigned to it by the Charter.
41. So far as the Sovi.et Union is concerned, its position
remains unchanged. In this connexion, I cannot but draw
attention to the following sentence in the message of
congratulations sent by the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the USSR to the African States and peoples on
the occasion of Africa Liberation Day:
“The Soviet Union will continue to oppose the attempts of imperialist forces and racist rCgimes to impose a
neocolonialist
solution on the problems of southern
Africa and to call for the immediate exercise of the
inalienable rights of the peoples of southern Africa to
self-determination, for the liquidation of apartheid and
racism in the Republic of South Africa, for the immediate
withdrawal of that State from Namibia and for the
unreserved and complete transfer of all power to the
people of Zimbabwe.”
42. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
The unilateral declaration of independence by the colonialist and racist minority in Southern Rhodesia in 1965
remains today, as indeed it was 12 years ago, an illegal act
contravening the right to self-determination of the African
people of Zimbabwe and represents a growing threat to
international peace and security. To remove that threat and
to restore the inalienable right of the Zimbabwe people to
self-determination,
the Security Council, in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter,
established a system of sanctions against the illegal r6gime
in Salisbury. However, today, 11 years after the first
embargo measures were adopt.ed by the Council, we must
agree that the action taken by the Council has not led to
the expected result, that is, to put an end to the rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia.
43. The continuation in power of the minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, despite the sanctions that have been
imposed, can be explained by the fact that the measures
adopted have proved inadequate and, in addition, have been
systematically and broadly violated by the political and
economic circles interested in the maintenance of the status
quo in Rhodesia. There can no longer be any doubt that the
illegal rCgime of Ian Smith remains in power thanks to the
assistance it receives, openly or in a camouflaged way, from
certain States, and above all South Africa, in violation of
the binding sanctions laid down by the Council.
44. The undeniable truth is that at present Southern
Rhodesian trade is being fraudulently carried out through
South Africa, which has joined hands with Ian Smith. That
is why the present sanctions will not have the expected
effect so long as the measures adopted against Southern
Rhodesia are not extended to South Africa.
45. In view of the inadequate results that we have been
witnessing for the past 11 years in the application of
sanctions against the minority r6gime of Southern Rhodesia, the Romanian delegation believes that the Council,

always stpod for the application of strict sanctions against
the Southern Rhodesian authorities. This is also the
unshirkable responsibility of the Council.

on the one hand, should eliminate all the loopholes in the
present measures, among other ways by extending these
measures to South Africa, and, on the other hand, should
apply all the provisiogs of Article 41 of the Charter.

51. Nine years have elapsed since the adoption of resolution 253 (1968) on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
On 6 April last year, the Council adopted another resolution, resolution 388 (1976) on the expansion of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. Regrettably, however, the result
of the sanctions against Southern Rhodesia remains far
from satisfactory.

46. Obviously, the draft resolution (S/12339] now before
the Council does not fully meet those requirements.
Nevertheless, it does express the common decision of the
members of the Council to reconsider this question not
later than 11 November 1977, in order to take other
measures in conformity with the provisions of Article 41 of
the Charter. The unanimous adoption of this draft must be
regarded as final notice to the illegal Salisbury r6gime.

52. At a meeting of the Sanctions Committee last November, the delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania put
forward a number of concrete proposals on further
strengthening the sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. The
Chinese delegation fully supported them. Nevertheless,
these proposals have so far not been adopted by the
Committee in their entirety.

47. Despite the temporary failure of the sanctions applied
thus far against Southern Rhodesia, the Romanian deiegation continues to believe that this peaceful method could
yield results. To that end, the sanctions must b” equal to
the objectives proclaimed and pursued. In other words, the
medicines and the doses must be sufficient to cure the
disease; they must be, above all, commensurate with the
gravity of the disease. That is why the Romanian delegation
stressesthat the peaceful method provided for in Article 41
of the Charter should be explored and used ta the very end.
The credibility of the United Nations would indeed be
damaged if the measures taken against Southern Rhodesia
were to fail. Such a failure would also undermine the
system provided for in the Charter to combat threats to
international peace and security.

53. The measures to be adopted by the Security Council
this time on the expansion of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia are still far from adequate. An abundance of
evidence shows that, in repeated violation of the sanctions,
some countries are carrying on trade with Southern
Rhodesia through covert or overt means. As for the South
African authorities, they have been working hand in glove
with the Southern Rhodesian r6gime in committing serious
violations of the sanctions. The Declaration adopted at the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, held recently at Maputo, also
unequivocally called for the further strengthening and
expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

48. My country has consistently come out in favour of
recognizing the right of the people of Zimbabwe to
self-government, to the establishment of a government
which would reflect the structure of the population of the
Territory and would guarantee broad democratic freedoms
and ensure the country’s accession to independence. We
believe that the United Nations, including the Security
Council, has the duty to pursue unrelentingly the action set
in motion against the minority racist regime of Southern
Rhodesia, in order to ensure freedom and independence for
the people of Zimbabwe. Of course, the fall of the Ian
Smith rBgime and the accession of Zimbabwe to independence will be the result of the struggle waged by the
people of that Territory and its political organizations, a
struggle enjoying the warm support of the Romanian
people. But if we want the United Nations to assist that
struggle, then a complete and effective system of sanctions
must be established that can force the Ian Smith regime to
yield political power to a government representing all the
people of the Territory.

54. In view of all that, the Security Council should have
strengthened and expanded the sanctions. In order that its
resolutions can be really put into effect instead of being
reduced to mere pieces of paper, we hold that the Council
should seriously consider the question of expanding the
sanctions to cover South Africa. Meanwhile, all States
Mem-bers of the United Nations, and above all the permanent members of the Security Council, should strictly
implement the sanctions and should not pay mere lip
service while acting differently.
55. More and more people have now come to realize that
sanctions do not provide a ‘fundamental solution to the
question of Southern Rhodesia. In the past year, with the
rapid deveIopment of the armed struggle of the Zimbabwe
people, the Smith r&me has been working hard to step up
its counter-revolutionary dual tactics. While resorting to the
fraud of a so-called “internal settlement”, the Smith regime
is making desperate efforts to expand its military strength,
intensify its repression of the patriotic armed forces of
Zimbabwe and carry out repeated armed provocations
against the neighbouring independent African States in an
attempt to perpetuate its criminal rule. The facts prove that
a fundamental solution to the question of Southern
Rhodesia can be found only by relyihg on the strength of
the Zimbabwe people who are themselves persevering in .
struggle, particularly armed struggle, and carrying through
to the end the struggle against the Southern Rhodesian
racist rBgime and for the national liberation of Zimbabwe,
with the support of the people of Africa and the rest of the

49. In conclusion, I should like to state once again the
well-known position of Romania: firm action, in the future
as in the past, for the faithful implementation of the United
Nations decisions on Southern Rhodesia, for the elimination of the policy of racial discrimination and apartheid
and for the attainment of respect for the right of the
peoples of southern Africa to freedom, dignity and independence.
!O. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (translation porn Chinese):
With regard to the question of sanctions applied by the
Security Council against Southern Rhodesia, the position of
the Chinese Government has been most explicit. We have

6
i

world. In the meantime, when the two super-Powers are
stepping up’ their fierce rivalry in southern Africa, the
Zimbabwe people have also come to realize ever more
clearly that it is essential to combine their struggle against
racism and colonialism closely with that against hegemonism and that only by so doing will they be able to lead
their liberation struggle to final victory.

sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia. It
will impose additional restrictions on the movement of
capital by the illegal regime and will enable Member States
to take action to frustrate the operations of offices or
agencies maintained outside Southern Rhodesia by the
illegal regime, except offices or agencies established exclu”
sively for pensions purposes.

56. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Zimbabwe people in their struggle
against colonialism and racism and for national liberation.
We will, as always, render them assistance within our
capabilities until they win complete victory. We are
convinced that by strengthening their unity, heightening
their vigilance, persevering in struggle and “guarding against
the tiger while repelling the wolf’, the Zimbabwe people
will certainly be able to attain their great goal of State
independence and national liberation.

63. Operative paragraph 3, referring to further action
which the Council may take, has been the subject of
intensive informal discussions between various members of
the Council, in which the United Kingdom delegation has
taken an active part. It is well known that there are
elements of Article 41 of the Charter which, in relation to
Southern Rhodesia, pose difficulties for some members of
the Council, including the United Kingdom, There are,
however, many elements in Article 41, and we will be
ready, as we have been in the past, to seek ways in which
the application of the economic sanctions which the
Council has adopted can be improved,

57. Mr. BRUCE (Canada): For over a decade the international community has demonstrated its opposition to the
illegal minority Government in Rhodesia through the
of sanctions. Today’s draft resolution
imposition
/S/12339] closes a comparatively small loophole1 in the
existing regulations, but we welcome it none the less
because it proves that the Council, representing all regions
of the world, remains united in its opposition to the
minority regime.

64. The text of operative paragraph 3, is a compromise
probably not regarded as ideal by any member of the
Council. But my delegation is glad that a spirit of
compromise has prevailed and that the discussions to which
I have referred have resulted in a text which I understand
all can accept,
65. It is in that spirit of compromise, rather than as an
expression of total satisfaction with the wording, that my
delegation has joined with others in sponsorship. The
agreement which has been reached will enable the Council
to adopt unanimously a further resolution on sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. That action will be a clear
warning to the illegal regime at Salisbury that, until a
satisfactory solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia
has been found, the application of sanctions by the
international community will not be relaxed but, rather,
strengthened.

58. We note with great satisfaction that the United States
of America is now in a position to enforce the embargo as it
applies to chrome, and we believe that this will further
demonstrate the extent of the Smith Government’s isolation.
59. We have already had one opportunity this year to
explain Canada’s policy towards Zimbabwe in the debates
on Botswana’s complaint, and we will probably have other
occasions to do so again this year. I shall not, therefore, say
anything further about it now. I should, however, like to
underline my Government’s dismay at the fact that the
illegal Government has not been willing to continue serious
negotiations.

66. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): For more
than 11 years an illegal racist minority regime in Rhodesia
has defied the Council, stood in open rebellion against the
British Crown and flouted world opinion. The result of that
rebellion has been widespread suffering on the part of the
people of Zimbabwe, suffering which threatens to expand if
majority rule is not achieved in Zimbabwe and the minority
r&ime consigned to oblivion.

60. It is clear that there will, some day, be a Government
at Salisbury which represents the majority of the people of
Zimbabwe. The question is whether such a Government will
come to power as a result of negotiations and an orderly
transition, or only after further bloodshed and disruption.
We hope the draft resolution today will help to serve as a
warning to the Rhodesian Government that it has no option
but to return to the negotiating table. We are very pleased
that a consensus has been reached on this draft resolution
and that all members of the Council have joined in
sponsoring it.

67. It is with particular satisfaction that my delegation has
joined in drafting and sponsoring the draft resolution [ibid]
and will join in its adoption.
68. The reasons for our satisfaction are numerous. As is
well known to the members of the Council, my delegation
was privileged to play one of the leading roles in the
tightening of sanctions contained in operative paragraphs 1
and 2. We believe that the elaboration and adoption of this
draft come at an important time and must be viewed in the
context of such other important developments as the
elimination
of the Byrd amendment and the spirit of
harmony and co-operative effort toward a common goal
that characterized the recent meetings at Maputo. The
decisions taken in the draft resolution will facilitate

61. Mr, BYATT (United Kingdom): The second special
report of the Sanctions Committee which is before us today
is the outcome of long and detailed discussions by the
Committee, and the draft resolution also before the Council
[ibid.] is, with the exception of operative paragraph 3, the
fruit of the Committee’s work.
62. Adoption of the draft resolution will represent a
further step in increasing the scope and effectiveness of the
7
j

with the Sanctions Committee in its difficult task. As we
ourselves are now a member of that Committee, it is our
view that the Committee should continue its work of
examining specific cases in order to ensure the implementation of the existing sanctions.

tightening the sanctions so that the illegal rkgime in
Southern Rhodesia may no longer take advantage of
loopholes to further its goals.
69. The adoption of this draft resolution, along with the
other recent actions to which I have referred, can leave no
doubt in the minds of any of the leaders at Salisbury or
elsewhere of the commitment of the international community to the attainment of a government in Southern
Rhodesia based on the consent of the governed. The
unanimous nature of the action today will underline the
strength of the international commitment. The efforts
made by the members of the Council to achieve this
unanimous result augur well for continuing international
co-operation to solve the many and serious problems of
southern Africa.

75. We do not consider this debate the appropriate
occasion for a detailed presentation of our views on the
complex political issues in southern Africa. We already
outlined our position recently in another context. But I
should like to stress once again that the Federal Republic
of Germany is ready to join in any serious and promising
attempt to bring about an overall political solution to the
problems besetting that part of the world. It is our
conviction that that solution should be achieved by
peaceful means. We are therefore closely all efforts towards
the establishment of a constitutional government based on
majority rule and the ultimate independence of Zimbabwe.
An extension of the existing sanctions is only a modest but,
I believe, a significant contribution to those efforts. The
decisions we are going to take should be understood as an
expression of the strong disapproval and justified concern
of the world community over the intransigent attitude of
the Salisbury authorities.

70. In agreeing to meet no later than 11 November “to
consider the application of further measures”, we are
committing ourselves to continue, in accordance with our
often-stated position of principle, to explore ways and
means of closing loopholes whose existence may diminish
the impact of the economic sanctions programme.
71. We are furthermore pleased that the formulation of
this draft resolution has carefully preserved the existing
functions of the Sanctions Committee. For, as matters now
stand, the sanctions regime is sufficient to impose a
crushing burden on the economy of Southern Rhodesia.
The need is to examine further the functioning of the
system in order to prevent its circumvention. After almost
nine years, the minority Government at Salisbury is still in
power and economic conditions there have not declined
appreciably, There are reasons for this, and those reasons
certainly lie in the fact that some nations allow violations
of the sanctions imposed by the Council.

76. We are all looking forward to the day when sanctions
will no longer be necessary and when we may enter into a
free and unhindered commercial exchange with an independent Zimbabwe in the interests of the well-being and
future development of that country.
77. Mr. CONSALVI
(Venezuela) (interpretation
from
Spanish]: The unanimous support received by the draft
resolution before us (ibid.] is a further proof of the
unwavering determination of the United Nations to put an
end to the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia. Nine years
have elapsed since resolution 253 (1968) was adopted and
it is regrettable that, for reasons that are all too well
known, the sanctions imposed against the regime in
Salisbury have not yielded the desired results. The open
violations of the sanctions and connivance at such violations have made it possible for that illegal regime to survive
over such a long period of time.

72. The Committee’s examination of particular cases has,
therefore, become more important than ever. We hope that,
before November this year, important steps will have been
taken to bring about a government in Rhodesia based on
the free consent of the governed. We pledge ourselves to
continue to work to that end through all available means.
73. Mr. VON HASSELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
My delegation is pleased to go along with the consensus on
the draft resolution [ibid] which is aimed at tightening the
mandatory sanctions against the regime in Southern Rhodesia and at bringing within the scope of those sanctions an
area of economic activities which up to now has not been
clearly covered by previous Council resolutions, We are
equally glad to be among the sponsors of this draft
resolution. It is encouraging to see that a consensus has
been reached within the Council in a constructive and
understanding spirit. That spirit was shown in particular by
our friend Ambassador Ramphul of Mauritius, and I should
like to thank him for his co-operative efforts.

78. While the general picture has been frustrating, it is
encouraging that the tenacious and steadfast independence
forces of Zimbabwe have succeeded in putting the Smith
Government in a position that is increasingly more difficult
to defend, Moreover, the position of the people of
Zimbabwe has been strengthened by the material and moral
support increasingly being given by the members of the
international community to the cause of its liberation.
79. Negotiations are proceeding in an effort to produce a
solution to the problem. But the truth of the matter is that,
because of the intransigence of the illegal regime, our hopes
are not particularly high. What is being done, however, does
seem to suggest that some Powers do recognize the urgency
of the problem. If a solution reflecting the sacred right of
the majority of the people of Zimbabwe is not found in the
near future, the situation in southern Africa will become
increasingly dangerous, thus posing a serious threat to
international peace and security,

74. The Council may be aware that the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany applied the sanctions imposed against Southern Rhodesia as early as 1968. We
enacted the necessary domestic regulations in order to
make sure that those sanctions were enforced effectively.
Since then, my Government has consistently co-operated
8

-

--

80. So this is a critical stage, and all sides must put
increased pressure on the illegal Smith regime to agree on a
speedy and peaceful solution. The Government of Venezuela is therefore fully in agreement with the proposals to
intensify sanctions. The decision that we are taking today is
a significant step in the right direction, namely, that of the
peaceful solution which depends exclusively on the Smith
r6q&ne.

undoubtedly force them to yield. A government that
represents the interests, aspirations and hopes of the
majority of the people of Zimbabwe must come into power
soon. That is the message that I read into the draft
resolution that we shall be adopting in a few minutes. I am
sure that it will make Mr. Ian Smith and his group of
oppressors understand that the end of the illegal regime is
at hand. The racists at Salisbury will surely perceive the
significance of this draft, for, if they do not, it wil1 be too
bad for them and we would much regret it for the loss of
human life is always to be deplored.

8 1. Still very much in the air is the atmosphere that was
created at Maputo, where the International Conference in
Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia has just
concluded. There another significant stage in the struggle
for human dignity was reached and the Conference reaffirmed the majority will of the Organization to put an end
to colonialism and racial discrimination in southern Africa.
The Programme of Action and the Declaration adopted at
the Conference commit us to further concrete steps in
support of a majority regime in Zimbabwe.

88. Mr. President, I should like to conclude this brief
statement by paying a tribute to the brilfiant manner in
which you have conducted the proceedings of the Council
dbring the month that is about to come to an end. We
consider it highly significant that it has been under your
presidency that the Council has met to expand the
sanctions and make them undoubtedly much more effective.

82. Furthermore, Mr. President, I should like to say that
the delegation of Venezuela is pleased by the fact that it is
under the presidency of a worthy representative of Africa
that the Council is deciding to adopt this draft resolution.

89. Mr.

LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
My delegation supports and is a sponsor of the
draft resolution [S/12339/ that is before us and whose aim
is to forbid the use or transfer of funds in the territories of
Member States by the illegal regime in Rhodesia. In
unanimously adopting this draft resolution, the Council will
have taken another step towards tightening the circle of
sanctions around Rhodesia. Of course, one might have
different views about this step. For its part, the French
Government believes that the international community
must keep up its pressure on the authorities at Salisbury
and even intensify it. This is the purpose of the draft
resolution.
French):

83. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
The white minority regime which subjugates the majority in
Zimbabwe represents a real threat to peace, and for that
reason the United Nations must take effective action to
eliminate that threat.
84. Up to now, the Organization has paid close attention
to the problem. It could never be accused of being negligent
in the face of the suffering of the people of Zimbabwe;
quite the contrary. This is shown by an endless number of
resolutions, among them Security Council resolution
253 (1968), by the tireless efforts of the Sanctions Committee, by the special missions, by the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General and the report in document S/12296
which we have before us.

90. The technical aspects of the draft resolution that we
are about to adopt must not cause us to lose sight of the
political dimensions of the Rhodesian problem. The application of sanctions, useful though it may be in weakening
the Salisbury regime, will not of itself suffice to put an end
to the ongoing rebellion and to bring about the independence of Zimbabwe and the establishment of majority
rule in that country. Those objectives can be attained only
through political initiatives which it is naturally up to the
United Kingdom to take. France, like its partners in the
European Community, has in the past supported the
actions taken by the United Kingdom Government within
the framework of its responsibilities. We support today the
efforts undertaken by Mr. Owen jointly with the United
States to put an end to the de factu situation that has
existed since 1965 and to clear the way for a satisfactory
solution in Southern Rhodesia.

85. Regrettably, the illegal regime has brazenly refused to
heed appeals for wisdom and restraint. It continues to act
irresponsibly in disregarding the demands of the international community, and the international community is
today obliged to act more vigorously and more decisively in
order to force the racists at Salisbury to relent.
86. The delegation of Panama wishes to invoke the spirit
of Maputo as a moral force that will encourage us to use all
the resources available to us under the Charter and go to
the rescue of the Zimbabwean people, the victims of
oppression at the hands of those who, at this stage of the
twentieth century, still continue to practise slavery, an
activity which the entire world has long abhorred and
repudiated.

91. The illegal Salisbury r@ime can still effect a peaceful
transition to an independent and democratic Zimbabwe.
There is still time for the voice of justice and reason to be
heeded. The new appeal made today by the international
community has the force of a solemn warning.

87. Let me turn to the draft resolution in document
S/12339, sponsored by all the members of the Council,
including the five permanent members. It represents a truly
vigorous step, The full application of Article 41 of the
Charter against the Ian Smith regime is no joking matter; its
consequences will be felt very soon. The stubborn resistance of the racists will be dealt a heavy blow which will

92. Mr. MULYE (India): Mr. President, since this is probably the last time the Council will meet under your
presidency, allow me to place on record my delegation’s
profound satisfaction and happiness at the sagacious manner in which you have conducted the deliberations during
9

nialist strategy in Southern Rhodesia. Their aim is to bypass
the fundamental interests of the people of Zimbabwe, who
are resolved to eliminate the colonialist regime of Southern
Rhodesia. The aim is to circumvent the legitimate revolutionary aspirations of the intrepid people of Zimbabwe
quite simply by replacing the colonialist and racist regime
of Smith by a puppet neo-colonial regime ready to protect
the interests of the capitalist monopolies operating in
Rhodesia.

the month of May, It is indeed a tribute to your dynamic
stew&&ip
that tie Council was able to achieve what it did
during this month.
93. My delegation, which was not a member of the
Council or, consequently, of its Sanctions Committee last
year, has attentively gone through the Committee’s report
contained in document S/12296. We have noted with
particular care the observations contained in section II of
the report. It is curious that, in spite of the fact that a
number of proposals enjoyed broad support in the Committee, the Committee could not reach agreement on them.
We believe that some of those proposals are worthy of very
serious consideration and earnestly hope that the Committee will, after further discussion, be able to reach a
measure of agreement on them.. I think that is not too
much to expect, given the fact that none of the States
represented around this table recognizes the illegal minority
Smith regime and that all are committed diligently to
applying existing sanctions and also to considering further
measures against it with a view to making it see the light of
reason. As the years go by, however, it is increasingly
difficult to be optimistic about the illegal r&irne’s paying
heed to the voice of reason, and this is reflected in the
growing frustration of freedom fighters seeking to liberate
their country and to establish majority rule there.

99. My delegation would like to address itself to those
who are promoting this neo-colonialist strategy and to say
that, like all other attempts of the same kind, it is
inevitably doomed to failure. It can only strengthen the
determination of the people of Zimbabwe completely and
definitively to eliminate the Smith regime and to replace it
freely with the political and social regime of their choice.
100. If the imperialist West,’ which is Smith’s protector, is
sincere in its wish to avert a blood-bath, the only honest
alternative is to oblige Smith and his clique to give up the
power they have usurped, thus allowing the authentic
representatives of th.e people of Zimbabwe to set up the
governmental institutions of their choice. If the imperialist
West is sincere, it must accept the expansion of the
sanctions in terms of the entirety of the measures advocated in Article 41 of the Charter.

94. The draft resolution /S/12339] before us is clearly a
step forward in the sensethat it attempts further to widen
the scope of mandatory sanctions against the rebel regime
in Southern Rhodesia. However, it is only a tentative and
halting step. We share the view of those who have spoken
before us that the actions of the Council in this matter have
come to be regarded by many as too little, too late. Under
the Charter, the Council has a responsibility and, indeed, a
duty to act to terminate the rule of the Smith regime.
Given the seriousnessof the problem and the threat it poses
to international peace and security, the Council must act
and act quickly and decisively. If, for whatever reasons, it is
seen as failing in the performance of that duty, the
consequences for the world could be incalculable. We hope
that the Sanctions Committee and the Council itself will
not lose sight of that fact in the future deliberations on this
subject.

101. The text before us is not perfect. My delegation
associates itself with it in the spirit of co-operation and
solidarity which we scrupulously observe among the non-aligned and others in the Council. The Council, whose
raison d’&tre is the maintenance of international peace and
security, must inevitably expand the scope of the sanctions
against the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia under the
terms of Article 41 of the Charter.
102. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, if no other representative wishes to speak at this stage, may I take it that the
Council is ready to take a decision on the draft resolution
appearing in document S/12339 without a vote? If that is
the case and if there is no objection, I shall take it that the
draft resolution is adopted unanimously without a vote.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimouslyka

95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Since
there are no further speakers on the list, I shall now make a
statement as the representative of BENIN.

103. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): The Security Council
has today unanimously decided on further measures to
tighten the screw on the rebel illegal racist regime of Ian
Smith. We have also decided on an important tactical
procedural step regarding measures under Article 41 of the
Charter. However, we have not taken any effective action
merely by adopting yet another resolution, That was rightly
pointed out by Mr. Troyanovsky, representative of the
Soviet Union. Actions can be taken only by our respective
Governments. I hope that they will take the necessary
prompt and effective action and implement the decisions of
the Council in their entirety with a sincerity of purpose. I
thank all my colleagues around this table for their
co-operation.

96. The fact that the illegal minority racist rdghe
established on 11 November 1965 by the white settlers in
Southern Rhodesia under the leadership of Ian Smith
constitutes a grave threat to international peace and
security no longer needs demonstrating.
97. The imperialists know perfectly well that the illegal
rdgime of Ian Smith is fragile. They know that the
elimination of that illegal regime is only a question of time.
That is why, since the Geneva scenario, they have recently
been intensifying all sorts of diplomatic manoeuvres.
,98. In reality the imperialist West, always true to form in
regard to decolonization, has launched a propaganda arsenal
in order to achieve the sordid objectives of the neo-cola-

The meeting rose at 1 p-m.
3 See resolution 409 (1977).
10

Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent in other

currencies)

77-70001-April

1’978-2~200
