S/2017/1113

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 December 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2363
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2018 and requested me
to report, every 60 days, on its implementation. The report provides an update on and
analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational environment in
Darfur and the main challenges to the effective i mplementation of the mandate,
including violations of the status-of-forces agreement, for the period from 15 October
until 15 December 2017. It also presents the steps taken by UNAMID towards
achieving its benchmarks and provides an update on progress in t he implementation
of the recommendations contained in the special report of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of UNAMID (S/2017/437).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
While the reporting period did not witness any armed clashes between the forces
of the Government of the Sudan and the Darfur armed groups, the initiation of the
mandatory stage of the weapons collection campaign across Darfur and its launch in
the camps for internally displaced persons created new dynamics. In addition, the
start of the migration season continues to generate violence among communities,
although at lower levels than in previous years. No tangible progress was noted in the
Darfur political process, nor in the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. The level of displacement remained the same as in the previous reporting
period, with the number of returnees insignificant, while the num ber of refugees from
South Sudan to Darfur reached 192,826, with over 89,000 arriving in 2017 to East,
North and South Darfur.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan forces and armed groups
3.
The armed groups of the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and
the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM/Gibril)
remained largely inactive in Darfur, while the area of operations of the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) continued to be limited to pockets of the
Jebel Marra amid reports of further fragmentations and involvement in acts of
banditry. UNAMID reported clashes between a suspected dormant cell of JEM and

17-22899 (E)

020118

*1722899*

S/2017/1113

Sudanese Armed Forces/Rapid Support Forces (RSF) in Birkat Saira area, 25 km east
of Saraf Omra, on 22 November, in the context of the weapons collection campaign,
which resulted in the capture of 16 rebels. A clash also took place in Feina, north -east
of Kass, on 21 October, when SLA/AW reportedly encroached an area controlled by
a splinter group.
4.
Amid continued disagreements on reaching a permanent ceasefire, SLA/MM,
JEM/Gibril and Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional Council (SLM/TC)
extended their unilateral cessation of hostilities until 31 January 2018.
Weapons collection campaign and impact on security
5.
The initiation of the second phase of the mandatory collection of weapons as of
mid-October has de facto strengthened the control of RSF over the security situation
in Darfur, while expanding the scope of the campaign to the camps for internally
displaced persons. In this context, Government forces defeated the Savanna militia
group, composed mainly of Southern Rizeigat, after clashes in Kutum, North Darfur,
on 23 October, then in Shearia, East Darfur, on 30 October, and finally in Korma area,
North Darfur, on 10 November, where they captured its leader, Abdallah Rizkallah,
and nine militia. On 26 November, 14 RSF and nine border guards were killed,
following a reported ambush against RSF by the border guard units und er the
command of Musa Hilal. RSF eventually arrested Musa Hilal in his stronghold of
Misteriya, North Darfur, and transferred him to Khartoum.
6.
In the same context, the Government is reasserting control over the camps for
internally displaced persons, including settlements that, to date, had been considered
out of their reach. On 2 November, in an apparent show of force, its security forces
entered parts of the Kalma camp in South Darfur, with dozens of gun trucks and
anti-personnel carriers. Subsequently, the Joint Special Representative held two
meetings with the Second Vice-President of the Sudan and with the Governor of South
Darfur, on 9 and 14 November, which resulted in the establishment of a trilateral
committee composed of the internally displaced persons, the state government and
UNAMID, to oversee the collection of weapons in Kalma camp as of 10 December.
No incidents have been reported to date.
7.
In several camps for internally displaced persons in Central Darfur, namely,
North and Straina camps in Nertiti area, and Hasahisa, Hamidiya Khamsa and
Dagayeg in the Zalingei area, and surrounding areas comprising of Orokom
Fatnakaral and Tamar Boljimail villages, the communities expressed concern about
the involvement of RSF in the disarmament campaign and requested UNAMID
presence during the conduct of the exercise.
Intercommunal conflicts
8.
The start of seasonal migration in October was marked by a higher number of
fatalities and an increase in criminality, notably in North and West Darfur. During the
period under review, three intercommunal clashes occurred, resulting in 45 fatalities,
compared with eight clashes, resulting in 19 fatalities, reported during the previous
period. All the clashes were attributable to disputes over livestock, criminal ity and
revenge attacks. Some farming communities requested protection from RSF to
prevent potential clashes with migrating herders. In October, following clashes
between the Ma’aliya and the Rizeigat in East Darfur, the Sudanese Armed Forces
were withdrawn and replaced by RSF in the buffer zone between the two groups.
9.
Communal tensions were reported in West, North and South Darfur. In West
Darfur, subclans of the Rizeigat (Awlad Id, Awlad Zaid and Ereigat) clashed with the
Zaghawa on 17 October in Hatam village (25 km south-east of Kulbus town), over
the ownership of camels, which resulted in the deaths of 16 Zaghawa and 11 Rizeigat.
2/12

17-22899

S/2017/1113

The Sudan-Chad joint border forces were deployed to contain the violence. In North
Darfur, following the killing of two Mahariya on 18 October, the kinsmen of the
deceased traced the perpetrators to Umm La‘ota village (9 km north-west of
Kabkabiyah town), where two Mahariya and two Tama were killed during the ensuing
clashes. The authorities, in collaboration with RSF, mana ged to contain the situation.
In South Darfur, the Salamat and the Fallata clashed on 24 October over cattle rustling
in the Dejaj area (55 km west of Graida) in which four Fallata, including two women,
and five Salamat men were killed.
10. The annual migration of nomadic herders, which usually coincides with the
harvest season, was marked by an increase in criminality in the areas of El Fasher,
Kabkabiyah, Kutum and Tawilah in North Darfur as well as El Geneina and Masteri
in West Darfur, increasing tensions between farmers and herders. On 25 October, the
crop protection committee in Khazan Jadid, East Darfur, reported rising tensions
between farmers and herders in the western areas due to large numbers of the Baggara
and the Abbala migrating north to south. In South Darfur, on 27 October, a group of
armed nomads attacked Fallata and Fur returnees in Funguli village, 54 km north west of the team site at Menawashei, in East Jebel Marra locality, killing five and
injuring several others. There were also reports of armed nomads destroying farms in
Shangil Tobaya, North Darfur, on 29 October.
11. In the meantime, positive developments took place on two outstanding conflicts
in South and East Darfur. On 29 October, the Salamat and the Habbaniya held a forum
on peaceful coexistence in Buram, South Darfur, where they signed a reconciliation
agreement, following the cessation of hostilities agreement of 12 May 2017. On
2 November, the state government facilitated exchange visits for the Habbaniya t o
Nadeif and the Salamat to Buram, as a confidence-building measure. On 30 October,
the Government released nine Rizeigat and four Ma’aliya leaders who were arrested
in July following intercommunal fighting and other criminal activities.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
12. Despite the reduction in armed clashes and a decrease in the number of human
rights violations, the overall human rights situation remains of concern. There were
58 cases of human rights violations and abuses, involving 123 victims, including
18 minors, compared to 72 cases, involving 253 victims, including 16 minors, during
the previous reporting period. Arbitrary arrests and illegal detention accounted for
three cases, involving 24 victims. Violations of the right to life accounted for 11 cases,
involving 17 victims, violations of the right to physical integrity (assault) accounted
for 31 cases, involving 64 victims, and abductions accounted for two cases, involving
five victims. UNAMID confirmed the occurrence of 40 cases of human rights
violations and abuses, involving 77 victims, while the remaining 18 cases, involving
50 victims, could not be verified owing to various factors, including local access
restrictions. Of the 58 reported cases, eight cases, invol ving 34 victims, were
reportedly perpetrated by Government armed forces and military intelligence, the
National Intelligence and Security Service and RSF, two cases involving, two victims,
were reportedly perpetrated by male civilians and the remaining 46 cases, accounting
for 85 victims, were allegedly perpetrated by unidentified armed men. Investigations
were initiated in 26 of the documented cases, resulting in 11 arrests.
13. There were 11 cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence, in the form of rape, involving 13 victims, including 9 female
minors. UNAMID continued to highlight the negative impact of sexual violence on
the lives of women, especially young girls, and the need for action on the part of the
Government to combat violence against women. Sustained emphasis was placed on
the need for unfettered access to sites of alleged incidents in order to interview victims

17-22899

3/12

S/2017/1113

and document cases, as well as to facilitate medical care and psychosocial support for
victims so as to avert long-term negative health implications, especially on minor girls.
14. Communities of internally displaced persons were also subject to security related incidents in Darfur. They were the target of 123 criminal incidents, which led
to eight fatalities. Other civilians were affected by 208 crime -related incidents,
resulting in 42 fatalities, including cases of murder (32), armed robbery (22),
attempted robbery (2), assault/harassment (60), burglary/break -in (3), looting (1),
abduction (7), shooting (52), threat of violence (3), livestock theft (12), arson (1) and
other crimes (13). In the previous reporting period, internally displaced persons were
affected by 45 criminal incidents, resulting in six fatalities, and other civilians were
affected by 73 criminal incidents, resulting in 10 fatalities.

III. Political situation
15. The Darfur peace process remains stalled, while voices for reform at the national
level are becoming more outspoken in this regard. On 16 October, the leader o f the
Sudan Liberation Army/Zurg (SLA/Zurg), Nour al-Din Zurg, who signed a peace
agreement with the Government in 2016 and participated in the national dialogue,
suspended his participation in the Darfur peace process, alleging that the Government
had reneged on its commitments to the agreement, which included his appointment to
a senior military rank. Similarly, the Justice and Equality Movement/Dabajo
(JEM/Dabajo), a signatory to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, on several
occasions raised concerns regarding the slow pace of integration of its forces into the
regular forces, as well as the level of the movement’s representation in the
Government of National Unity.
16. During the reporting period, the Government took steps to revitalize the
commissions and the Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund of the Darfur
Peace Follow-up Office (which took over responsibility for the implementation of the
Doha Document after the closure of the Darfur Regional Authority). On 25 October,
the Second Vice-President of the Sudan, Hassabo Mohamed Abdul-Rahman, and the
head of the Darfur Peace Follow-up Office, Magdi Khalafalla, held discussions on
the implementation of the Doha Document, the status of the Commissions and the
Fund, and the reported returns of some refugees from Chad to North, Central and
West Darfur. On 11 November, the Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission,
other Government officials and officials from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) visited Abéché, in Chad, to commence the
implementation of the tripartite agreement signed between the Sudan, Chad and
UNHCR in Khartoum, in May 2017, on the legal protection of and assistance to
refugees who wish to voluntarily return to the Sudan. In the same context, th e
Commission surveyed Wadi Salih, Azum, Um Dukhun and Bindisi localities in
Central Darfur and Tine locality in North Darfur, as potential areas of return.
17. At the regional level, the Sudan’s improved relations with its neighbours have
resulted in decreasing support for the Darfur armed movements. The two -day visit to
Khartoum by the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, on 1 and 2 November, focused
on bilateral cooperation on security, political, trade and economic -related matters. On
13 and 14 November, the President of the Sudan, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, visited
Uganda to discuss bilateral trade, immigration and security-related issues with the
President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, who has encouraged the Darfur rebel groups
to join the peace process. During a visit to Chad on 1 and 2 December, the President
of the Sudan and the President of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno, discussed bilateral relations
and noted the positive impact of the weapons collection campaign on regional security.

4/12

17-22899

S/2017/1113

IV. Humanitarian situation
18. During the reporting period, there were no additional displacements. New cases
of acute watery diarrhoea were registered, but there was a significant reduction in the
number of cases and deaths. Between August 2016 and 25 November 2017, a tota l of
5,537 cases were registered, resulting in 242 deaths, although for the reporting period,
there were only 30 cases, resulting in one death.
19. Regarding food security, the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
indicates that parts of North Darfur are experiencing dry spells, which may
subsequently affect overall agricultural production and water and pasture availability.
In addition, according to the Famine Early Warning Systems Network, cereal prices
are higher than last year and the recent four-year average across several markets in
Darfur. While access to food has improved among internally displaced persons and
poor households in Jebel Marra, limited agricultural labour opportunities and low
asset holdings will continue to limit household productive capacity. The most affected
households will continue to face acute food insecurity (phase 3 — crisis, according
to the Classification) between October 2017 and January 2018.
20. Developments in South Sudan continue to have an impact on the humanitarian
situation in Darfur. As of 15 December, nearly 192,826 South Sudanese were hosted
across the Darfur states. About 17 per cent of the refugees live in two East Darfur
refugee camps managed by UNHCR and Government counterparts, while the majori ty
are sharing resources with host communities and internally displaced persons in over
30 locations. Although host communities have largely welcomed the refugees and
peacefully co-exist with them, basic services and natural resources are overstretched in
most areas and this needs to be addressed so as to avert possible conflicts over
resources.

V. Operating environment
21. While humanitarian access continued to improve across Darfur, there was an
increase in criminal incidents and aviation restrictions. Delays in the issuance of visas,
in particular for human rights personnel, continued to hamper the work of UNAMID
and the backlog of containers at the port of entry has also not yet been fully resol ved.
Attacks and threats of attack
22. A total of 35 criminal incidents targeting United Nations and humanitarian
personnel were reported, compared to 23 in the previous reporting period. Of those
incidents, 27 involved attempted intrusions into UNAMID premises (26 at Nyala
“super camp”, South Darfur, and one at Ed Daein “super camp”, East Darfur),
resulting in the theft of valuables and cash belonging to a UNAMID police officer
and an attempted robbery at the asset container in Nyala Super Camp. On
14 November, in Kutum, North Darfur, a Swiss national working with the Children ’s
Nutrition Hospital in El Fasher, who was kidnapped on 7 October, was released
unharmed after 38 days in captivity.
Access restrictions
23. Humanitarian access continued to improve in Darfur, although the
implementation of the Government’s directives and procedures for humanitarian
action remained inconsistent. Some delays were reported in processing interstate
travel notifications and humanitarian partners continue to wor k with the Government
at both the federal and state level to further improve this process. The humanitarian
community in South Darfur continued to advocate for access to additional locations
17-22899

5/12

S/2017/1113

in East Jebel Marra, including areas outside of Government contro l. Plans to access
parts of East Jebel Marra are also contingent on a security risk assessment.
24. Sudanese authorities continued to limit the mission’s direct flights between team
sites in different states and allowed a limited window for air operations hours. Further,
the use of El Obeid Airport, which is the best alternative for regular flights to
Khartoum in the event of emergencies, continued to be restricted. In addition, the
mission was denied access twice to Misteriya, following the clashes betwee n RSF and
the border guards of Musa Hilal, before being allowed to visit the area on 6 December.
Visas and customs clearance
25. The Government granted 413 visas for UNAMID, including 33 for military
personnel, 173 for police personnel, 118 for official visitors, 67 for contractors, 1 for
a consultant, 9 for international staff and 12 for dependents. A total of 293 visa
requests have been pending beyond the normal period of 15 days, some of them since
June 2016. These include 42 for police, 118 for co ntractors, 63 for official visitors,
26 for military personnel, 31 for civilian staff, 2 for consultants and 11 for United
Nations Volunteers. The vacancy rate for the Human Rights Section remains
unchanged at 44 per cent, while 3 per cent of vacancies (of the overall 18 per cent
vacancy rate) for the mission’s international civil staff is attributable to pending visas.
26. The Government progressively released food ration containers from Port Sudan.
Currently, 50 shipments remain pending, two of which, containing an armoured
personnel vehicle and 10 water trucks, have been pending since 2015. The delays
have resulted in demurrage charges and other costs associated with the inspection and
repair of equipment being incurred by troop- and police-contributing countries. After
the current financial year ends in December, the Government will communicate with
UNAMID regarding the new processes and procedures that have repl aced the Sea
Ports Corporation.
27. The Government continued to prevent UNAMID from print ing hard copies of
its quarterly Voices of Darfur magazine and distributing the annual comic booklets on
the mission’s mandate. Despite the mission leadership’s formal and informal
interventions, the Government has still not reversed both directives, which negatively
affect UNAMID ability to effectively inform the host community of its activities.

VI. Progress towards achievement of the strategic objectives of
the mission
Protection of civilians
28. Integrated field protection teams conducted 68 missions in North Darfur, 40 in
West Darfur and 10 in Central Darfur. In North Darfur, those teams conducted eight
visits to Korma camp for internally displaced persons and five visits to the
surrounding areas of Korma market, and Tagber, Kunkule, Dixma, Tawilah and Miro
villages. The teams also conducted daily patrols to Umm Baru farming areas
(Abduleha, Musbat, Shegue-Karo, Furawiyah and Jurajeem) and Umm Baru camp for
internally displaced persons to follow up on the impact of the mandatory phase of the
Government’s collection of weapons campaign and the reaction of the border guard
forces located in Kutum and Kabkabiyah to that campaign. The team also undertook
four patrols to the abandoned villages of Orchi, Dolbe and Kurbia.
29. In Central Darfur, the integrated field protection teams visited North and Straina
camps for internally displaced persons in Nertiti area, and Hasahisa, Hamidiya
Khamsa and Dagayeg in the Zalingei area, and surrounding areas compris ing of
Orokom, Fatnakaral and Tamar Boljimail villages to follow up on issues related to
6/12

17-22899

S/2017/1113

the seasonal migration and the weapons collection campaign. In West Darfur, the
teams visited Sharib, Tajuna, Gokar, Tatarona, Fufu, Hashabah, Afandi, Tandusa,
Nuri, Umkadosa, Shatok, Um Sebeikha, Jokhan, Tanjeki, Amar Jaded, Amar Allah
Birtaguna, Ojeje and Misselime villages, regarding similar matters.
30. The military component of UNAMID conducted a total of 13,623 patrols, of
which 6,856 were for the protection of civilians (4,827 short-range patrols, 344 longrange patrols and 1,685 night patrols), 233 were for humanitarian escorts, and 6,534
patrols were for the protection of mission personnel and equipment (5,663 routine
patrols and 871 logistics and administrative escorts). The police component of
UNAMID conducted a total of 4,177 patrols, including 1,921 confidence -building
patrols to camps for internally displaced persons, 528 patrols to respond to the
security needs of internally displaced persons, particularly women and children
engaged in livelihood activities outside camps, 240 market patrols, 801 village
patrols, 609 town patrols, 15 area-of-return patrols and 63 migration patrols. In
addition, 195 joint patrols, involving 470 male and 153 female community p olice
volunteers, were conducted as part of crime prevention initiatives.
31. UNAMID uniformed personnel provided 316 round-trip escorts for
humanitarian partners, in support of the delivery and monitoring of humanitarian
assistance, as well as inter-agency verification assessments, distribution and
monitoring of food and non-food items and operational activities. In addition,
UNAMID continued to provide daily escorts to humanitarian water, sanitation and
hygiene partners for water-trucking from Kube to Sortony gathering site for internally
displaced persons in North Darfur, which hosts over 21,500 persons, as well as regular
armed escorts, twice a week, for humanitarian supplies between Sortony and
Kabkabiyah in North Darfur. Under special arrangements wit h the World Food
Programme (WFP), UNAMID armed escorts facilitated one WFP logistics convoy of
eight trucks, carrying 154 tons of food items to Tawilah, North Darfur, and continued
to provide security for WFP warehouses in El Fasher and Sortony.
32. In addition to ensuring security and facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, UNAMID also supported voluntary returns. In Shataya locality, South
Darfur, where state authorities and native administration have reportedly negotiated
the return of 97 per cent of land to the legal owners, with the assistance of the office
of the Prosecutor, UNAMID, through its quick-impact and community stabilization
projects, has supported the establishment of security and rule of law institutions and
the provision of some public services in that locality, with the construction and
rehabilitation of a police station, local court, prosecutor ’s office, secondary school
and water pumps. On 24 November, the Joint Special Representative handed over
those facilities to South Darfur authorities and the beneficiaries.
33. UNAMID continued to work with the transitional justice and human rights
institutions established under the Doha Document, with a view to strengthening their
capacity to promote and protect human rights in Darfur. UNAMID, in collaboration
with the United Nations Development Programme and the Advisory Council for
Human Rights of the Sudan, organized a four-day workshop for 50 participants on the
implementation of the recommendations on transitional justice made b y the Human
Rights Council through the universal periodic review, in El Fasher, which began on
25 October. The representative of the Ministry of Justice participating in the
workshop informed participants that the Sudan had accepted 184 of the 244
recommendations made by the Council and urged the advancement of the
implementation process of the universal periodic review recommendations. A one day training workshop was also conducted in El Fasher, North Darfur, for
35 participants (including 23 women) from the Federal Society of Disabled Persons,
to promote the rights of persons with disabilities, in accordance with the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
17-22899

7/12

S/2017/1113

34. UNAMID facilitated the participation of the Director General of Sudan Prison
Development and Reform and two senior prison officers in a five -day conference of
the International Corrections and Prisons Association for the Advancement of
Professional Corrections, held in London. A training on human rights laws and
standards, and the rights of people in detention, was organized in West Darfur on
8 November, to support capacity-building and skills development of newly recruited
government prison officers at Ardamata prison.
35. During the reporting period, the mission trained 180 serving prison officers
(from across the five states of Darfur) and 200 newly recruited prison officers (from
North Darfur), on compliance with international detention and prisons standards.
Similarly, on 8 and 9 November, in Nyala, South Darfur, 20 prosecutors and
Government of the Sudan police were trained on investigation and prosecution under
the criminal laws of the Sudan, international fair trial standards, the investigation and
prosecution of cases of sexual and gender-based violence and legal issues and
procedures related to juvenile cases. The mission was also given access to prisons and
other places of detention to undertake monitoring and advise the prison authorities on
international human rights standards and the treatment of prisoners.
36. UNAMID has begun discussions with the newly established Public Prosecution
Office of the Sudan on a letter of agreement to facilitate capacity-building support to
the prosecution service, including the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in
Darfur. The establishment of the new Prosecution Office, following the passage of
the Public Prosecution Act in June 2017, is a significant development for the rule of
law in the Sudan, as the act guarantees the independence of the pro secution, which
was previously placed under the Ministry of Justice. UNAMID continued to advocate
for the strengthening of the rule of law and capacity-building of the justice chain to
enable it to carry out its functions effectively.
37. UNAMID continued to monitor the trial involving two members of the Rizeigat
militia accused of killing eight internally displaced persons in Sortony gathering site
in 2016. In the general criminal court of El Geneina, four Arab suspects accused of
attacking and gang-raping two teachers in Addar School were found guilty and
sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment and 100 lashes each. On 6 December, UNAMID,
in collaboration with the Government’s Directorate of Prisons and Reforms,
organized the quarterly meeting of the National Prisons Development Committee in
El Fasher and the mission also handed a health unit in the Shallah women ’s prison
over to the Directorate.
38. During the reporting period, UNAMID undertook 71 field visits to monitor and
report on allegations of grave violations of children’s rights, trained 537
peacekeeping personnel on child rights and protection, and distributed 575 pocket
cards as part of its in-mission campaign on protecting children and supporting the
efforts of UNAMID, emphasizing the policy of zero tolerance for sexual relations
with minors. The mission also promoted local ownership of the protection of children
agenda through sensitization, capacity-building and the training of 962 members of
host communities (538 men and 424 women), including 733 internally displaced
persons and other community members, 141 Government police, 25 members of the
national armed forces/RSF, 59 Government prison officers, and 4 members of the
Sudan Liberation Army/Popular Defence (SLA/PD) led by “General” Sadiq.
39. Following an inter-agency assessment mission to East Jebel Marra, South Darfur
in September, a multisectoral humanitarian response has been ongoing since
mid-October. This includes the routine vaccination of children, the repair of hand
pumps and rehabilitation activities at Kidhgeer school. A total of 5,609 children under
5 years of age were screened for malnutrition and the ongoing rehabilitation of
18 classrooms in Kidhgeer and Belle El Serif will benefit 1,300 school -aged children.
8/12

17-22899

S/2017/1113

40. Activities related to demobilization and the reinsertion of ex-combatants
continued. On 15 October, UNAMID, in collaboration with the Darfur Ceasefire
Commission, Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
and the United Nations country team commenced planning for the demobilization and
provision of reinsertion assistance in North Darfur for 500 ex -combatants from Doha
Document signatories, the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM) and the Justice
and Equality Movement-Sudan (JEM-Sudan).
41. UNAMID mine action teams conducted general explosive hazard assessment
and disposal operations in 60 villages across Darfur, with a particular focus on areas
adjacent to and within Jebel Marra. As a result, 33 hazardous areas were cleared and
3,969 items of unexploded ordnance were destroyed. The teams also disposed of
10,918 rounds of expired small arms ammunition, to remove the risk of misuse of
those stocks, and delivered awareness training on explosive hazards that benefited
27,952 persons, including 9,774 men, 3,757 women, 7,732 boys and 6,689 girls. As
part of the transfer of knowledge and skills, the mission continued to enhance the
capacity of national authorities to assume responsibilities for mine action.
42. In collaboration with the local, state-level Ministry of Culture, Information and
Communication office, the mission organized a training programme for 25 journalists
on 6 and 7 November, in El Geneina, West Darfur, with the aim of building the
capacity of local media to contribute towards reporting on pea ce in the region.
Support to the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the
Doha Document
43. The Joint Special Representative, in collaboration with the African Union High level Implementation Panel, continued to engage with the parties to the conflict in
support of the Darfur peace process. Both the Government and the non -signatory
movements reiterated their past positions, with differences regarding the sequencing
of events: while the movements insist on signing a framework agreement, whic h
includes the cessation of hostilities, before the commencement of earnest negotiations
on substantive issues, the Government prefers the opposite. The movements have also
indicated their readiness to consider the Doha Document as a starting point on
condition that the resulting agreements would cover all the issues that they consider
crucial to any sustainable and lasting peace in Darfur, and that they have their own
independent mechanisms for implementation. In the meantime, SLA/AW remains
disengaged from the Darfur mediation. On 30 November, JEM/Gibril, SLA/MM and
for the first time, the Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional Council (SLM/TC),
while extending a unilateral cessation of hostilities in Darfur for two months,
reiterated their commitment to the road map agreement for peace in the Sudan
brokered by the High-level Implementation Panel.
44. Following the completion of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation
consultations at the level of localities, UNAMID facilitated a review conference on
the Dialogue and Consultation in Khartoum, on 30 October, which brought together
around 300 participants representing the government, civil society and academia from
across Darfur and from Khartoum. Key recommendations from the locality
consultations were categorized under security, political, economic and social themes.
The Government representatives acknowledged the relevance of some of the
recommendations to the peace process and indicated that policies and actions had
already been formulated to implement them. The meeting outlined subsequent plans
for the conduct of the Dialogue and Consultation at the state, refugee and diaspora
levels, as a next step, and called on the donor community to provide financial support.

17-22899

9/12

S/2017/1113

Mediation of intercommunal violence
45. UNAMID, in collaboration with the United Nations country team, continued to
engage with local authorities, the native administration and security committees to
support mediation processes in North and West Darfur. On 17 October, in North
Darfur, UNAMID, the United Nations Development Programme and a local
non-governmental organization, organized a forum to encourage hakamat (traditional
women singers) to participate in reconciliation activities in the state. The forum was
attended by 10 native administration leaders and 40 women from El Serif, Saraf
Omra, Kabkabiyah, Kutum and nomadic settlements around El Fasher locality.
Similarly, on 31 October, UNAMID conducted a forum with 20 members from the
Women for Peace Committee in Damrat Sheikh Abdulbagi, Kutum locality, to
encourage the participation of women in reconciliation initiatives.
46. In the context of the start of the migration and in order to enable a peaceful
season, UNAMID organized four dialogue forums in West Darfur for farmers and
herders in Tonvoka, Terbiba, and Nuri returnee villages, and Birkilab nomadic village,
from 6–8 November. Over 650 participants including farmers, herders, native
administration leaders, women and youth groups attended the forums. Participants
urged the government to enforce the rule of law so as to prevent tensions between the
farmers and herders, advised herders to refrain from releasing their animals into farms
and urged farmers to cultivate away from water points. They also recommended the
demarcation of migratory routes and the provision of water and veterinary services
along the routes.

VII. Progress in the implementation of the recommendations of
the strategic report
Implementation of phase one
47. The reconfiguration of UNAMID in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2363 (2017) has progressed within the phase one parameters, with 11 team
sites being closed and handed over to the Government of the Sudan, the uniformed
personnel repatriated and the civilian staffing review completed. The Jebel Marra task
force concept of operations was adopted by the mission on 7 December 2017. The
establishment of the temporary operating base in Golo is pending the allocation of
land from the Government. The mission is yet to complete the state stabilization plans
in collaboration with local authorities and the United Nations country team. A joint
African Union-United Nations assessment of phase one of the reconfiguration took
place from 7–17 November, in line with paragraph 6 of resolution 2363 (2017), and
a joint report detailing the assessment observations and recommendations will be
submitted to the Council under separate cover on 2 January 2018.
Joint fundraising strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur
48. The Integrated Strategic Framework for Darfur, covering the period from July
2017 to June 2019, was formally adopted by the mission and the United Nations
country team in September. It identified three key priorities for the United Nations to
consolidate peace in Darfur: the rule of law and human rights, durable solutions and
peacebuilding for human security. UNAMID and the country team are developing a
joint fundraising strategy for the implementation of the framework, with the aim of
scaling up country team resources to undertake peace consolidation activities in the
next two years and longer-term development in Darfur.

10/12

17-22899

S/2017/1113

VIII. Observations
49. While I am encouraged by the positive developments in the area of security and
by the progress of the weapons collection campaign, it is important to ensure that all
the communities, including the internally displaced persons, benefit from the secure
environment this is meant to create, and that the rights of citizens are duly respected
in the process. In the same context, steps towards the d isarmament of armed militia
are promising and should be pursued in line with the provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur.
50. Progress towards achieving a comprehensive peace through a negotiated
political settlement remains elusive. As the Doha Document represents a
comprehensive framework towards a political solution, I call on the rebel movements
to show vision, pragmatism and courage to ensure that the Darfur people benefit from
its implementation.
51. Addressing the needs of the internally displaced persons and finding durable
solutions for them remain priorities for the Government and the international
community in the Sudan. In this context, I call for realistic solutions that take into
account the rights and the interests of the internally displaced persons, and urge the
Government to fully engage with them in ensuring their access to land, to natural
resources and to services. In the same vein, while acknowledging the contributions of
Member States towards creating the necessary conditions for resettlement and/or
settlement, I urge the international community to assist the Darfur state governments
in stabilizing the situation, especially by creating a conducive environment for the
genuine reintegration of internally displaced persons into communities through the
strengthening of security and the establishment of rule of law institutions and services.
52. I call on the Government to build on the progress made in the restoration and
promotion of the rule of law to assist in rebuilding the trust in governance, which was
lost as a consequence of the armed conflict. I wish to recommend to the Government
to seize the opportunity of close collaboration with UNAMID and the United Nations
country team so as to enhance its capacity to effectively and legitimately carry out
and eventually take over the core functions of protecting civilians and promoting
human rights.
53. As the mission’s mandate calls for a two-pronged approach that entails the
operationalization of the Jebel Marra task force with a temporary operating base in
Golo, and stabilization for the rest of Darfur, we will do our utmost to finalize, with
Darfur state governments, the state stabilization plans, based on state-specific
priorities in accordance with the Doha Document, thus ensuring Darfuri ownership of
the process and relevance to the realities on the ground.
54. While some progress has been made in the issuance of visas and in addressing
bureaucratic hindrances, I call upon the Government to further expedite those
processes as well as to ensure the release of remaining containers, by facilitating
customs clearances and the certificate of tax exemption in accorda nce with the statusof-forces agreement. Likewise, I appeal to the Government to formalize the allocation
of land for the establishment of the Golo temporary operational base.
55. I would like to conclude by thanking the Joint Special Representative, Jere miah
Nyamane Kingsley Mamabolo, and all the personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations
country team and the humanitarian community, who continue to work tirelessly to
improve the lives of the people of Darfur. I commend my Special Envoy for the S udan
and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and the former President of South Africa, Thabo
Mbeki, and the former President of Nigeria, Abdulsalami Abubakar, of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, for their continuous efforts to resolve the
conflict in Darfur.
17-22899

11/12

S/2017/1113

12/12

17-22899
