S/PV.7192

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7192nd meeting

Thursday, 5 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Zagaynov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Ruiz Cerutti
Ms. King
Mr. Ali Adoum
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Lamek
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Gasana
Mr. McKell
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-42102 (E)

*1442102*

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Letter dated 15 May 2014 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/343)
Letter dated 16 May 2014 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/350)
Letter dated 16 May 2014 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/351)

2/32

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 15 May 2014 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/343)
Letter dated 16 May 2014 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/350)
Letter dated 16 May 2014 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/351)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and

Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2014/343 and S/2014/351, respectively
containing the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2014/350, containing a letter dated 16 May
2014 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is my privilege to appear before
the Security Council once again in two capacities, as
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. During
my remarks today, I shall endeavour not to repeat the
content of the written reports for those two institutions,
but will instead highlight a few of the key issues
contained therein.
Before doing so, however, I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Vitaly Churkin of the
Russian Federation on his country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. The Russian
Federation, as a permanent member of the Council,
has a continuing and critical role to play in relation to
matters of international criminal justice, and I wish to
extend to the Russian Federation my best wishes for its
presidency.
I would like to underscore my appreciation for the
work and dedication of the members of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and to
warmly welcome Chile and Ambassador Cristián
Barros Melet to their new leadership role in the Working
Group. Finally, I wish to recognize the continuing
support and assistance provided to the ICTY and the
Mechanism by the Office of the Legal Counsel and by
the Legal Counsel himself, and to extend my deepest
gratitude to all concerned.
Since its establishment by the Council, the ICTY has
been the subject of diverse and ambitious expectations.
For some observers, the Tribunal is the means by which
victims and witnesses of horrific crimes have had

14-421023/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

and continue to have an opportunity to be heard and
to obtain a sense of justice. For others, the Tribunal’s
judgements, as well as the extraordinary quantum of
evidence presented in its proceedings more generally,
provide an avenue for understanding the tragic events
that devastated families and communities across the
region of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Some
observers and commentators also believe that bringing
peace and reconciliation to the affected region is a core
part of the Tribunal’s mission.
I need not tell the members of the Council that
these different hopes and ideals for international justice
can often be in tension, if not outright conflict, with
each other. Nor need I tell members how the varying
visions that shape observers’ perceptions of the roles
of international criminal courts invariably impact
the understanding of the courts’ work and of their
achievements and failings.
Whatever different perceptions and expectations
there may be about what it is that courts like the ICTY
should achieve, however, I believe that all will agree
that as a court, our mandate is to apply the law to the
facts in a neutral manner, thereby ensuring the fair
trials and appeals of those who have been accused of
individual criminal responsibility for atrocities. And I
believe that all may also agree that the establishment of
the ICTY more than two decades ago demonstrated a
profound commitment on the part of the Council, acting
on behalf of the international community, to ensuring
accountability for widespread and flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law through procedures and
proceedings that reflect an abiding respect for fairness
and due process of law — that reflect, in essence, a
commitment to the rule of law.
The significance of this expression of commitment
should not be underestimated. It is a devastating truth
that the mere existence of the law cannot stop all
conflict or all brutality. Murder and rape, theft and
destruction — these acts have occurred since time
immemorial and, tragically, they continue to this day.
But it is through the law, I would suggest, and through
our respect for the rule of law that our shared values are
expressed and our moral imperatives articulated. It is
through the law and respect for the rule of law that we
affirm our own expectations about the kind of world in
which we wish to live.
More than 20 years ago, the Council unanimously
affirmed the importance of ensuring accountability and
respect for the rule of law when it established the ICTY.
4/32

In 2010, the Council renewed its commitment to these
same principles by creating the Mechanism. In the six
months since I last appeared before the Council (see
S/PV.7073), the principals and staff of the Mechanism
have continued to carry out the mandate entrusted to it
with both care and commitment. As described in greater
detail in my written report (S/2014/351, annex I), the
Mechanism is providing vital services to vulnerable
victims and witnesses, supervising the enforcement
of sentences across two continents, and addressing a
wide range of requests for assistance from national
jurisdictions, among other tasks.
During the reporting period, the Mechanism has
handled a significant amount and range of judicial
work, involving everything from allegations of false
testimony to requests for review and the variation
of witness protection measures. The hearing in the
Mechanism’s first appeal from judgement will be
conducted soon, and a judgement in the case is expected
before the end of the year.
The Mechanism’s archives section also continues
to work closely with the staff of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY on
the preparation and transfer of records to the custody of
the Mechanism, and progress is being made in relation
to the construction of the Mechanism’s permanent
premises in Arusha. My colleagues and I are most
grateful to the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania for its ongoing, excellent cooperation in
relation to the preparations for these new premises.
The dedication and talents of the Mechanism’s
excellent staff, hailing from more than 45 different
States, have played an invaluable role in making all
of this possible. However, I would be remiss if I did
not note with gratitude the tremendous support that
the Mechanism receives from valued colleagues at the
ICTR and the ICTY. As those two Tribunals complete
their own work and downsize their operations, the
Mechanism is relying less and less on their support.
But even as this occurs, the principals and staff of the
Mechanism will continue to work closely with their
counterparts at the ICTR and the ICTY to ensure a
smooth transition of remaining functions and services
to the Mechanism.
I would be likewise remiss if I did not stress how
vital the continued support and cooperation of Member
States are to the fulfilment of the Mechanism’s mandate.
The Mechanism relies on States to enforce sentences
pronounced by the ICTR, the ICTY and the Mechanism
14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

itself, and it is actively seeking to establish new
enforcement agreements with States. The cooperation
of States is also particularly vital when it comes to the
apprehension of the remaining fugitives.
When the Council established the Mechanism in
2010, all States were urged to intensify cooperation and
render all assistance necessary to achieve the arrest and
surrender of all remaining fugitives. Just a few months
ago, the Council renewed its entreaty in resolution
2150 (2014), calling upon all States to cooperate in the
arrest and prosecution of the remaining nine fugitives
indicted by the ICTR, three of whose cases remain with
the Mechanism. Such cooperation is imperative if the
international community’s commitment to ensuring
accountability is to have meaning.
I would now like to turn to discuss the ICTY,
the first ad hoc tribunal created by the Council and
a ground-breaking institution that is currently in the
process of finishing its final few cases.
As regards the Tribunal’s remaining trials,
three of them — those of the late-arrested accused
Messrs. Hadžić, Karadžić and Mladić — are
continuing in line with earlier forecasts for judgement
delivery, although all three are expected to continue
past 31 December, as I had previously informed the
Council. The fourth and final case still at trial — that
of Mr. Šešelj — presents a situation sui generis, as
described in my written report.
Since my last appearance before the Council,
judgements in two appeals have been issued, and two
more are expected by the end of this year. As previously
reported to the Council, it is currently anticipated that
despite the Tribunal’s continuing efforts, it will have
difficulty in completing the appeals in the remaining
three appeal cases by 31 December, and the projected
schedule of one of those cases has suffered a setback.
Details on all of these matters and other updates
regarding the Tribunal are contained in my written
report.
Even as the Tribunal’s judicial work advances, the
ICTY continues to move towards closing its doors and
is taking active steps to downsize its operations. A
variety of factors, many beyond the scope of the case
management process, continue to pose challenges as
we strive to maintain previously forecast judgement
delivery dates. I can assure the Council, however,
that the committed judges and staff of the Tribunal
are making every effort to ensure that the Tribunal’s

nine remaining cases are speedily concluded while still
respecting all necessary procedural safeguards.
International courts cannot resolve long-running
historical conflicts on their own. Courts must be part
of a panoply of transitional justice measures, including
broader societal efforts spearheaded by community
leaders, focused on history, memory, responsibility
and respect for the rule of law. The need for a broader
approach such as this should not, however, detract from
our appreciation for the Tribunal’s groundbreaking role
and the valuable contributions of international criminal
justice more generally.
Ensuring accountability for the worst of crimes
and respect for the rule of law is sometimes not easy,
and it is certainly not cost-free. But it is essential. For
the protection of men, women and children, and for the
preservation of our common values, the commitments
made by the Security Council more than two decades
ago, and renewed in 2010 and again this very year, must
not be forsaken. It is because of this that the Mechanism
was created, that the ICTY is diligently and carefully
completing its final few cases before it closes, and that a
successful conclusion to the remaining work entrusted
to both institutions is still so tremendously important.
I am, as ever, deeply grateful to the members of
the Council and the international community for their
continued support as my colleagues and the dedicated
staff of the ICTY and the Mechanism carry out the
mandates the Council has entrusted to us.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my sincere congratulations to the representative of the
Russian Federation presiding over the Security Council
in June. I would also like to thank and congratulate
the representative of Chile on assuming the role of
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. I wish both of them successful tours of duty.
I would also like to take this opportunity to renew
my thanks to the Office of the Legal Counsel for its
continued work over the past six months as a very able
and neutral interlocutor between the Tribunals and the
Security Council.
It is as always a great honour to address the
members of the Council and present it with a current
update on the progress being made towards completion

14-421025/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

of the work of the International Criminal tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). I wish to express the gratitude of the
entire Tribunal to all Governments represented on the
Council for their continued support as we approach the
conclusion of two decades of judicial work.

soon be forgotten. As we look back on almost 20 years
of work, it is clear that the staff of the Tribunal, some
of whom have committed large parts of their working
lives to it, represent a significant part of the ICTR’s
legacy and what it will leave for posterity.

I am happy to report that the Tribunal’s judicial
workload, which or some time has been only in the
Appeals Chamber, remains on schedule since my last
report (S/2013/663) in December 2013. The Appeals
Chamber has delivered two judgements concerning four
persons and heard appeals in three cases concerning
four persons during the six months since the last report.
Appellate proceedings have now been concluded with
respect to 50 persons, and the Appeals Chamber is
expected to render a judgement on the sole remaining
accused in the Ndindiliyimana et al. (“Military II”)
case in June, while three other appeal judgements
concerning four persons are projected to be delivered
in September. This leaves only the Nyiramasuhuko et
al. (“Butare”) case, concerning six persons, in which
the appeal is still scheduled to be heard before the
end of 2014, with the judgement still not projected for
completion before the end of July 2015.

I now turn to the issue of relocating the acquitted
and convicted released persons still residing in
Arusha. I note that during the reporting period, the
number of acquitted persons increased from seven to
nine, following the acquittal of two individuals in the
Ndindiliyimana et al. case in February, and the number
of convicted released persons rose from two to three,
following the release of Innocent Sagahutu after we
filed our written report (see S/2014/343) on 5 May.
Mr. Sagahutu was released following a reduction in his
sentence by the Appeals Chamber in February and was
eligible for consideration for early release, which was
granted on 9 May.

As I have previously reported, the projected delivery
of the appeal judgement in the Butare case reflects the
delays in the briefing schedule, the fact that the scope
of the appeals in this case has expanded since the initial
notices of appeal, and the voluminous and complex
pre-appeal litigation. I remain in contact with the
Presiding Judge on the Butare appeal, and I am happy
to report that the allocation of additional resources to
this case has helped to prevent the additional delays that
could potentially have occurred due to the continued
volume of pre-appeal litigation. The Registrar and I
continue to work closely with the Presiding Judge on
Butare to try to ensure that the judgement in our final
case will be delivered without any further delays.
I feel it is incumbent on me at this time to bring
to the Council’s attention, as I have in the past, the
tireless work and dedication of the appeals judges and
support staff of the Appeals Chamber, who have once
again worked during this reporting period to very tight
deadlines to ensure that the Tribunal’s work remains on
schedule. As the Council is well aware, however, the
Tribunal is more than just its judicial component, and
I would therefore be remiss if I did not also thank all
the current and former ICTR staff outside the judicial
teams. Their contributions to international justice have
helped us reach the stage we are at today and will not

6/32

The issue of relocating the now 12 individuals
currently residing in Arusha has been brought to the
Council’s attention on numerous occasions and is an
issue that I continue to believe represents a serious
challenge to the credibility of the enforcement of
international criminal justice. Despite numerous
Security Council resolutions calling upon Member
States to assist the ICTR in its relocation efforts, all
attempts made by the ICTR to relocate the remaining
individuals have proven unsuccessful.
Since the last report to the Council (S/2013/460),
and consistent with the framework of the strategic
plan submitted to the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals in the past year, the Registrar
and I met with representatives from European countries.
The Registrar also visited countries in Africa and held
discussions with the African Group and the Chair of the
African Union Commission in Addis Ababa to present
the idea of the relocation of one or more acquitted or
released persons. Unfortunately, as more time passes
without positive results, it becomes less likely that
those individuals will be relocated before the ICTR
closes, and, as such, the Tribunal must once again call
for urgent assistance from the Security Council to find
a sustainable solution to the issue.
I will now update the members of the Council
on the progress regarding the issue of reparations for
victims of the genocide. I am pleased to announce that,
following a request from victims’ associations and initial
discussions between my Office and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), which I explained
14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

in my last report to the Council (S/2013/460), IOM has
secured funding through a generous donation by the
Government of Finland to undertake an assessment
study on how the issue of victims’ reparations could
be taken forward. In February, the IOM and my
Office held very promising initial meetings with
key stakeholders in Rwanda, including the Rwandan
Government, victims and survivors associations and
civil society. Further consultations and preparations
for the next stage of the project are expected to begin
shortly, following the conclusion last week of a formal
memorandum of understanding between the IOM and
the Rwandan Government.
I will now provide the Council with an overview
of the progress that has been made with respect to the
transition to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010).
During the reporting period, the administration of
the monitoring of all ICTR cases referred to national
jurisdictions became fully the responsibility of the
Mechanism. However, ICTR staff members continue
to assist the Mechanism as interim monitors, pending
the finalization of the Mechanism’s arrangements with
an international organization or body to monitor all
referred cases.
In accordance with article 27 of the Rome Statute,
the Mechanism is responsible for the management of
the archives for both Tribunals. The ICTR continues
to work in close cooperation with the Mechanism to
ensure that the records are prepared in a manner that
will facilitate effective management by the Mechanism
after the transfer. I am happy to report that, as of 5 May,
the Tribunal has transferred to the Mechanism a total of
approximately 630 linear metres of records with longterm to permanent retention value, out of an estimated
total of 2,621 linear metres of records that are being
appraised for transfer by the end of the ICTR mandate.
After a great deal of work done on assessing records in
the past six months, additional records will be ready for
transfer to the Mechanism during the coming months.
However, records still in active use, including records
related to the Butare case, will remain the responsibility
of the ICTR and will be transferred only once they are
no longer in use. The Tribunal remains hopeful that the
preparation and transfer of its records will be completed
prior to its closure.
I will conclude by recalling that, since April,
Rwanda has been marking the twentieth anniversary
commemoration and honouring the victims of the 1994

genocide. Overwhelmingly, the victims of the atrocities
in 1994 were Tutsi, against whom the ICTR has stated,
as a fact of common knowledge beyond dispute, that
a genocide was committed. But they were also Twa,
moderate Hutu and others who stood in opposition
to the genocidal campaign, all of whom suffered the
same tragic fate as their Tutsi brothers and sisters. Very
fitting efforts to honour the victims of the genocide
have already taken place, and further efforts are being
planned to continue the commemoration for all victims
of the genocide.
In April, representatives from the ICTR, including
myself, the Prosecutor and the Registrar, participated
in commemorative events in Kigali, Arusha and Dar es
Salaam. Those events very fittingly reminded the world
of those 100 dark days that took the lives of more than
800,000 people and of the resiliency of a country whose
determination to rebuild a society after unspeakable
devastation represents a monumental achievement that
will not soon be forgotten.
Rwanda’s achievements over the past 20 years are
quite impressive, including the creation of a stable
and functioning Government, whose commitment
to national reconciliation and the strengthening of
the rule of law can be seen in, as one example, its
vigorous efforts to rebuild its justice system. The
development of Rwanda’s judicial system, including
holding accountable those who participated in the
atrocities in 1994, remains a crucial part of the peace
and reconciliation process in Rwanda, and there can be
no question that the ICTR has played an important role
as an accountability mechanism.
It is a testament to Rwanda’s dedication to
accountability that, as the Tribunal’s mandate draws
near to a close, Rwanda is currently in the process of
trying two cases referred to it by the ICTR and has taken
over responsibility for six of the remaining fugitives.
As Rwanda and other countries continue to work to hold
those responsible for international crimes accountable,
it is clear that the jurisprudential legacy of the ICTR
will live on until, as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
appropriately put it, “genocide is consigned, once and
for all, to history”. The Secretary-General’s message
was delivered by Bongani Majola, ICTR Registrar, in
Arusha at the 10 April commemoration (SG/SM/15763).
As we look ahead, it is also important to note
that 8 November 2014 will mark 20 years since the
Council saw fit, initially at the request of Rwanda,
to create an international tribunal. We hope that the

14-421027/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

international community will use the occasion as an
opportunity to mark Rwanda’s achievements, as well
as to further study the lessons learned from what was
only an experiment in international justice in 1994.
The great experiment has faced some adversity over
the years, but it has also proven to be an integral part
of the evolution of post-conflict justice. We plan to
recall all of the Tribunal’s achievements and challenges
through a series of international events surrounding
the 8 November anniversary. We sincerely hope that
the international community will fully engage in and
support those efforts.
It has been my distinct honour to address the
Council once more, and on behalf of the Tribunal, I
wish to express our gratitude for the support that the
States Members of the United Nations have shown us
throughout the past two decades. Continued assistance
from Member States is crucial to the efforts that we are
making to ensure that the Tribunal can close its doors
with its mandate completed and its legacy secured.
The President: I thank Judge Joensen for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council on our progress
towards the completion of our mandate.
As forecast in my December address (see
S/PV.7073), in this reporting period the Prosecution
finished presenting its evidence in all the remaining
trials. We are now well and truly in the final phase of
our work. In the Karadžić case, the defence case has
closed and the parties are now preparing their final
trial briefs and closing arguments for late August and
September, respectively. Following the closing of the
Prosecution’s case in both the Mladić and the Hadžić
cases, the respective Trial Chambers denied the defence
motions for acquittal. As a result, the Mladić defence
began presenting its evidence two weeks ago and the
defence in the Hadžić case is scheduled to begin on
3 July. The trial judgement in the Šešelj case is still
pending.
The Appeals Division of the Office of the Prosecutor
is presently occupied with five appeals. I would like to
refer the Council to the full written statement for more
details in that regard.
The appeal judgements earlier this year in the
Šainović et al. and Ðorđević cases established two

8/32

additional legal precedents with far-reaching and
positive significance for both the Tribunal and for
international criminal law. First, in both cases, the
Appeals Chamber corrected errors at the trial level that
resulted in unduly restrictive approaches to assessing
whether the accused could foresee crimes of sexual
violence. In correcting those errors, the Appeals
Chamber has strengthened the foundations for holding
senior officials accountable for crimes of sexual
violence amid a violent criminal campaign. Secondly, in
the Šainović et al. case, the Appeals Chamber affirmed
that specific direction is not a requirement for aiding
and abetting, thereby bringing the Tribunal’s case law
back in line with customary international law.
I am pleased to report that the day-to-day
cooperation between my Office and the countries of the
former Yugoslavia continues smoothly. Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina have responded as required
to our requests for assistance and have generally
facilitated our work on the remaining trials and appeals.
We call upon the national authorities to maintain that
good cooperation throughout the next reporting period
and beyond. I am also pleased to note that additional
cooperation protocols have been concluded among
the countries of the former Yugoslavia on war crimes
issues and that information exchanges are taking place.
That is clearly an improvement, and we encourage the
national authorities to translate the goodwill enshrined
in the protocols into more visible action.
When it comes to implementing the Bosnia and
Herzegovina National War Crimes Strategy, the picture
is unfortunately bleak. As I have reported over the
past four periods, very little progress has been made
towards finalizing the remaining category II cases,
the last of which my Office transferred to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2009. Only one indictment in relation
to those investigation files was issued in the current
reporting period, leaving the other seven files pending,
with no discernible progress made. In April, I had
in-depth discussions with representatives of the Office
of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina but did
not receive convincing explanations for the absence of
relevant activity on the remaining files. That situation
cannot continue. The responsible authorities must
commit to a dramatic improvement in processing the
category II cases.
More generally, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
National War Crimes Strategy is considerably delayed
and a large backlog of cases remains. According to the

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
around 350 complex cases should be completed by the end
of 2018. That is three years after the deadline originally
prescribed. Then there is the far larger backlog of less
complex cases, many of which still await investigation
and, in some cases, the start of investigations. Serious
action is required if that large volume of cases is to be
completed by the 2023 deadline.

those investigating and documenting such crimes. One
such effort is the United Kingdom’s Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, launched in May 2012 by Foreign
Secretary William Hague. We will be present at the
Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
in London next week and look forward to sharing our
insights and expertise as part of that unprecedented
dialogue on conflict-related sexual violence.

The delay does not arise solely from a lack of
resources. There is little commitment on the part
of the responsible institutions to prioritizing war
crimes investigations and prosecutions. While more
resources alone will not solve some of the fundamental
problems of the National War Crimes Strategy, my
Office welcomes the justice budgetary support of
the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance, funded
by the European Union, which aims to strengthen
resources for war crimes processing. My Office also
recognizes the efforts of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to set up a new and more coordinated
national training programme for war crimes cases. As
emphasized in a report prepared on behalf of my Office
last year, a comprehensive and coordinated training
programme is an essential precondition for successfully
implementing the National War Crimes Strategy. My
Office remains available to work with the OSCE and
other relevant partners to integrate the knowledge and
expertise of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia into the programme.

On a similar theme, we are pleased that, of course
within the constraints of our available capacity, the
expertise within my Office is being channelled into
rule of law capacity-building efforts across the world.
Periodically, we have been called upon to advise and
assist in post-conflict accountability processes in the
Middle East, Africa and South America. We have also
assisted other parts of the United Nations system, such
as the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and UN-Women, in that regard. In that way, we
have been pleased to reinforce the operational capacity
available within the international community for
investigating and prosecuting international crimes. To
the extent compatible with our core functions of trial
and appellate work, we will remain open to further
requests to assist in the future.

My Office is in the process of finalizing the first
edition of a paper that records our best practices and
lessons learned with respect to investigating and
prosecuting crimes of sexual violence. We know that
such crimes occurred in shockingly high numbers
during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and that
many of them remain unaddressed. We also know
that crimes of large-scale sexual violence continue to
characterize ongoing conflicts around the world. We
plan to make available our experience over the past
21 years in navigating some of the distinctive obstacles
that arise in sexual violence cases. The paper will be
of interest to a range of actors, including the national
authorities of the former Yugoslavia and other countries
around the world.
Our work also reinforces other efforts currently
under way within the international community to
elevate the priority accorded to crimes of sexual
violence and to improve the guidance available to

In conclusion, as downsizing continues in
compliance with the completion strategy, my Office
remains firmly focused on the final trials and appeals,
which are among the most important and complex in
the Tribunal’s history. We are also taking a deep and
reflective look at the practices that we have developed
and the lessons learned over the past 21 years. We
know that there is an increasing interest among many
stakeholders in accessing such information, and we are
committed to sharing it. We will continue to encourage
the national authorities, especially those of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to take full advantage of the resources
available to them within my Office in order to ensure
accountability for the crimes committed. More broadly,
we know that finding creative and effective new
strategies for national capacity-building is a priority
area if we are to construct a more coherent and complete
international justice system. We will ensure that our
experience and expertise are available as a building
block for that process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Judge
Brammertz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Jallow.
Judge Jallow: Today’s meeting takes place against
the backdrop of the recent commemoration by the

14-421029/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Security Council, Rwanda, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and,
indeed, the world at large of the twentieth anniversary
of the 1994 Rwandan genocide against the Tutsis. It is
also in anticipation of the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of the ICTR by the Council.
In that context, we at the ICTR and at the
Mechanism share the expression of remorse by Council
members over the occurrence of that great tragedy. We
commend the Council’s unflinching support for justice
and accountability, as well as its commitment to make
never again a reality. Rwanda’s tragedy of 1994 acutely
highlights the need for effective measures to prevent
mass atrocities and for timely and effective steps by the
international community to protect communities that
face the threat of or are already subject to such atrocities.
We hope that the role of the ICTR in the process of
post-genocide justice and reconciliation in Rwanda has
provided a basis for effective accountability for such
crimes and further strengthening of the international
community’s resolve to ensure that such atrocities are
indeed never again allowed to occur.
The ICTR, in the course of its mandate, has indicted
93 leading figures, of whom 61 thus far have been
convicted of genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes and 14 have been acquitted at trial or on appeal.
Two indictments were withdrawn prior to trial, three
accused passed away prior to trial, and we have now
referred ten cases to national jurisdictions for trial. We
still have nine fugitives at large, six of whom have had
their cases referred to Rwanda, and three fugitives have
had their cases reserved for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The process of justice and accountability has not,
it must be acknowledged, been exclusively the preserve
of the International Court. Rwanda, through both its
conventional courts and its traditional gacaca courts, has
undertaken the prosecution of the bulk of perpetrators
of the genocide and contributed significantly to the
restoration of peace and the reconciliation of the
community. Several other countries, in Europe and
the Americas particularly, have also contributed to
the process by undertaking the local prosecution of
genocide suspects, extraditions or deportations of
suspects or acceptance of cases for trial on referral
from the ICTR. The process of accountability has thus
been a truly global effort. Underpinning it all is the
sacrifice of thousands of victims and survivors who

10/32

have come forward and testified before the courts,
reliving their bitter experiences in order to assist the
courts in establishing the truth and rendering justice.
To all those States and to the witnesses, we owe a debt
of gratitude.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
that tragic event and prepare for the imminent closure
of the ICTR and the complete takeover of its functions
by the Mechanism, we need to recognize that, despite
many achievements, much remains to be done to bring
the process of legal accountability to a proper end.
Member States need to cooperate with and support
the Mechanism and Rwanda to ensure that the nine
remaining fugitives are arrested and transferred to
the appropriate jurisdiction for trial. The many other
persons suspected of involvement in the genocide
who could not be indicted by the Tribunal need to be
extradited to Rwanda for trial or to another appropriate
jurisdiction or prosecuted by the States in which they
reside. Witnesses who require protection need to be
secured against those continuously seek to subvert the
process of justice. Those who have been acquitted or
have finished serving sentences need to be assisted
with resettlement. These are all matters in which only
Member States can assist to provide solutions, and
we look forward to their full cooperation in all these
respects.
Turning to the work of the ICTR during this past
period, I am pleased to report that, with the completion
of the oral arguments on appeal in the Nizeyimana and
Nzabonimana cases, the Tribunal’s remaining workload
continues to be reduced and is on track for timely
completion. Earlier in the reporting period, the Appeals
Chamber also completed the hearing of oral arguments
in the Karemera et al and Ngirumpatse appeals, at
which session it also delivered judgements against
three accused in the Ndindiliyimana et al (Military II)
appeal. Prior to that, judgement on the Ndahimana case
was delivered on 16 December 2013.
We are now awaiting a judgement is now awaited
in the case of Augustin Bizimungu, whose appeal was
severed from the other Military II accused, as well as in
the Nizeyimana and Nzabonimana cases. Oral argument
in our last appeal — the Butare case, in which there are
six accused — has not yet taken place, but my staff are
actively engaged in preparing for it, litigating a large
number of post-trial motions and preparing for final
submissions in that case.
Alongside the appellate work, which is the only core
work that remains, staff of the Office of the Prosecutor
14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

(OTP) remain actively engaged with the completion of
the remaining critical activities, including the updating
of all records of past disclosures for a smooth transition
to the Mechanism. The archiving of the OTP’s records
continues apace, and with the commissioning of the
OTP’s archives store, which was mentioned in my most
recent report, more records are positioned for transfer
to the Mechanism’s archives. In the past six months, a
further 225 boxes of documents in respect of 5 cases
were handed over to the archives. The processing,
appraisal and security classification of all Office
records continues in order to ensure proper archiving.
The staff also continue to assist the staff of
the Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor in a
double-hatting capacity whenever required, particularly
in connection with the monitoring of referred cases and
the preparations for oral arguments in the Augustin
Ngirabatware case.
Our residual work, especially around good practices
and experiences and the preparation of manuals,
continues to attract interest from broad quarters and
practitioners, particularly in the efforts to meet the
challenges of transitional justice. Our cooperation
with other United Nations agencies in that respect has
been most useful. Our manual on the investigation
and prosecution of sexual violence was completed and
launched at an international workshop that I hosted in
Kampala in January 2014 and is now available to all
Member States and other interested parties. A series of
regional training events are being planned on this subject
for later this year as a follow-up to the Kampala meeting.
I am happy to report that UN-Women has played and
continues to play an important role in those activities in
relation to a very difficult and critical subject. Like our
colleagues at the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), we are also collaborating with the
organizers of the global conference in London relating
to the investigation and prosecution of sexual violence
and look forward to participating in that event.
With regard to the activities of the Mechanism, I am
pleased to inform the Council that, with the completion
of the recruitment of the core staff of the Office in both
branches, in Arusha and The Hague, the work of the
two branches and the task of inter-branch coordination
is progressing well.
At the Arusha branch, the creation of a roster of
potential staff for recruitment in the event of the arrest of
a fugitive is in progress. To enhance further cooperation
in the tracking and arrest of the three fugitives, that

is, Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and Augustin
Bizimana, I have visited, during the reporting period,
several countries in the Southern African Development
Community and Great Lakes region of southern Africa
and held high-level and productive consultations with
Government ministers and senior security officials.
I am pleased to report that the Mechanism has
been assured that it will receive effective cooperation
in pursuance of our requests. Further visits to more
countries in the region are planned before the end of
the year. It is my hope that, with increased cooperation
between Member States and staff on the ground, the
tracking activities and the arrest of the fugitives will
be accelerated and yield some results. Tracking will
continue to be a top priority for the Mechanism, and
so should also be for all Member States. Our Office
continues to receive a steady stream of requests
for assistance, and in the current reporting period,
51 requests from 10 countries were responded to.
Monitors appointed by my Office continue to
monitor the two cases, Uwinkindi and Munyagishari,
that were referred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013,
respectively, and Bucyibaruta and Munyeshyaka, which
were referred to France in 2007. The trial of Uwinkindi
has actually commenced as scheduled on 14 May 2014.
Meanwhile, pre-trial proceedings in the Munyagishari
case in Rwanda are ongoing, although no firm trial date
has yet been scheduled. My recent consultations with
French judicial authorities also disclose significant
progress in the management of the two cases in France.
The oral arguments in the Ngirabatware case, the only
appeal pending from the Arusha branch, are tentatively
scheduled for 30 June.
The Hague branch has, in addition to establishing
itself to its full capacity, been active during the reporting
period. We have established there an advance ad hoc
appeals team to deal with the appeals that we expect to
manage, and the branch works closely with the ICTY
Office of the Prosecutor, making use of double-hatting
arrangements to prepare for future appeals and to make
efficient use of resources.
Regarding judicial activities, I am pleased to report
that the briefing of a request for a review of the ICTY
judgement against Milan Lukić has been completed.
The Hague branch has responded to nine applications
for variations of protective measures from national
judicial authorities in relation to more than 30 ICTY
witnesses. It has also provided information to the

14-4210211/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Registrar regarding the enforcement of sentences in
relation to five persons convicted by the ICTY.

for the Tribunal, but also for the cause of international
justice and accountability.

Cooperation with the national juridical authorities
with respect to that branch is going well. There has,
however, been an unforeseen increase in the number of
requests for assistance received by the Hague branch.
We have had to create a temporary position in order to
assist with managing that backlog. Since my last report
(see S/PV.7073), the Hague branch has responded to
121 requests for assistance, primarily from prosecutors
from the former Yugoslavia. The Hague branch has
been working closely with the liaison prosecutors
from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia,
who are situated at the ICTY-OTP, and we are in the
process now of negotiating — and hopefully we will
conclude before the next meeting of the Council on
this topic — memorandums of understanding with the
respective State prosecutors in the region to entrench
cooperation and mutual legal assistance and ensure
smooth continuity as the Mechanism takes over mutual
assistance and cooperation responsibilities.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Jallow
for his briefing.

Further, we also had the pleasure of participating
in the annual conference of prosecutors in Brijuni this
year.
I remain confident that the ICTR is on track for
the timely completion and closure of its remaining
workload, with the conclusion of all cases save the
Butare appeal. We therefore consider 2014 a fitting
year to organize, as we plan to do, subject to voluntary
contributions from Member States, two critical
components of the ICTR legacy programme. The
seventh Colloquium of International Prosecutors, which
will seek to identify the challenges and prospects for
the national prosecution of international crimes and the
lessons that the work of the Tribunals can offer in that
regard. The Colloquium will also be complemented by
an international symposium on the contribution of the
ICTR to international justice, peace and reconciliation.
We look forward very much to the support of Member
States to make those events possible.
Finally, allow me to acknowledge, with appreciation,
the Council’s resolution 2150 (2014) calling for the
urgent and active support of Member States, especially
in the Great Lakes region, to realistically show
their commitment to the fight against impunity by
supporting the Mechanism in tracking and arresting the
few remaining fugitives slated for trial in Arusha and in
Rwanda. That remains the biggest challenge, not only

12/32

I now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their complete reports
on the work done and on the completion strategies of
their respective Tribunals. We also thank the President
and Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for his comprehensive reports
on the Mechanism’s work.
Our country has supported the establishment of the
various International Criminal Tribunals and their work.
We underscore their contribution to the international
justice system and to international peace and security
and the rule of law. In that regard, we recognize and
support the work carried out by the ICTY and the ICTR
in accordance with our conviction that the most serious
crimes in the eyes of the international community must
not go unpunished.
Last year we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the establishment of the ICTY, and this
year we will commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the creation of ICTR. Experience has shown us
that the jurisprudence of the specialized Criminal
Tribunals, despite their ex-post-facto nature, serves as
a valuable contribution to the fight against impunity
and the ongoing development of international criminal
law. In that connection, we also support the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, which ultimately allows for the conclusion of
the proceedings initiated by the Tribunals and ensures
accountability for those responsible for the crimes that
led to the establishment of the ICTY and ICTR.
From my country’s perspective and with our own
experience in recent history, we would like to underscore
the role played not only by the international criminal
Tribunals, but also by the cooperation and assistance
that can be provided by the international community in
creating mechanisms for victim reparations, which will
open space for reconciliation.
With regard to the ICTY, we underscore the
progress made in concluding the pending trials

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

and appeals, ensuring all the while respect for the
fundamental principles of due process, impartiality and
justice. Meanwhile, we underscore the importance role
that international judicial cooperation has played in
ensuring the Tribunal’s proper functioning, which has
allowed, among other things, for the completion of the
trials of 141 of the 161 accused, and the important fact
that there are no fugitives at large. However, despite
the Tribunal’s efforts, we see a delay in the processing
of some cases owing to a lack of logistical resources,
primarily with regard to the translation of many
documents. My country encourages Member States
to increase their cooperation in that area in order to
streamline the procedures so that justice can be served.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, we underscore the fact that its trial work
has been completed and that there are only five appeals
at various stages of processing. Rulings are expected to
be handed down this year, except in the Butare case, the
decision for which is expected next year.
We wish to express our concern over the fact that
nine defendants remain fugitives, and we encourage
all States, especially those in which fugitives are
suspected to be situated, to redouble their efforts to
find them and have them brought before the Mechanism
for trial. The international community must cooperate
with international criminal justice to ensure that there
is no impunity.
With regard to the situation of acquitted persons
and those who have already served their sentences and
remain in Arusha under the custody of the Tribunal
without identification documents, migration status or
means to support themselves, it is essential that efforts
to find a final resettlement for them continue. Once
again, the international criminal justice system depends
on the cooperation of the international community.
With regard to the Residual Mechanism, we
are pleased that it is fully operating and carrying
out intense judicial work and that the transfer of the
Tribunals’ functions to the Mechanism has shown
concrete progress. We underscore the signing of
the agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Tanzania, on 5 February, which allows
for the construction of the facilities for the Mechanism
in Arusha. We thank the Government of Tanzania for
the generous donation of land on which those facilities
will be built. We also encourage the prompt signing
of an agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of the Netherlands on the functioning of

the branch at The Hague. The transfer of the archives
of both Tribunals to the Mechanism should be a priority
for those bodies. In that regard, we recognize the
progress made so far.
The Tribunals have achieved much progress in
fulfilling their mandates, and we recognize their efforts
to implement their completion strategies. Nevertheless,
we recognize the challenges that the Tribunals face in
retaining their qualified and experienced staff, who,
faced with losing their jobs with the conclusion of the
work of both Tribunals, are seeking other opportunities.
The international community must ensure that both
the Tribunals and the Mechanism have the necessary
human resources to carry out the work entrusted to
them by the Council.
The dual mandates of Judge Meron and Mr. Hocking,
as President and Registrar of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Residual
Mechanism, respectively, and of Prosecutor Jallow,
as Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the Mechanism, have facilitated the
effective and coordinated transfer of functions from
the Tribunals to the Mechanism. We recognize their
commendable work.
Chile is honoured to chair the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. As we have heard
from the Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, as well
as from the President and Prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism, they face numerous challenges in their
completion strategies and in the transfer of their
functions to the Mechanism. The Working Group
is in a unique position to contribute to the search for
joint solutions. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
a deepening of international cooperation so that the
mandate given to the Tribunals and the Mechanism by
the Council can be adequately fulfilled.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank the briefers for
the presentation of their assessments and progress
reports on the work of their respective Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism (S/2014/343, S/2014/350 and
S/2014/351).
Members of the Council are all aware that this year,
from 7 April to 4 July, Rwanda is commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of the one-hundred-day genocide
against the Tutsi. On 8 November this year, we will also
mark the twentieth anniversary of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) established

14-4210213/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

by the Security Council in its resolution 955 (1994).
Therefore, as we consider the reports submitted to us,
we shall also take stock of the work of the ICTR during
the past 20 years.

accepted that Joachim von Ribbentrop, Adolf Hitler’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, or Heinrich Müller, Head
of the Gestapo, could be acquitted in Nuremberg? I do
not think so.

Rwanda acknowledges the important role played by
the ICTR and by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in advancing
international criminal justice. Indeed, both Tribunals
have produced a substantial body of jurisprudence,
including on the definition of genocide and on superior
responsibility. In the Akayesu case, the Tribunal, while
establishing that genocide was committed against the
Tutsi ethnic group in Rwanda, also ruled that acts of
rape and sexual violence constitute crimes of genocide
if committed with the intent to destroy the targeted
group. We also recognize the fact that the ICTR indicted
93 individuals, mainly the masterminds, planners and
organizers of the genocide, who were out of reach for
the Rwandan justice system as they were international
fugitives.

Unfortunately, that is what happened at the ICTR,
where a number of cabinet ministers, including the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and military commanders,
including the Head of the Gendarmerie, have been
acquitted by the ICTR, mainly by the Appeals
Chamber. To add insult to injury, the ICTR has also
granted a number of early releases to people sentenced
for genocide despite the seriousness of the crime
committed.

The ICTR and the ICTY clearly established that
genocide was committed in Rwanda and Srebrenica
respectively, and we take this opportunity to once again
call on all members of the international community,
including political actors, to fight the scourge of
genocide denial, which is an insult to the victims and
an obstacle to long-term reconciliation.
Rwanda also appreciates the medical and
psychological services provided by the Mechanism
to witnesses residing in Rwanda, particularly the
victims of psychotrauma and HIV/AIDs among women
raped during the genocide. That was one of the main
contentious issues of the past few years, as those
services had only been provided to the people indicted
or convicted in Arusha.
Rwanda fully understands that all of the people
indicted in judicial proceedings will not necessarily
be convicted and sentenced. Nonetheless, we are
extremely troubled at the dangerous trend we see in the
ICTR appeals, where military commanders and cabinet
ministers have been acquitted, despite some of them
having been found guilty of serious charges by the
Trial Chamber. I would recall that, in 1998, the thenPrime Minister of the genocidaire Government pleaded
guilty to genocide and even produced a substantive
written confession on how the genocide was planned
and executed by the authorities.
Allow me to put things in historical perspective.
Could anyone in this Chamber or elsewhere have
14/32

One of my interlocutors, a very prominent person
working for the ICTR, told me two days ago, “You
know, Ambassador, we need to take that kind of action
so that we maintain a kind of credibility with the
international community.” I looked at him and I said,
“Oh, that is well and good.” I think that the ICTR,
despite all its achievements mentioned previously,
should strive to gain credibility among the Rwandan
people, and especially among genocide survivors, those
directly concerned, rather than among members of the
international community.
With regard to the four cases referred to national
jurisdictions under rule 11 bis of the ICTR Statute, the
situation varies.
Two cases — those of Jean Uwinkindi and Bernard
Munyagishari — were transferred to Rwanda in April
2012 and July 2013, respectively. The trial of Uwinkindi
started last month, while that of Munyagishari is in
pre-trial proceedings before the Rwandan courts. At
the same time, two other cases — those of Laurent
Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas Munyeshyaka — were
transferred to France seven years ago, in November
2007. Let me recall that the investigations in France
against the two individuals started well before the
2007 referral; they started in 2000 for Bucyibaruta
and in 1995 for Munyeshyaka. We are informed by the
monitoring mechanisms put in place by the ICTR that
the trials in those cases will begin in 2015 and 2016,
respectively — that is, 16 and 20 long years after the
start of the respective investigations.
While Rwanda welcomed the conviction of
Pascal Simbikangwa by a criminal court in Paris in
March — which was the very first trial of a genocide
suspect in France in 20 years — we are extremely
concerned by the repeated delays of proceedings

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

in cases referred by the ICTR to France. It has been
said that justice delayed is justice denied. We call on
the French authorities to ensure that the remaining
investigations are expedited, and we hope that they will
be.
Rwanda is still concerned that nine ICTR fugitives
remain at large, including the three top-priority
fugitives, Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana. We recall resolution 2150 (2014),
adopted by the Council on 16 April, which calls upon
all States to cooperate with the ICTR, the Mechanism
and the Government of Rwanda in the arrest and
prosecution of those fugitives, and further calls upon
States to investigate, arrest, prosecute or extradite
all other fugitives accused of genocide residing on
their territories, including those who are Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda leaders. In the
meantime, we thank Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow
for his continued efforts in tracking the fugitives,
including by dedicating a page on the Mechanism’s
website containing updated information related to the
search for those nine fugitives.
Rwanda commends the ICTR for its outreach
programmes, in particular the awareness-raising
activities of the Umusanzu Information and
Documentation Centre in Kigali and its 10 additional
provincial mini-information centres. As stated in the
Mechanism’s progress report (S/2014/350, annex I),
the Centre has played an important role in information
dissemination and facilitated access to ICTR
jurisprudence and other legal materials, for the benefit
of the Rwandan authorities, including the judiciary,
academics, civil society and the general public.
In the long term, however, we have on many
occasions expressed our view that the ICTR archives,
although they are the property of the United Nations,
should be located to Rwanda upon the completion of
the Mechanism’s mandate. Indeed, the ICTR records
constitute an integral part of Rwandan history, are vital
to the preservation of the memory of the genocide, and
will play a critical role in preserving current and future
generations from genocide denial and revisionism.
Rwanda will continue its consultations within the
United Nations system to achieve that goal.
In conclusion, we hope that as the ICTR marks its
twentieth anniversary, it will live up to the expectations
of Council members when they adopted resolution 955
(1994). I thank the Tribunal for its achievements, but
we regret that its decisions in recent years will hardly

convince Rwandans that it has served justice and
reconciliation in our country.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
begin by thanking Judge Meron, Judge Joensen,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their
comprehensive reports and briefings today.
Lithuania supports and commends the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The principle of
accountability for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community must be upheld and
actively pursued. The task of ending impunity for mass
atrocities is often at the very heart of transitional justice
and reconciliation efforts leading to a sustainable peace.
The ICTY and the ICTR were established by the
Security Council to deal with horrific crimes in view of
a lack of independent judiciary capacity. Guided by the
principles of fairness, impartiality and independence,
both Tribunals have championed respect for the rule
of law, developed capacity at the national level, and
contributed to the difficult but necessary process of
reconciliation and peace. The reports and today’s
briefings clearly show that both Tribunals are moving
successfully towards the completion of their mandates.
With regard to the work of the ICTY, all the
indictees have been brought before the Tribunal,
including several long-term fugitives. The Tribunal has
concluded proceedings against 141 of the 161 indicted
individuals. We expect the Tribunal to complete its
work in the nearest future. It is important to emphasize
that nothing should undermine its ability to deliver
justice in due process. While acknowledging the heavy
workload of the Tribunal and the considerable progress
that has been made, we encourage the ICTY to take all
necessary measures to keep the delays to a minimum.
Accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity depends on the effective completion of the
last cases by the ICTY and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as much as it does
on the success of national prosecutions. In fact, effective
and efficient national prosecutions of war crimes will
remain a critical component of the ICTY’s legacy. We
share the concern expressed in the report (S/2014/351,
annex I) regarding the slow processing of war crimes
cases, and in particular cases of sexual violence, by
national institutions in countries that emerged out of
the former Yugoslavia.

14-4210215/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Conflict-related sexual crimes are particularly
heinous and have lasting effects on the victims, their
families and entire communities. We call upon the
national authorities to devote sufficient time and attention
to these cases and to truly commit to the resolution
of the outstanding case load. Regional cooperation is
very important in this regard. The conclusion of the
Protocol on Cooperation in Prosecution of Perpetrators
of War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and
Genocide between the Prosecutor’s Offices of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Montenegro on 29 April was a
positive step in that respect.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has done significant work in pursuing justice and set
important precedents in the development of international
criminal law, such as the first-ever prosecution for rape
as an act of genocide. As the closure of the Tribunal
approaches, nine fugitives indicted by the ICTR remain
at large, six cases have been referred to Rwanda, and
the remaining three indictees are to be tried before
the Residual Mechanism. The work is not yet fully
complete, and we should not let down our guard. We
call on all parties to intensify their cooperation in order
to achieve the arrest and surrender of all remaining
fugitives as soon as possible. A successful conclusion
to the Tribunal’s work, and the delivery of justice to
the victims and survivors of the unspeakable horrors
committed two decades ago, would be a fitting tribute
to the memory of the human tragedy whose twentieth
anniversary is being commemorated this year.
An issue of concern is the human rights situation
faced by those who have been acquitted but are still
waiting to be relocated. We call on all States in a
position to do so to respond positively to the Tribunal’s
request for their relocation.
After two decades of activity, the Tribunals are
working together to ensure a gradual and effective
transition of their work to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. The Residual
Mechanism is essential to ensuring that there will be
no impunity for the remaining fugitives and that the
appeals will be completed and witnesses protected.
Finally, I would like to note that the scale and
horrendous character of the mass atrocities of the past
few decades have clearly demonstrated the necessity of
a permanent court of justice aimed at ending impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern, in
situations where justice cannot or will not be ensured
otherwise. Both ad hoc Tribunals have played a crucial
16/32

role in and made a considerable contribution to the
creation of the International Criminal Court (ICC). As
the work of the ICTY and the ICTR is about to end,
it is more important than ever that the Council fulfil
its responsibilities in putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice and accountability. In that regard,
political support for the ICC is essential in order to
make sure that it can deliver on the expectations of
the numerous victims of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, for whom this body may be the
only recourse to justice.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Russian delegation for convening this important debate,
and I join previous speakers in thanking the briefers
for their statements. Nigeria commends the two ad hoc
Tribunals for their contributions to the development of
substantive and procedural international criminal law
and the promotion of the rule of law. Their work has
helped to strengthen the international criminal justice
system and the fight against impunity and has affirmed
the importance of ensuring accountability for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Council members will recall that at the meeting held
on Wednesday, 16 April, to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda (S/PV.7155), the
Council adopted resolution 2150 (2014), which calls on
States to recommit to preventing and fighting genocide
and other serious crimes under international law. The
Council acknowledged that the prosecution of persons
responsible for genocide and other serious crimes by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
has contributed to the process of national reconciliation
and to the restoration and maintenance of peace in
Rwanda.
In the interests of justice, all Member States have
a duty to cooperate with the ICTR, the International
Residual Michanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
Government of Rwanda in order to arrest and prosecute
the remaining fugitives indicted by the Tribunal.
According to the report of the ICTR (see S/2014/343),
Member States have intensified their cooperation, with
the goal of apprehending and bringing to trial within
their national jurisdictions the Rwandan suspects on the
INTERPOL list of wanted fugitives. This is a welcome
development, and we hope it sends a clear message
that there will be no place for the perpetrators of mass
atrocities to hide.
Nigeria takes positive note of the progress the
ICTR has made in implementing its completion
14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

strategy, which has been updated continuously since
2003. The smooth handover of most of its judicial and
prosecutorial functions to the Residual Mechanism
is an important indication of that progress. While we
understand that preparing and submitting archives to
the Mechanism is a major challenge, we nonetheless
call on the Tribunal to continue to focus on the process
of transferring the records and archives. One important
fact is that the lessons learned in managing the judicial,
administrative and prosecutorial functions of an
international tribunal are vast, and sharing them will
enable current and future international and domestic
courts to learn from the successes and challenges that
form the ICTR’s legacy.
Turning to the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, it is significant that there are no outstanding
fugitives and that the Tribunal has concluded its
proceedings against 141 of the 161 individuals it has
indicted. This reassures us that the Tribunal has been
making progress in fulfilling its mandate to meet
the completion strategy deadlines. Its support for the
Residual Mechanism through a variety of processes,
including recruitment, communications, information
technology support and registry management, is
commendable.
We are concerned that various factors, including
the late arrests of some individuals and issues that
are particular to specific cases, could militate against
the efforts to complete some trials and appeals by the
31 December deadline for transfer to the Mechanism. We
encourage the Tribunal to work expeditiously towards
completing the outstanding judicial proceedings while
observing all appropriate procedural safeguards,
adhering to the fundamental principles of due process
and fairness, and ensuring a smooth transition to the
Residual Mechanism.
Nigeria welcomes the progress reports from the
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the period from
16 November 2013 to 15 May 2014 (S/2014/350, annexes
I and II). We are satisfied that in accordance with its
mandate, the Mechanism has assumed responsibility for
many functions of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. We urge the Mechanism to continue
to work closely with the principals and staff of both
Tribunals in order to facilitate the smooth transition of
the remaining functions and services and to harmonize
and adopt best practices.

Finally, we would like to state that Nigeria remains
committed to the fight against impunity. We believe
it must be confronted wherever it occurs. We support
strong global action against mass atrocities, and to
demonstrate our support we have ratified the relevant
international legal instruments.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
and reports on the activities of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I
also thank them for the information they have given us
in the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We commend the excellent work of both
Tribunals in developing international law, bringing
justice to the victims, apprehending fugitives and
prosecuting the individuals guilty of genocide and
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia is currently dealing with very complex
cases. We welcome the steps it has taken to meet the
deadlines established by the completion strategy while
respecting the fundamental principles of equity and due
process. We are pleased that Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia have continued to cooperate with
the ICTY. Such cooperation on the part of States is
essential if the Court is to be able to fulfil its mandate.
We note, however, that according to the Prosecutor’s
report (S/2014/351, annex II), the capacity of national
institutions to prosecute war crimes effectively
remains a source of concern, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We share the Prosecutor’s concern about
the slow progress with category II cases transferred to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, as well as with
other war crime cases, particularly those involving
sexual violence. In that regard, we welcome measures
taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to improve
capacity-building through a joint training project with
the European Union for national prosecutors and young
professionals from the former Yugoslavia.
As regards Bosnia and Herzegovina, we commend
the efforts of the European Union to strengthen available
resources at the State and local levels to prosecute war
crimes. We also welcome the training efforts by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

14-4210217/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Last year, we marked the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the ICTY. This year, we will
mark the twentieth anniversary of the conception of
the ICTR. Established on 8 November 1994 upon the
request of Rwanda, the ICTR has played a critical role
in prosecuting perpetrators of genocide. The ICTR is
about to conclude its work, and the transition towards
the International Residual Mechanism is under way. By
the end of 2012, the first trials were concluded.
The Tribunal is now continuing with the appeal
proceedings, which will be concluded, we hope, in 2015
with the delivery of a judgement in the Butare case.
Three high-level fugitives are still being sought, and
their arrest must remain a priority. They will be judged
by the Residual Mechanism when they are apprehended.
Cooperation among all States and the Tribunal and the
Mechanism is an obligation under Security Council
resolutions, and it is important that the Mechanism
have the necessary support to successfully conduct its
work.
Regarding assistance to the Tribunal, the pending
issue of the resettlement of nine acquitted individuals
and two others who were freed after serving their
sentence and still live in Arusha, also has our full
attention.
In establishing the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, the Security
Council responded to the universal appeal that those
responsible for the most serious crimes against the
international community be brought to account for their
actions. The International Criminal Court, a permanent
court with international jurisdiction, has now assumed
a key role, which ensures that justice will be served.
At a time when the work of both Tribunals is
coming to a close, it is more important than ever for
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
putting an end to impunity and providing unwavering
support to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The fact that the Security Council can refer situations
to the ICC is a key tool in establishing responsibility
and accountability. At a time when current events,
in particular in Syria, demonstrate that widespread
atrocities remain a challenge for the international
community, the legacy of the ICTY and the ICTR
should serve to warn perpetrators across the world that
they will have to bear the consequences of the choices
they have made, the measures they have taken, and the
orders they have given.

18/32

I conclude by welcoming the fact that the two
Tribunals are making available the lessons learned from
their ground-breaking work so as to strengthen national
capacities across the world and create an international
justice system that is more effective.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank President Meron, President Joensen, Prosecutor
Jallow and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings.
France would like to express its appreciation to the
entire staff of the Tribunals for the work they have done
to bring the work of the Tribunals to completion. We
have the sense that everything is being done to abide
by the timetables so that the individual trials and for
appeals in the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) can be conducted
in satisfactory conditions. We also unreservedly support
the extension of the mandates for the Prosecutors and
Judges.
I would also like to take this opportunity to recall
once again the contribution made by the two Tribunals
in the fight against impunity. I would also like to note
the road that lies ahead as we seek to ensure that the
work of justice can continue and will not be undermined.
In 2013, we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 827 (1993), which established
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. In 20 years, the region has found a human
face again. Dialogue continues under the aegis of the
European Union, particularly between Belgrade and
Pristina. The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which has worked to protect rights,
fight against impunity and uphold the right to memory,
has played a major full role in those processes. Today it
seems normal to see individuals like Mr. Karadžić and
Mr. Hadžić being judged in court. No one thought years
ago that they would have to answer for their crimes.
The work that remains to be done is primarily tasks
that fall within the political and judicial responsibility
of the countries of the former Yugoslavia. Political
rhetoric, criticizing this or that judicial ruling, has no
place in the rule of law, where the judiciary and its
independence must always be respected. The trials
of intermediary criminals will require strengthened
efforts, both domestically and in the area of regional
cooperation. The right of victims to respect is also
essential.

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, in resolution 2150 (2014) the Council
has commemorated the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide. We welcome the fact that the resolution
recognizes the contribution of the ICTR. The Tribunal
has put justice at the centre of its concerns in the
region. The ICTR continues its work, and efforts at
the international level have continued, even in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are pleased to see
that international criminal justice has been supported
at the political level within the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. That agreement is aimed
at bolstering cooperation among the States of the
region and at putting an end to decades of instability
and mistrust that have led to great tension. We cannot
be complacent, however. The civilian population in the
Great Lakes region remains victimized by repeated
waves of violence. Sexual violence continues on a large
scale, and the Tribunals have tried to eliminate such
actions. We must therefore remain vigilant.
The work of justice is the work of all of us. I should
like to confirm that the trials are continuing in the
two cases that have been sent to French jurisdictions,
namely, those of Mr. Bucyibaruta and Mr. Munyeshyaka.
The French authorities are proceeding very carefully
in those cases. As the Council is aware, other cases
against individuals accused of genocide are also
before the courts. At the same time, France confirms
its willingness to continue to support the ICTR and
the Residual Mechanism, seeking responses to the
challenge that they face and that we have been reminded
of today: the relocation of those who have been
acquitted or have served their sentences and the search
for the nine fugitives sought by the ICTR — Félicien
Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya,
among others.
On the second point, France draws attention to the
obligation of all States to cooperate with the Tribunal
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. The three fugitives must be brought
before the Residual Mechanism when they have been
apprehended. We must ensure that the Mechanism has
the appropriate resources to complete its mission.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda have been fundamental for the United Nations
in this era, which Mr. Ban Ki-moon has called the era of
accountability. The work of the Tribunals is coming to

an end, but another permanent tribunal with universal
jurisdiction exists, endowed with a statute that reflects
the main judicial traditions, namely the International
Criminal Court. I commend the unflagging support
of the Secretary-General for the Court. We very much
hope that such support will continue to be shown
throughout the Secretariat in all departments and that
each representative of the Secretary-General on the
ground will provide an echo of that support.
France deeply regrets that some States have failed
to avail themselves of the unique opportunity that
we have with the International Criminal Court in
pursuing all alleged authors of revolting crimes, and
have been trying to reverse the course of history. Their
presence today has given criminals and their protectors
immunity. That is unfortunately the signal sent by
two States represented at this table in exercising their
veto on draft resolution S/2014/348, which referred the
situation in Syria to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
In conclusion, I thank the Ambassador of Chile,
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, his entire team, and the representatives of
the International Criminal Tribunals and of the Office
of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for their efforts to
implement the transition provided for by resolution 1966
(2010). The programme outlined to us by Mr. Barros
Melet is ambitious, and we are ready to support it.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
respective briefings on the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I would like to make the following four
points.
First, with regard to the progress in the work on
the completion strategy of both Tribunals, we note
that, during the reporting period, the two Tribunals
continued to make further progress, and we express
our appreciation in that regard. Resolution 1966 (2010)
establishes the time frame for the completion strategy
of both Tribunals and calls on them to complete all their
work by the end of 2014. However, according to the most
recent reports of the two Tribunals (S/2014/350, annex,
and S/2014/343, annex), the time frame set out by the
Security Council cannot be achieved. The work of the
ICTY will continue until 2017 and that of the ICTR

14-4210219/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

until 2015. We express our concern in that regard. We
understand that there are multiple reasons for the delay.
There are some additional issues to those foreseen by
the two Tribunals. We hope that both Tribunals will
continue to increase their efficiency while ensuring
judicial fairness, overcome the difficulties in retaining
staff, expedite their work and conclude their task as
soon as possible. At the same time, we believe that
the Security Council should conduct consultations as
soon as possible on the programme of work of the two
Tribunals beyond 2014 so as to find an appropriate
solution.
Secondly, with regard to the transition, the
branches of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals in Arusha and in The Hague started
operations on July 2012 and July 2013, respectively.
We are pleased to see that, owing to the relatively
smooth transition of the two Tribunals to the Residual
Mechanism, some judicial and administrative functions
have been transferred. We express our appreciation in
that regard. China hopes that the two Tribunals will
carry out their work efficiently in accordance with
the Security Council’s resolutions. Particular attention
should be given to strengthening communication and
coordination with the Residual Mechanism in order to
ensure a smooth transition to the Mechanism.
Thirdly, with respect to the cooperation of the
relevant countries with the two Tribunals and the
Mechanism, the cooperation of States, in particular
those of the region, is crucial to the smooth functioning
of the Tribunals and the Mechanism. We commend
Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Rwanda and
the relevant regional countries for their cooperation with
the Tribunals and the Mechanism on the investigations
and the trials.
We also note that one of the most difficult issues
that the ICTR faces is the relocation of those who
have been acquitted and those who have served their
sentences. We urge those countries that have the
capacity to show the political will and actively consider
assisting the ICTR in finding a solution to that issue.
The ICTR should heed the views of Rwanda in that
process. Moreover, there are still nine fugitives among
those indicted by the ICTR. We hope that progress will
soon be made towards finding the fugitives.
Fourthly, with respect to the assessment of the
work of the two Tribunals, it has been 20 years or
more since their establishement. They are now in the

20/32

final phase of completing their work. Before their
closure, we should earnestly review and evaluate our
experiences and lessons learned in fighting impunity
and in addressing the link between maintaining peace
and achieving national reconciliation and the pursuit of
justice. The international community can draw lessons
in that regard and use them as a reference.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Ambassador of Chile in his role as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
for their work.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
would like to thank President Meron, President Joensen,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for the
reports that they have presented to the Council today.
I would also like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
continued support for the very important work being
carried out by both Tribunals as indpendent judicial
bodies.
With regard to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we note that Serbia,
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to cooperate
with the Tribunal. Regional cooperation remains
essential if the ICTY is to be able to complete its
mandate and deliver justice for the many victims of
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. We welcome
the news that the judgements in the trials of Karadžić,
Mladić and Hadžić are all expected to be handed down
on the anticipated dates. We commend the Tribunal for
its work to minimize delays.
We note that the Prosecutor’s main concern
is, once again, the slow progress of war crimes
prosecutions by national institutions within the former
Yugoslavia, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Prosecutor’s assessment that that poses a risk to
the deadline specified by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
National War Crimes Strategy is very valid. The timely
completion of such cases should remain a top priority.
The offices of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State, entity
and cantonal prosecutors have received additional staff
to help expedite those proceedings. The Prosecutor’s
Office is supported by the European Union, which is
contributing €15.5 million through the Instrument
for Pre-Accession Assistance to build capacity and to
help reduce the processing backlog. It is hoped that the
backlog will be reduced by 50 per cent over the course
of five years.

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

Moving on to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), 2014 marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, which was a
tragedy of global significance that has influenced the
international community’s approach to peacekeeping,
mass atrocity prevention and international justice.
Between April 1994 and July 1994, in 100 short days,
approximately 1 million people were killed in the most
horrific manner. Rwanda’s transformation since those
dark days has been truly astonishing.
We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the ICTR ahead of its upcoming twentieth
anniversary in November and to thank everyone
invloved in the Tribunal for their work to ensure that
those most responsibile for the Rwandan genocide
be held accountable. The work of the ICTR has been
fundamental in helping to deliver justice.
The apprehension of the nine fugitives remains a
cause for serious concern. The ICTR’s work cannot be
completed until those individuals have been brought to
justice. We continue to encourage all States to provide
the ICTR with their full cooperation in order to ensure
that all those fugitives are apprehended and face justice.
The problem of relocating the acquitted indiviuals
from Arusha also remains unresolved. We thank and
commend the ICTR for its continued efforts to try and
resolve that issue. Once again, we encourage all parties
to work together to try and find an acceptable solution
as quickly as possible.
The United Kingdom greatly appreciates and
supports the work of the ICTY and the ICTR on
tackling crimes of sexual and gender-based violence.
The Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom has
made ending sexual violence in conflict a priority and
will host the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in London from 10 to 13 June. It will be the largest
summit ever held on the issue and will seek agreement
by States to practical steps to shatter the cultural
impunity surrounding crimes of sexual violence once
and for all.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their reports and, even more,
for their dedication to global justice.
The recent debate over the Security Council’s
referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court shows that the struggle to hold
accountable those responsible for mass atrocities is not

behind us. The four briefers have shown outstanding
leadership in their efforts to end impunity and advance
accountability. People everywhere are in their debt.
The United States has strongly supported the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) since their inception.
The two courts have tried more than 200 defendants
accused of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including top political and military leaders.
It has been a complex and unprecedented undertaking,
yet the Tribunals have demonstrated a commitment
to fairness, impartiality and independence. Today we
see, as demonstrated by the events in Syria, South
Sudan, the Central African Republic and elsewhere,
that mass atrocities still pose a challenge to the global
community. We also see that the record provided by the
ICTY and ICTR provides a warning to leaders that the
choices they make and the orders they give can have
serious personal consequences.
With the work of the Tribunals now nearing
completion, the United States commends the efforts
of the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals to
transfer the remaining functions to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. At the
same time, we understand the need for flexibility and
recognize that the exact closure dates will depend on
the completion of ongoing and soon-to-begin trials and
appeals.
Turning to the ICTY, we note with satisfaction that
the Tribunal continues to focus on the completion of
all trials and appeals, having rendered four appellate
judgements between November 2013 and May 2014.
We are pleased that the trial of Ratko Mladić is moving
forward as forecast and that a judgement in the case
of Radovan Karadžić is expected next year. Those
two men are accused of being the architects of the
Srebrenica genocide, the worst crime committed on
European soil since the Second World War. Completing
their trials will help to close the book on one of the most
painful chapters in the history of the former Yugoslavia.
We urge all Governments in the region to continue to
work towards reconciliation, to avoid statements that
inflame tensions and to continue to bring war criminals
to justice in local courts.
Regarding the ICTR, we are pleased that the
Tribunal has wrapped up its workload of trials and
continues to complete appeals. The Mechanism in

14-4210221/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Arusha opened in 2012 and has smoothly taken over
most prosecutorial and judicial responsibilities.
The United States remains concerned, however,
that nine ICTR fugitives remain at large. Those
alleged mass murderers must be brought to trial, and
the United States urges all Member States, especially
those in the region, to cooperate with the Tribunal in
the apprehension of those nine men. The United States
continues to offer monetary rewards for information
leading to their arrest, whether those individuals are
prosecuted in the Mechanism or in Rwandan courts.
We are working very closely with the ICTR tracking
team, the Rwandan Government and INTERPOL to
form an international task force later this year with
a view to increasing collaboration in the search for
those fugitives. We also call on regional Governments
to work with the Tribunal on the relocation of several
persons who have been acquitted by the ICTR or have
served their sentences, but whose return to Rwanda is
problematic.
We see the historic contributions that the two
Tribunals have made to international criminal justice.
They have brought to justice some of the most vicious
criminals in the history of humankind. They have also
assembled an historical record that will be publicly
accessible and that will protect the truth from those who
might in the future attempt to deny or distort it. They
demonstrate that the world does not forget. Political and
military leaders perpetrating atrocities today should
ponder that lesson carefully.
Ms. Ruiz Cerutti (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin my statement by paying a sincere
and well-deserved homage to Mrs. Carmen Argibay, on
behalf of my country, Argentina, and of all the women
and men who are fighting to eradicate violence of any
kind committed against women in times of peace and
in conflict situations. Mrs. Argibay passed away on
10 May 2014. She had been a judge on my country’s
Supreme Court since 2005. She was the first women
in the democratic history of Argentina to be appointed
to the highest court of justice of our land. One of her
first acts was to create a women’s office in that court,
so that gender-based crimes would not be invisible or
enjoy impunity. She introduced into our country and
our judicial system something that had been sown at
the international level. In June 2001, she was appointed
by the General Assembly as an ad-litem judge in
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). There, she was a pioneer in getting

22/32

sexual violence committed against women classified as
an international crime, as subsequently recognized in
the Rome Statute. After she was arrested on 24 March
1976 by the civil-military dictatorship, she worked to
ensure that the suffering of the victims and their right to
truth, justice and reparations would never be forgotten.
I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to pay tribute to her.
I would like to welcome, as always, the presence of
Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors Jallow
and Brammertz. I also welcome the presence of Judge
Meron in his capacity as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
I take this opportunity to recognize Chile for
its leadership of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
After two decades of work, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) are at the stage
of completing their work, during which, according to
the completion strategy adopted by the Council, they
must complete their judicial work in accordance with
the agreed deadlines by transferring cases and archives
to the Residual Mechanism.
Argentina would like to recognize the reported
progress in the work of the Tribunals and the way in
which the Mechanism has begun its work.
As regards the ICTY, we note that court proceedings
have been concluded for 141 of the 161 individuals
charged and that there are no more cases of fugitives.
The Tribunal has made progress in the completion of
the nine cases that are pending. Of those, some will
continue after the end of 2014. In that regard, it is
imperative to take into account the circumstances
that might influence the processing times for those
cases. One is the remarkable challenge of the loss of or
difficulty in retaining qualified staff at this stage prior
to the final completion of the Tribunal’s functions. We
believe that, while resolution 1966 (2010) may have set
ideal dates for the transfer of functions to the Residual
Mechanism, the judicial function may, in itself, pose
challenges owing to the complexity of the cases and the
transitional situation that we are in. Therefore, just as it
supported the call for the election of an additional judge
for the Tribunal to be held expeditiously, Argentina will
support the Security Council’s renewal of the mandate
of the judges and the Prosecutor of the ICTY.
However, my country also hopes the Council will
reconsider measures that have already been requested
14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

by the Court and that the General Assembly will then
consider the issue in its Fifth Committee. For example,
the Court requested the establishment of a working
group at the United Nations to provide opportunities
to absorb staff from the Tribunal and the granting of
a special subsidy to prevent the early departure of
such staff, who fear that their posts will be eliminated.
Solutions must be provided and we are encouraged that
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will be considering that issue.
We also appreciate the information provided by
the ICTR with regard to the implementation of its
completion strategy. The Tribunal has concluded
its substantive work with respect to the entirety of
the 93 accused, having concluded or being about to
conclude the trials and appeals as expected. That leaves
only the appeal in the Butare case to be concluded in
2015.
We recognize the apprehension of fugitives from the
ICTR as a priority. The fact that nine ICTR defendants
are still at large is not encouraging. Of those, three
are still under the jurisdiction of the Mechanism and
the Mechanism is in a position to try those individuals
once they are arrested. However, arresting the
fugitives — those who are under the jurisdiction of the
Mechanism and those who have been transferred to the
jurisdiction of Rwanda — will require the cooperation
of all States pursuant to the obligations set forth in
resolution 955 (1994).
I want to underscore the activities of both Tribunals
in cooperating in areas of training in investigative and
trial skills, including in sexual, sexist and gender-based
violence.
With regard to the Residual Mechanism, Argentina
underscores that both the subdivisions of Arusha and
The Hague are operating and will be able to fully
operate when both Tribunals close. We would like
to also express our appreciation to the Government
of Tanzania for supporting the Mechanism through
the conclusion of the headquarters agreement, which
recently entered into force, as well for the facilities
provided for building the headquarters. I also want to
recognize the support of the Netherlands for The Hague
branch.
The international community should continue
supporting the Tribunals’ work — not only its judicial
activities, but also its activities in the lives of those
directly affected by that justice system. An important

aspect is that of reparations for victims. We welcome
the conclusion of a memorandum of understanding with
the International Organization for Migration to consider
how to address the issue of reparations for victims of
the Rwandan genocide. In that regard, the involvement
of associations of victims and survivors, civil society
and the Rwandan Government is encouraging.
On the other hand, there are also those who have
been acquitted of their charges or who have served the
sentences handed down by the Tribunal. Finding a State
in which to relocate those people and providing them
with documentation to fully enjoy civilian life and
exercise their rights is a task that the Tribunal has been
actively focused on. Although some people have been
relocated, for others relocation has been very difficult.
Argentina recognizes the importance of work of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
which continues to look at that issue to support those
efforts. It is also important for the Security Council to
encourage all Members of the Organization to do the
same.
Commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda and the creation of the ICTR, it is
high time that the international community recognize
the progress made in the fight against impunity that
the ICTR and the ICTY have represented with their
important doctrinal contributions to international law,
in particular to international humanitarian law, and the
role and importance of international criminal justice.
Undeniably, the legacy of both ad hoc Tribunals in
affirming the international community’s awareness
that there is no lasting peace without justice has been
definitively consolidated with the establishment of
a permanent international criminal tribunal — the
International Criminal Court — which is today the
centrepiece of the international community’s criminal
justice system as a whole. The system requires the
commitment of all States, not just the States parties, as
well as the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would once again like to pay tribute
to the Judges, Prosecutors and staff of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank the Russian presidency for holding this important
meeting. I would like to also thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International

14-4210223/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
respective briefings.
The Republic of Korea appreciates and supports
the efforts of the ICTY and the ICTR and the smooth
transitioning activities of the Mechanism. We note
that, as of now, 161 cases have been handled by the
ICTY and 93 by the ICTR. We encourage the correct
understanding of ensuring due process and fairness
in prosecutions and trials. However, in some cases it
has taken longer than expected for the defendant to be
indicted and judged, such as in the Mladić and Butare
cases. We would like to stress the importance of speedy
completion by quoting the legal maxim: “Justice
delayed is justice denied”.
We would also like to reiterate the importance
of the residual work, such as the nine fugitive cases,
contempt and false testimony cases, victims and
witness protection and record archiving. To fulfil
those mandates, mutual assistance and international
cooperation are crucial. We also support resolution
2150 (2014), which calls upon all States to cooperate
with the Mechanism in the arrest and prosecution of the
remaining fugitives.
In transitioning to the Mechanism, we believe
that the Presidents and the Registrars need to focus
on the staff’s sustainability. The rich legacy of those
international criminal justice bodies has to be preserved
for prosperity. The ICTY, ICTR and the Mechanism
are and will remain symbols of the international
commitment to the fight against impunity and the
milestone of reconciliation.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank
President Meron and President Joensen and Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their thoughtful
and informative briefings. I would like to acknowledge
their commitment to the cause of international criminal
justice. Their effective leadership of the Tribunals that
we are discussing today makes a critical contribution
to that cause.
This meeting provides us with a timely opportunity
to reaffirm the international community’s support for
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and to acknowledge
their vital contribution to international criminal
accountability.

24/32

Established in response to some of the worst
atrocities the international community had witnessed
since the Second World War, both the ICTY and the
ICTR were products of a firm conviction, on behalf of the
Council and also the broader international community,
that perpetrators of serious international crimes must
be held to account for their actions, regardless of rank
or position.
Over the past 20 years, the ICTY and ICTR have
played a historic role in the fight against impunity, as
was recognized by the Council in resolution 2150 (2014),
adopted by consensus in April. The groundbreaking
jurisprudence produced by the ICTY and the ICTR
has been particularly significant, including its
contribution to the understanding of sexual violence
under international criminal law. Both the ICTY and
ICTR recognize that sexual violence can constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and a constituted
act of genocide. That has had a lasting impact on
understandings of and responses to sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict. We also commend the
efforts of both Tribunals to share lessons learned and
best practices in the investigation and prosecution of
serious international crimes with national authorities
and the broader international community, including the
International Criminal Court.
We welcome the progress reported this morning
towards completion of the Tribunals’ mandates,
including President Joensen’s advice that the huge task
of transferring the ICTR’s archives to the Mechanism is
on track to be completed by the end of this year and that
only one appeal in the Nyiramasuhuko et al. (“Butare”)
case is likely to extend into 2015. Similarly, we welcome
President Meron’s advice on the delivery of two ICTY
Appeals Chamber judgements earlier this year and
we note his advice of expected delays in some other
appeals. We appreciate the ongoing crucial support for
the Tribunals from the Governments of the Netherlands
and Tanzania and note that the agreement between the
United Nations and Tanzania for the Arusha branch
of the Mechanism’s headquarters has just entered into
force.
We share the ICTR’s concern about the lack of
progress with relocating the nine acquitted and three
convicted and released persons still residing in safe
houses in Arusha. We appreciate the concerted efforts
of the President and Registrar to reach out to States
to assist. We urge all Member States to cooperate
with the ICTR on that matter and we support further

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

consideration of how the Council can best support the
ICTR’s efforts. Like others, we highlight the Council’s
renewed call in resolution 2150 (2014) for Member
States to intensify cooperation with the Mechanism and
with the Rwanda authorities to apprehend the remaining
nine ICTR fugitives.
Notwithstanding the progress reported today, it is
clear that the Tribunals will need to continue working
beyond 2014, with some very important cases still before
the ICTY. The continued support and cooperation of
the international community, including by ensuring
that the Tribunals have adequate resources, is essential
to ensuring that the Tribunals can achieve the goals
the Council has set for them and to secure their lasting
legacy.
The Tribunals established by the Security Council
we are discussing here today have been instrumental in
the recovery process, following the devastating events in
1990s in both the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. They
demonstrate that the Council’s role in ending impunity,
including through its power to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court, is crucial. The current
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
Rwandan genocide must remain foremost in our minds
as we consider and respond to the crises we face today.
The devastating impact of the genocide should serve as
a continual reminder of the consequences we may face
if the Council fails to act to prevent mass atrocities. As
we have heard this morning, ensuring accountability
is a key element in restoring peace and stability. It is
therefore clear that justice and accountability must play
a central role in the Council’s work.
Tragically, the Council’s recent failure to exercise
that responsibility in relation to Syria shows that
we are not applying the clear lessons of history
either consistently or justly. When presented with
evidence that mass atrocities are being committed,
the international community must unite in its message
to those responsible that they will be held to account.
More importantly, the Council has the authority to
ensure that to be the case, and it should live up to its
responsibility to use that authority.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): We
join all other members in welcoming warmly to the
Security Council this morning Judge Theodor Meron,
Judge Vagn Joensen, Prosecutor Serge Brammertz, and
Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow. We also thank all
of them for their important briefings to us and for their
reports on the work of the Criminal Tribunals and on

the progress made regarding the implementation of the
completion strategy in keeping with resolution 1534
(2004).
We have listened carefully to the briefers’ thoughts
and insights, and we welcome in particular President
Meron’s willingness to touch upon some broader
reflections. Indeed, it is a pity the Security Council,
the one non-judicial organ of the United Nations that
undoutedly produces law, spends so little to no time
evaluating the jurisprudence of the Tribunals. Nor do
we try to understand in detail what those courts have
revealed over the course of their operations and then
decide how best their discoveries can fit into an agreed
recognizable formula needed for a permanent peace.
Instead, too much time is spent by us on the
technical and administrative details of the work of the
Tribunals, and it need not be so. The thematic debate the
Council held late last year on the Tribunals (S/PV.7073)
provided us with an indication of the sort of deeper
analysis the Council can conduct, and indeed should
conduct. If we are to focus on the administrative issues,
it should only be where the challenges are considerable.
I will get to those in a moment.
More fundamentally, we should concentrate on
the question of how the work of the two Tribunals
can be developed to ensure that their conclusions
shape the conscience of the concerned communities.
We recognize, of course, that crimes were indeed
committed by individuals of all ethnicities, but we
understand too that in two of the overall situations
covered by the Tribunals, the huge lopsidedness in
the overall volume and balance of crimes committed
creates no moral equivalences in that respect.
While it is true that the Residual Mechanism, the
referrals and subsequent national prosecutions will
continue the work done judicially, and that in the years
ahead there will likely be further outreach conducted by
the United Nations building on the existing programmes,
the jurisprudence and the establishment of fact and of
truth must still be made to fit much more deliberately
into the recovery architecture of the concerned societies.
Denials of wrongdoing by a particular ethnic group
or other are still detectable in respect of the crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda,
despite the weight of evidence underscoring no grounds
for them. Naturally, in the case of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the Šešelj, Karadžić, Mladić and Hadžić trials still have
to be concluded, and they will very much be part of

14-4210225/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

the centrepiece of the Tribunal’s work. We therefore
await the completion of the trials. We also join others
in calling for the apprehension of the nine remaining
fugitives in respect of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Yet even before we end all outstanding criminal
proceedings, if we are to achieve a permanent peace
among all the concerned societies covered by the work
of the two Tribunals there must be a seamless transition
from the judicial operations mounted by the Security
Council two decades ago to a more structured formation
of historical accounts. What do we mean by that? To
begin with, well-intended historical commissions need
to be established. They need to cement the conclusions
of the Tribunals drawn from the decisions handed down
in the broader historical narratives. Those narratives
must be threaded into precise algorithms designed to
draw out a reckoning from the perpetrator and, where
applicable, his or her broader community.
Without a genuine signature planted in the register
of remorse by those individuals who have done much
wrong and by their supporting communities, there can be
no permanent peace — a temporary peace, even lasting
decades, yes — but no permanent peace. Reckoning
opens the gate to human compassion from which a
reconciliation of a permanent character can begin to
emerge. All of this must then be fed into the national
curriculums of the countries concerned, curriculums
that must themselves be wholly reconstructed to reflect
the truth as they and we can best assess it. We hope that
in the future the Council will focus more on these sorts
of issues rather than the nitty-gritty of the completion
strategies the Tribunals are pursuing.
That said, I began by saying that we should be
discussing only the most pressing challenges. We agree
with others who have said that those challenges consist,
in the case of the ICTY, in finding lasting remedies to the
issue of relocating witnesses and in ensuring progress
in the category II cases in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in finding safe and permanent homes for those
acquitted, in the case of the ICTR. Those challenges
are not rocket science, and they can be resolved; that
is simply a matter of continued or expanded burdensharing and will.
We also completely understand the struggle both
Tribunals face on a daily basis as they work to fulfil their
mandates while still needing a highly motivated set of
skilled professionals at the heart of their operations. We
urge the United Nations leadership to think creatively
26/32

about how to keep these officials in The Hague and
Arusha until all remaining decisions have been dealt
with. Such issues cannot be beyond our ability to solve.
Finally, we congratulate all four of the briefers
on their outstanding achievements and the continuing
extraordinary work being accomplished by the
Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Ali Adoum (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings to
the Council, and I join previous speakers in commending
the work of the ad hoc Tribunals, whose creation is a
significant milestone in international relations that has
paved the way for a new era in international criminal
justice for serious violations of international human
rights and crimes against humanity and in which they
have made a contribution to international jurisprudence.
The victims of ethnic cleansing, genocide and other
serious crimes have found their greatest support in
them, however limited the number of cases may have
been. Today the international community’s expectations
of justice are equal to the crimes perpetrated around
the world, particularly on civilian populations. The
impunity currently enjoyed by the perpetrators of
crimes in South Sudan, Syria, the Central African
Republic, Somalia and Libya should not undermine
those expectations or be interpreted as an admission
of powerlessness on the part of the international
community, but rather should be seen as a sign that,
more than ever, we must unite in order to find more
effective ways of combating it.
Africa, where the worst of these atrocities are
committed today, has an enormous task before it if it is
to enjoy the benefits of peace and security without which
overcoming its underdevelopment would be impossible.
To achieve that, Africa has to be able to show that no
crime committed on its soil shall go unpunished by
making the ideal of justice its own, particularly for the
generations dedicated to the demon of war. But there is
a price to pay for justice, which should not be a reason
to renounce it. The Special Court for Sierra Leone,
created in 2002 and intended to last three years, did not
truly accomplish its mission until 2013, long after the
duration originally envisaged and having exceeded its
initial budget four times over.
While the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) approaches the end of its mandate,
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

(ICTY), on the other hand, will be unable to close
its doors according to schedule owing to various
judgements and arrests still under way, some of which
will not be resolved until 2015 or 2017. That is clearly a
setback to the established completion strategy. The fact
that some principal perpetrators were not arrested until
2011 and the complexity of some cases explains most of
these delays.
Apart from these difficulties, there have been some
achievements since the last report, in December 2013
(S/2013/363), both in the framework of proceedings
and in the execution of the completion strategy. New
judgements and arrests have been made. The archives
are being transferred. External relations have improved
thanks to efforts to promote openness. Efficient use of
staff, the activities of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals and follow-up on cases both at
trial and on appeal have resulted in gains both in time
and means.
Furthermore, the transfer of cases and functions
to national jurisdictions has gone smoothly, and the
jurisdictions of the countries of the former Yugoslavia
have cooperated well with the ICTY in trying mid-level
and lower-level accused persons, except in some cases
such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These jurisdictions
continue to benefit from the support of the ICTY,
particularly in strengthening their capability for trying
international crimes. However, many questions are still
hanging, chief among them the delays in meeting the
completion strategy deadline.
Furthermore, the issues of witness protection
and delivering support to the victims remain a major
concern. Persons who have been acquitted or who
have served out their punishment for the genocide in
Rwanda have been unable to find countries willing to
host them, and it is vital that we find a suitable solution
to such enduring problems. It is deeply regrettable that
the nine persons wanted by the ICTR have remained
at large despite the search efforts of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
Tribunal itself. This situation emphasizes how weak the
cooperation of States has been, a fact highlighted by
most of today’s speakers, particularly those in the areas
of the Great Lakes region and southern Africa, where
the search has been focused. The search for the three
principal fugitives should receive special attention
from the United Nations and the entire international
community so that nobody, anywhere, suspected of
genocide has the chance to find asylum.

The activities promoting awareness and information
for the public on the role of the International Criminal
Tribunals and international criminal law are very
important, as much for ensuring that memories are kept
alive as that justice is delivered to the victims, but the
lack of financing threatens to put obstacles in the way
of preserving these gains.
There are many difficulties on the road to completion
of the ICTY’s mission, but they should never undermine
the hopes that have been born of international justice
and the role it can play in maintaining international
peace and security. On the other hand, the only case
currently active in the ICTR will not be finished until
2015. The Tribunal should therefore take all necessary
steps to complete its work on schedule, while taking
into consideration the comments of the Rwandan
Government.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I too would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanis for Criminal Tribunals for their
participation and their briefings.
Unfortunately, an acquaintance with the periodic
reports of the ICTY and ICTR once more emphasizes
the lack of progress both in the Tribunals’ approach to
their activities and in their completion and transfer of
their secondary functions to the Residual Mechanism.
At the beginning of the year, the ICTY issued appeal
judgements in the Đorđević and Šainović cases.
Indictments have been handed down against the
backdrop of the recent acquittal in the very similar
Perišić case.
In our view, problems have arisen that have a
significant bearing on international criminal justice,
involving in particular legal certainty and the
application of a single standard of justice for all. Such an
approach to judicial activity hardly enhances the legacy
of the ICTY. There have been ongoing deferrals of the
hearings in the Stanišić, Župljanin and Šešelj cases.
We understand that the current situation is the result
of the disqualification of Judge Harhoff. Nevertheless,
we also understand that it is now time to overcome
the consequences of that problem. We should not like
to see his recusal become a long-standing pretext for
dragging out the work of the ICTY. In that regard, I

14-4210227/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

recall the recent election of an additional judge to the
ICTY. According to the Tribunal’s report, that judge is
working on only one case, while it had been planned that
he would be assigned a heavier workload. The question
arises as to whether it was genuinely necessary to add
a judge to strengthen the personnel and effectiveness of
the ICTY?

with our colleagues in the Fifth Committee. We hope
that by the end of the year we shall be able to avert any
excessive complications.

With respect to the ICTR, the time when that body
was a model for the swift conclusion of its mandate has
come and gone. Unfortunately, efforts to shorten the
time frames for the consideration of the Butare case have
not borne fruit. Against that backdrop, we rightly hope
that there will be no new excuses for prolonging the
activities of the ICTR. We recognize the gravity — first
and foremost for the States of East Africa — of the
issue of the resettlement of individuals acquitted in
cases before the ICTR. That is a humanitarian problem.
We support the efforts of the ICTR management and
the Residual Mechanism in that respect, and call on
them once again to pursue their work with a view to
maximizing effectiveness.

Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the Presidents of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judges Meron and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow, and to commend them for their
important work.

The function of resettling acquitted individuals
in safe countries should be transferred to the Residual
Mechanism by the end of this year. The Tribunal’s
management would appear to understand that. We
would warn against attempts to draw out the ICTR’s
work by retaining on its docket the so-called technical
cases involving contempt of court or false testimony in
cases that have already been transferred to the Residual
Mechanism. Pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010), such
cases should also be transferred expeditiously to
the Residual Mechanism. No new Security Council
resolution is needed to that effect. We stress once again
that we remain committed to strict compliance with
resolution 1966 (2010) and are not ready to consider
reopening it under any pretext. We suggest that the work
on transferring the archives to the Residual Mechanism
should already be in full swing. No one is stopping the
ICTR from starting to implement the liquidation plan,
which is not dependent on the conclusion of the Butare
case.
It has become very clear, as we approach the
watershed moment for the Tribunals at the end of 2014,
that attempts to establish pretexts for their ongoing
functioning would taint the backdrop for December’s
discussions. Continuing the Tribunals’ activities beyond
2014 would require independent external experts to
look into the true state of affairs in the Tribunals in
order to make specific recommendations to address the
situation. We are pursuing relevant work to that end
28/32

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

We appreciate their briefings and comprehensive
reports (S/2014/343, S/2014/350 and S/2014/351) on the
work of the Tribunals and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the reporting
period.
In the course of the 21 years since it was
established, the ICTY has been highly praised for its
remarkable achievements, as well as criticized, more
than once, justifiably or not, with occasionally even its
very existence put under question. So, it could be said
that the important legacy of the Tribunal is still being
scrutinized and is not entirely without flaws. However,
that should in no way tarnish the historical record of the
Tribunal, but should rather serve as an important lesson
learned for the benefit of international criminal justice.
Croatia has been among those who have occasionally
voiced criticism of the Tribunal. Nevertheless, we
strongly believe that the ICTY has played an important
historical role in the region and beyond, and we praise
its work.
In that context, I would like to point out the
following matters.
The establishment of the ICTY represented a
breakthrough in the development of international
criminal law. It has made valuable progress in the
last two decades in improving international criminal
procedures and in narrowing the impunity gap for
international crimes. The experiences of the ICTY and
ICTR were the starting point for the creation of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), the work of which
Croatia strongly supports.
The practice of the ICTY is important for the
interpretation of international humanitarian law. In

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

that respect, we would like to particularly emphasize
the contribution to international jurisprudence on
sexual violence, as mentioned today by Prosecutor
Brammertz. Before the establishment of the ICTY and
the ICTR, sexual violence was a marginalized issue in
international law. The ICTY established case precedents
for the prosecution of rape as a crime against humanity,
a war crime and an act of torture.
The ICTY has played an important part in
establishing a judicial network for dealing with warcrime cases in the States that emerged from the former
Yugoslavia. It was a paramount instrument against
the culture of impunity, setting high standards of
responsibility for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. That has not only helped national courts
to increase the quality of war-crime proceedings, but
has also led to a general rise in legal awareness and the
quality of the judiciary.
Last, but not least, let us not forget that the ICTY was
established under resolution 877 (1993), unanimously
adopted by the Security Council, under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, as a response
to gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law and the horrendous scale of atrocities and human
suffering. The Tribunal was created because it was the
right thing to do, and there was sufficient political will
on the part of the international community.
Can we say today that the same will is present in
2014 when we deal with war crimes and crimes against
humanity in other parts of the world?
Croatia advocated for the establishment of the
ICTY from the very beginning. We strongly supported
the main purpose of the ICTY — the prosecution
and punishment of individuals responsible for acts of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as well as the delivery of justice for the victims of
those crimes. Croatia also supported the Tribunal’s
more global functions aimed at the restoration and
maintenance of peace and stability in the region as well
as the promotion of justice.
We believed then, as we believe today, that it is
of the utmost importance to put an end to the culture
of impunity and to ensure accountability for the most
serious crimes, wherever they have been committed. It
is precisely because of our own difficult experience that
we believe that accountability should be ensured for the
most serious crimes under international law, which are
now being committed in ongoing conflicts, especially

in Syria. That is why we rendered our support to the
initiative for the referral of that situation in Syria to
the ICC.
One must always keep in mind that the Tribunal
provided the victims the opportunity for their voice
to be heard and their suffering to be recognized,
respected and eased. Unfortunately, the establishment
of the Tribunal did not stop or prevent future war
crimes, including the genocide in Srebrenica, the worst
massacre to occur on European soil since the Second
World War. However, due to the existence of the
Tribunal, some of those responsible for the crimes have
been brought to justice. The voices of the victims are
being heard and historical records established. That is
not a small achievement.
In conclusion, Croatia welcomes the results
achieved by the ICTY to date, especially the fact that
all those indicted by the Tribunal have been arrested
and transferred to its custody. However, the work of the
Tribunal is not over yet. Some of those most responsible
for the carnage, deaths and suffering are still waiting
for the verdicts to be rendered. We hope that that will
happen soon. Finally, let me reiterate our undisputable
support for the work of both Tribunals.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mrs. Anđelić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, allow me to welcome the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I would
also like to thank them for their comprehensive
briefings on the activities of the Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism. Let me underscore the significant
contribution of all the staff of the Tribunals and
commend their efforts in the successful work and
completion of the Tribunals’ mandates.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and has supported its work since the beginning.
We have continuously increased our level of cooperation
with the ICTY, including the Office of the Prosecutor,
and will continue to do so. We hope that good
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism will continue, as well. It is very
important for the Tribunal to accomplish its completion
strategy and transition to the Residual Mechanism. In
that regard, the Mechanism should be able to undertake
all necessary administrative and judicial work. We

14-4210229/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

welcome the decision that the Mechanism’s staff should
include nationals of 46 States, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
With the aim of ensuring the prosecution of all
suspected war criminals in the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we continue to strengthten the justice
system at both the State and the local levels. In 2013,
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted 80 proposals for the transfer of proceedings
to entity Prosecutor’s Offices and courts. During the
same year, 67 war crimes cases were referred from
the entities and Brcko District to the Constitutional
Court. Currently, 91 cases are being assessed as to the
complexity of the war crimes. As of 4 February, the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was dealing with a total of 352 of the most complex war
crimes cases against 3,309 individuals. The Prosecutor’s
Office estimates that the most complex war crimes
cases will have been processed and completed by 2018.
Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the National War
Crimes Strategy on 29 December 2008, which was
followed by the establishment of its implementation
monitoring body in 2009. The majority of the Strategy’s
goals have been fully or partially implemented, but with
a delay in the deadlines. The institutions at all State
levels are participating in implementing the Strategy.
To that end, we welcome the support of the European
Union in the implementation of the Strategy’s goals.
Both the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda have contributed to classifying
sexual abuse as a crime against humanity. As a result,
sexual abuse has become an integral part of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Female judges and
women in senior positions at the respective Office of the
Prosecutor have made significant contributions to the
effective prosecution of cases of sexual violence against
women. In that respect, we welcome the decisions
that 56 per cent of the Mechanism’s professional staff
and 53 per cent of its total staff should be women.
Furthermore, we welcome the assistance of UN-Women,
which sponsored a programme on prosecuting crimes
of sexual violence.
The Tribunals’ initiatives on support to and
contact with victims’ associations, such as during the
conference in Sarajevo in November 2013, are steps in
the right direction because victims and their families
have waited long enough and, in some cases, are still
waiting for the opportunity of redress and closure.

30/32

In order to preserve the records and archives of the
ICTY and to ensure their accessibility in the future, we
have proposed that an information centre be located
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That would have a very
symbolic significance in serving future generations
and as a constant reminder that violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law should never
be repeated. Today, information technology makes
it possible for there to be no difference between the
headquarters and branches of the information centre.
We welcome the interest of Croatia and Serbia in such
a project. We would like to encourage other countries
in the region and beyond to participate in supporting
the project. The legacy of the ICTY does not belong
only to the countries concerned but to all humanity as
the reminder and testimony of the justice achieved. We
believe that the issue deserves further consideration in
the spirit of regional cooperation and the inclusiveness
of the United Nations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to promote
regional cooperation, most recently by signing the
Protocol on Cooperation in Prosecution of Perpetrators
of War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and Genocide
with Montenegro on 26 April. That followed the
signing of the protocols on the exchange of evidence
and information on war crimes, concluded between the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Office of the Prosecutor of Serbia in January 2013
and the Office of the Prosecutor of Croatia in June 2013.
The protocols define the channels for concluding any
investigations concerning citizens of other countries.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Let me begin by
welcoming the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), two of whom are also
officials of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I thank them for the reports that
they submitted (S/2014/350, annex, and S/2014/313,
annex), which we studied with great attention.
At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation of the acknowledgement of the continued
high level of cooperation of the Republic of Serbia
with the ICTY that the President and the Prosecutor
mentioned in their reports. A partial testimony to that
is the fact that there are no remaining fugitives and that

14-42102

05/06/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7192

most of the 3,500 requests for assistance received from
the Office of the Prosecutor or the defence counsels
in accessing documents, archives and witnesses have
been processed, with only those of a more recent date
pending.
In that vein, I would like to express the commitment
of the new Government of Serbia to continuing that
successful cooperation with the ICTY and with the
International Residual Mechanism. We hope that the
remaining proceedings will be completed as planned,
in particular given the duration and problems in
completing certain cases, the length of detention of
some indictees and the delay in appeal judgements in
the cases of a number of sentenced persons.
Serbia is determined to make a contribution to
regional peace and reconciliation in the firm belief
that, to that end, the quest and respect for justice and
fairness are of vital importance. We consider that, in
that regard, regional cooperation is very important and
that it must continue to be a priority.
We would therefore like to point out that the
progress that has been achieved over the past year in
the field of regional cooperation by Serbia in trying war
crimes has been highlighted in the progress report on
Serbia by the European Commission for 2013. Overall,
82 new pieces of information and evidence have been
exchanged in cases of war crimes in the region, the
highest progress recorded in regional cooperation so
far. That cooperation is based on bilateral cooperation
protocols between the prosecutorial offices of Serbia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, as stated in the
reports.
I would like to make special mention of the
cooperation with the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, due to which six new indictments
have been raised. The cooperation in the exchange
of data, information and evidence is taking place in
38 cases of war crimes and other criminal offences
against international law through liaison officers in the
two prosecutorial offices. Similarly, the cooperation
with the State Attorney’s Office of Croatia has been
improved and should lead to the identification of new
indictments. We are convinced that the new proceedings
for war crimes will bring justice to a great number of
victims.
To that end, the trying of war crimes within
national jurisdictions is of paramount importance.
In Serbia, the number of the cases tried in domestic

courts has increased considerably in the most recent
period. The assistance provided to national judicial
authorities by the Office of the Prosecutor for the
purpose of strengthening national capacities has been
very important. Special mention in this context should
be made of the European Union/ICTY training project
for national prosecutors and young professionals from
the former Yugoslavia.
As I stated at the previous Security Council debate
six months ago (see S/PV.7073), bearing in mind that
Serbia is firmly committed to cooperation with the
ICTY and the fact that 20 years have elapsed since its
establishment, my country attaches great importance
to the initiative that those convicted by the Tribunal
in The Hague be allowed to serve their sentences in
the States that emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. In that context, let me recall that, since
2009, Serbia has requested to sign such an agreement
with the ICTY and sought very actively to promote
the initiative all along. Its officials have written to the
United Nations and the ICTY on a number of occasions
yet, regrettably, no progress has been made due to the
fact that this question continues to be determined by
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council of May 1993, which states that the
enforcement of sentences should take place outside the
territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Without prejudging the recommendation of the
Secretary-General and bearing in mind President
Meron’s statement in his report to the effect that the
International Residual Mechanism is actively working
to secure additional agreements to increase its
enforcement capacity and welcomes the cooperation
of States in that regard, Serbia would appreciate an
opportunity to sign such an agreement.
Let me repeat that the results of the cooperation
with the ICTY over the years indicate that my country
takes this question seriously and that it is ready to
accept international supervision of the enforcement
of sentences and to provide all necessary guarantees.
Let me also recall that the Republic of Serbia signed,
on 20 January 2011, an agreement on the enforcement
of criminal sentences with the International Criminal
Court. Under the agreement, persons convicted before
the Court for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide may serve their sentences in Serbia. My
country has been the first country in South-East Europe
to sign such an agreement, with the United Kingdom,

14-4210231/32

S/PV.7192 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/06/2014

Austria, Belgium, Denmark and Finland being the only
ones that did so before it.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
readiness of Serbia for, and its interest in, addressing the
question of the ICTY archives. We advised the Security
Council of our official position on the matter in October
2008. My country is ready to participate actively in all
future discussions and to continue to cooperate with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
this question. Also, as in the past, Serbia is ready to
fulfil its obligations resulting from cooperation with
the ICTY and the International Residual Mechanism.
Let me conclude by expressing my country’s
satisfaction concerning the progress made in the
establishment of the operational capacities of the branch
of the International Residual Mechanism in The Hague

32/32

over the past year. A successful commencement of
work is of key importance to the implementation of the
mission of the ICTY in accordance with its mandate, in
particular in enabling the continued work of national
judiciary in prosecuting war crimes. The international
judicial system has a key role to play in the process
and is duty-bound to make a contribution through full
respect for international norms, human rights and the
right to a fair hearing and defence. Let me point out
once again that Serbia is committed to regional peace,
stability and reconciliation.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

14-42102
