24

General Aseemhly-Sixth ~ssion

Invites the ~ecretary-General, and the agencies par' ;cipating in the Technical Assistance Board, to give
sympathetic consideration to requests of the Libyan
Government for assistance with economic development programmes which would strengthen the Libyan
economy, including the repair or reconstruction of
damaged property an<l installations, public and private,
and in this connexion to appoint, as requested by the
Libyan Governm~nt, any additional experts that may
be required to collect the necessary data, to complete
the survey of the problem of war damages and to make
recommendations.
366th plenary meeting,
29 January 1952.

530 (VI). Economic and financial provisions
relating to Eritrea
Whereas, in accordance with the provisions of article
23 and paragraph 3 of annex XI of the Treaty of Peace
with Italy, 15 the question of the disposal of the former
Italian colonies was submitted on 15 September 1948
to the General Assembly by the Governments of France,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republi~s, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America,
Whereas, by virtue of the above-mentioned provisions, the four Powers have agreed to accept the recommendation of the General Assembly and to take appropriate measures for giving effect to it,
Whereas the General Assembly, by resolution 390 A
(V) of 2 December 1950, recommended that Eritrea be
constituted an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown not
later than 15 September 1952, and laid down the necessary provisions for effecting the federation of Eritrea
with Ethiopia, and left for settlement by the United
Nations only the probkm referred to in paragraph 19
of annex XIV of the Treaty of Peace with Italy, while
taking into account, inter alia, the importance of assuring the continuing collaboration of the foreign communities in the ernnomic development of Eritrea,
Whereas paragraph 19 of annex XIV of the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, which contains the economic and
financial provisions relating to ceded territories, atates
that "The provisions of this Annex shall not apply to
the former Italian Colonies. The economic and financial
provisions to be applied therein will form part of the
arrangements for the final disposal of these territories
pursuant to article 23 of the present Treaty",
Whereas it is desirable that the economic and financial provisions relating to Eritrea should be determined
before Eritrea is constituted an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown in order that they may be applied as soon
as possible,
The General Assembly
Approves the following articles:

11
See Treaty Series. Treaties and international agreements
rl'gistered or filed atr.d recorded ·with the Secretariat of the
U,1itcd Nations, volume 49, 1950 I, No. 747.

Article I
1. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5
of this article Eritrea• shall receive, without payment,
the movable and immovable property located in Eritr~a
owned by the Italian State, either in its own name or in
the name of the Italian administration in Eritrea, and
such property shall be transferred to Eritrea not later
than the effective date of the final transfer of power
from the Administering Power to the appropri_ate authorities referred to in paragraph 14 of resolution 390
(V) of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
2. The property referred to in paragraph 1 shall
.
be taken as comprising:
(a) The public property of the State (demanio
publico);
.
( b) The inalienable property of the State (patrimonio in dis ponibile) ;
( c) The property of the Fascist Party a!1d its organizations as listed in article 10 of the Italian Royal
Decree No. 513 of 28 April 1938;
(d) The alienable property of the State (patrimonio disponibile) ;
( e) The property belonging to the aut~nomous
agencies ( azicnde autonomc) of the State which are:
Ferro11ie dell 'Eritrea
Azienda Speciale A pprovigionamenti
Azienda Minicre Africa Orientale (AMAO)
Azienda Autonoma Strade Statali {AASS);
(f) The rights of the Italian State in the form of
shares and similar rights in the capital of institutio!1s,
companies and associations of a public character w~1ch
have their siege social in Eritrea. Where the operations
of such institutions, companies and associations extend
to Italy or to countries other than Eritrea, Eritrea shall
receive only those rights of the Italian State o: the
Italian administration of Eritrea which appertam to
the operations in Eritrea. In cases where the Italian
State or the Italian administration of Eritrea exercised only managerial control over such· institutio1;1s,
companies and associations, Eritrea shall have no claim
to any rights in those institutions, companies and associations.
3. Properties, institutions, companies and associations referred to in paragraph 2 of this article shall be
transferred as they stand at the date of transfer and
Eritrea will take over all commitments and liabilities
outstanding at that date in connexion with those concerns.
4. Italy shall retain the ownership of the following
property listed in paragraph 2 of this article, that is
to say:
(a) The immovable property necessary for the
functioning of Italian government representation in
Eritrea ;b
( b) The immovable and mo~able property as at the
date of the present resolution used for the functioning
of the schools and hospitals of the Italian community
in Eritrea.
• The term "Eritrea" as used in the present resolution is to
be interpreted in conformity with paragraph 3 of resolution 390
(V) where the jurisdiction and responsibilities of the Federal
Government and the Eritrean Government are set out.
b The nature of Italian Government representation remains
for settlement between the future Federal· Government and the
Italian Government in accordance with international law and
practice.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Second Committee

5. The following property listed in paragraph 2
of this article, that is to say, building~ m.ed for worship
(including the land on which they are built and their
appurtenances), shall be transferred by Italy to the
religious communities concerned.
6. Italian cemeteries, monuments and ossuaries in
Eritrea shall be respected. Arrangements for their preservation ard maintenance shall be made between Italy
and, after Eritrea becomes an autonurn<Hts unit federated with Ethiopia, the appropriate authority under the
Federal Act.

7'.

Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5 and

(i ui this article, nothing in paragraph 1 of this article

25

obligations of the said organizations shall be respected.
These obligations may be extended to include other
categories of insured persons by agreement between
the appropriate authority under the Federal Act and
the said organizations.

Article IV
1. Italy shall continue to be liable for the payment
of civil and military pensions or other retirement benefits earned a!9 at the date of coming into force of the
Treaty of Peace with Italy and owed by it at that date.

sha 11 be taken as in any way restricting the right of the
Administering Power to make, during the period of its
administration, such dispositions of property referred
to in paragraph 2 of this article, whether limited to that
period or otherwise, as may be required by law or may
be appropriate for the good government of the territory, or may be necessary for the implementation of
the present resolution.

2. The amount of these pensions or retirement benefits shall be determined in accordance with the law
which was in force in Eritrea immediately prior to the
cessation of Italian administration of the territory and
shall be paid directly by Italy to the persons entitled
in the currency in which they were earned.

Article II

Eritrea shall be exempt from the payment of any
portion of the Italian public debt.

1. Subject to the provisions of this article, the Administering Power shall continue to have the custody
of all public archives and documents located in Eritrea
which relate to administrative or technical matters in
Eritrea or to property which is to be transferred by
!taly under article I of the present resolution or are
otherwise required in connexion with the administration of the territory.

2. Italy shall hand over to the Administering Power,
on request, the originals or copies of any such public
archives or documents located in Italy.
3. The Administering Power shall hand over to
Ital~, on r~quest, the originals or copies of any such
public archives or documents located in Eritrea which
are of interest to Italy or concern Italian nationals or
juridical persons, especially those who or which bave
transferred or hereafter transfer their residence to
Italy.
4. The rights and obligations of the Administering
Power under the preceding provisions of this article
shall, when Eritrea is constituted an autonomous unit
federa~ed with Ethiopia, devolve u1.xm the appropriate
authority under the Federal Act to which the Administering Power shall hand over such public archives and
documents as have been received from Italy.
5. The handing over of the above-mentioned archives and documents or copies thereof shall be exempt
from payment of dues and taxes, and the cost of
transport thereof shall be borne by the government
requesting them.

Article III
_The_ Italia_n social insuran~e organizations now operating m Entrea shall remain wholly responsible for
fulfilling all their respective obligations towards insured
persons as is provided for under present social insurance legislation, and the present legal rights and

Article V

Article VI
Italy shall return to their owners, in the shortestrossible time, all ships in its possession or that o its
nationals or juridical persons which are proved to have
been the property of its former Eritrean subjects or to
have been registered in Eritrea, except in cases in which
the ships have been acquired in good faith.

Article VII
1. The property, rights and interests of Italian nationals, including Italian juridical persons, in Eritrea shall,
provided they have been acquired in accordance with
the laws prevailing at the time of acquisition, be respected. They shall not be treated less favourably than
the property, rights and interests of other foreign nationals, including foreign juridical persons.
2. Italian nationals in Eritrea who have left or who
leave Eritrea to settle elsewhere shall be permitted
freely to sell their movable and immovable property,
realize and dispose of their assets and, after settlement
of any debts and taxes due from them in Eritrea, transfer their movable property and the funds they possess,
including the proceeds of the above-mentioned transactions, unless such property or funds were unlawfully
acquired. Such transfers of property or funds shall
not be subject to any export duty.
The procedure for the transfer from Eritrea of such
property or funds and the times within which they may
be transferred shall be determined by agreement between the Administering Power, or after Eritrea becomes an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia the
appropriate authority under the .i'ederal Act, on the
one hand, and Italy on the other hilnd. No such agreement shall restrict the right of transfer provided for
in the paragraph above.

General Assembly-Sixth Session
.:i. Companie~ in,:orporated under Italian law and
having their siege social in Italy shall be dealt with
,mder the provisions of paragraph 2 above.
Companies incorporated under Italian law and having their siege social in Eritrea and which wish to remove their siege social elsewhere shall likewise be dealt
with under the pro,, isions of paragraph 2 above, provided that more th;m SO per cent of the capital uf the
company is owned by persons usually resident outside
Eritrea and provided also that the greater part of the
activity of the company is carried on outside Eritrea.
4. The _property. rights and interests in Italy of
former Italian natic,nals belonging to Eritrea and of
companies previously incorporated under Italian law
and having their si,·gr social in Eritrea shall be respected by Italy to the same extent as the property,
rights and interests , ,f foreign nationals and of foreign
companies generally.
Such persons an<l companies are authorized to effect
the transfer and liquidation of their property, rights
and interests uncl,. 1· the same conditions as mav be
established under p:tragraph 2 above.
·
5. Debts owed hy persons in Italy to persons in
Eritrea or by persons in Eritrea to persons in Italy
shall not be affected liy the transfer of sovereignty The
Administering Power, Italy and, after Eritrea becomes-an autonom01,s unit federated with Ethiopia the
appropriate authori1y under the Federal Act, shall facilitate the settlement of such obligations. As used in
this paragraph the term "persons" includes juridical
persons.

A rticlc VII I
1. Property, rights and interests in Eritrea which,
as_ a result of the war, are still subject to measures of
seizure, c.ompulsory administration or sequestration,
shall be restored to their owners.
2. Nothing in this article shall apply to any compulsory acquisition or requisition by the Administering
Power for public purposes in Eritrea which is valid
under the civil law of Eritrea.

Article IX
1. Th~ former I!alian nationals belonging to Eritrea
shall continue to enJoy all the rights in industrial, literary_ and artistic property in Italy to which they were
entitled under the legislation in force at the time of
the coming into force of the Treaty of Peace.
2. Until the relevant international conventions are
applica~le. to Eritrea the. right~ in industrial, literary
and artistic property which existed in Eritrea under
Ita)ian law shall remain in force for the period for
which they would have remained in force under that
law.
Article X
1.

. (a)

In this article :

'.'<;once~sion" means a grant by the former Italian admm_1s~ratlon or
the Admi:t?-istering Power or
by a m~nic11;>al authority of t~e en1oyment in Eritrea
of specific nghts and assets m exchange for specific

?Y

obligations undertaken by the concessionaire with regani to the use and improvement oi such assets, such
grant being made in accordance with tht· laws, regulations and rules in force in Eritrea at tile time oi such
grant;
( b) "Cun tract in the nature u f a concession"
means a lease for a period of years by the former Italian admini~tration or by the Administering Power or
by a municipal authority of land in Eritrea by the terms
of which lease the tenant undertakes obligations similar
to those o i a concessionaire in the case of a concession,
such lease not being made under any specific law, regulation or rule c-ontaining provisions for such leases.
2. Concessions granted during the period of the
former Italian administration shall be recognized as
valid for all purposes and shall he respected ac<:ordingly.
3. Where a concessionaire satisfies the appropriate
authorities that a document of title perfecting his concession should ha\ e been issued to him but. owing to
conditions created by the state oi war or to f o-rce
majcurc, was not so issued, and that his concession,
if it had been perfected by the issue of the document,
would not he liable to revocation, the appropriate authorities shall issue a document of title to the concessionaire which shall have the same validity as the document which should have been issued originally.
4. Where the period of the lease, in the case of a
contract in the nature of a concession granted during
the period of the former Italian administration, has
expired during the period oi administration by the A<lministering Power and has been renewed on a temporary basis by the Administering Power, or where any
lease of such nature· has heen initially gr auted by the
Adminisfering Power, such Power may, if satisfied that
the tenant has fulfilled the obligations undertaken by
hi1:1 and that it is in the interests of the economy of
Entrea so to do, grant to the tenant a concession for
such period as is appropriate having .regard to the nature of the land in question.
5. A concession or contract in the nature of a concession granted during the period of the form<'r Italian
administration shall not be liable to revocation by reason of the failure by the concessionaire or tenant to
fulfil any obligation of the conces1,ion or contract if the
appropriate authorities are satisfied that such failure
was due solely to conditions created by the state of war
or to force majcure.
6. Where a concessionaire or tenant satisfies the
appropriate authorities that any document of title evidencing his concession or contract in the nature of a
co~cession h~s. been lost or destroyed and the appropnate authont1es are able to ascertain the terms of the
document and are satisfied that the concession or
contract in the nature of a concession is not liable to
revocation, they shall issue to the concessionaire or
tenant a nt>w document of title which shall have the
same validity as the one which has been loc;t or destroyed.

Article XI
1. A United Nations Tribunal shall be set up, composed of thre~ persons ~elect~d by the SecretaryGeneral for the!T legal qualifications from the nationals

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Second Committee

of three different States not directly interested. All or
any of such persons may be members of the Tribunal
provided for in article X of resolution 388 (V) of the
General Assembly of the United Nations. The Tribunal,
whose decisions shall be based on law, shall have the
two following functions:
(a) It shall give to Italy and the Administering
Power, or when Eritrea becomes an autonomous unit
federated with Ethiopia the appropriate authority under
the Federal Act, upon request by any of those authorities, sw::h instructions as may be required for the purpose of giving effect to the present resolution;
( b) It shall decide all disputes arising between the
said authorities concerning the interpretation and application of the present resolution. The Tribunal shall
be seized of any such disputes upon the unilateral request of any of those authorities.
2. The Tribunal shall have exclusive competence on
matters falling within its functions in accordance with
paragraph 1 of this article. In the event of any matter
in dispute being referred to the Tribunal, any action
pending in civil courts shall be suspended.
3. Italy, the Administering Power and, when

27

Eritrea becomes an autonomous unit federakd ,, 1th
Ethiopia the appropriate authority under the l·e1icral
Act, shall supply the Tribunal as soon as possible with
all the information and assistance it may need for the
performance of its functions.
4. The seat of the Tribunal shall be in Eritrl'a. The
Tribunal shall determine its own procedure. All requests referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall
be presented to the Tribunal not later than 31 December 1953 and the Tribunal shall pronounce its decision
on each such request within a delay not exceeding two
years from the date of its presentation to the Tribunal.
As soon as its decisions have been pronounced on all
such requests pursuant to the foregoing, the Tribunal
shall terminate. It shall afford to the interested parties
an opportunity to present their views, and shall be entitled to request information and evidence which it may
require from any authority or person whom it considers
to be in a position to furnish it. In the absence of unanimity the Tribunal shall take decisions -by a majority
vote. Its decisions shall be final and binding.

366th plenary meeting,
29 January 1952.
