UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIALRECORDS
THIRTY-FOURTH

’ .’ (,jb23-;,,--; ‘--’

YEAR

MEETING:

28 MARCH

1979

NEi+-YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/2138)
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .
Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13176) . .

S/PV.2138

1
1

_

,.

1

;i

NOTE

‘ ,’

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined <;a i
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to- a United Nations
. . . ‘J’
document.
I; ~
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published irr ! ” I
quarterly Supplements of the O$kiaI Records of the Security Council The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is !’ ’ ’
given.
.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohttions and Decisions of .the ,Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions ,I.
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
; E‘
1 :;
,*>
‘,
-.
.S’

*

1.’
: eji
‘. ‘. i,..
.;
I
:

.’

_,

!

2138th MEETING
Held in New Y&k on Wednesday,28 March 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
fiesidenr:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Mr. Sahloul (St&n), Mr. Ko@ovi (Togo), Mr. Chale (United
Republic of Tanzania). Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viit Nam) and 1
Mr. Komaiina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them
at the side of the Council table.

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica; Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia. .

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with theconsent
of the.Counci!, to invite the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Provisl‘b$al agenda (S/Agenda/2138)
1. Adoption

of the agenda
.. ..
2. Complaint ‘by Angola against South .Africa:
Letter dated ‘16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176)

At theinvitation of the President, Mr. Martynenko (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) took the place reservedfor him
at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2132nd meeting, I invite the representative of
the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) to
take a place at the Council table.

The agenda was adopted.

Complalnt by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Repre
sentative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gurirab (South West
Africa People’s Organization) took a place at the Council
table.

4. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): On behalf of the delegations
of Bangladesh, Bolivia, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria and my
own, I have the honour to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document S/l3197 concerning South African
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings /223&h,
2132nd. 2133rdand2135th meetings/, I invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council table and
the representatives of Algeria, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, the Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Romania, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Togo, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The genera! debate that has taken place on this question
has clearly reflected the abhorrence and indignation felt by
the international community as a whole at the persistent
and escalating South African acts of aggression against
Angola. A large number of Member States felt obliged to
take part in the debate and virtually a!! speakers stressedthe
gravity of the situation posed by the South African acts of
aggression and the implications for international peace and
security inherent in the policies and practices of the Pretoria
regime. The South African regime was most categorically
condemned by the participants in .the debate and an
unequivocal demand was made for the invocation of punitive measures against South Africa by the Security Council.

At the invitation of the President. Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Tlou (Botswat@,
Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mondjo (Congo),
Mr. Roa Kouti (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Worku
(Ethiopia), Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. Sekyi (Ghana), Mr. YansanC (Guinea), Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Tubman (Liberia).
Mr. Rabetajika (Madagascar),
Mr. Honwona (Mozambique), Mr. Marirtescu (Romania), Mr. Gelaga-King (Sierra
Leone), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Rodrigo (Sri Lanka),

6. It is against this background that the sponsors prepared
the draft resolution now before the Council. We also took
into account the fact that this is not the first time that the
Council has considered South African aggression against
1

- Seventhly, further request the Secretary-General to
submit such information to the Security Council not later
than 30 April 1979, in order to enable it to determine the
most effective sanctions in accordance with, the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations so
as to ensure the cessation by South Africa of its acts of
aggression against Angola and other front-line States.

‘Angola. The Council is on record as having previously
condemned South Africa for its aggression against Angola.
Indeed, the Council is on record as having previously
&manded that South Africa should desist from its acts of
aggression and that it should scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.
Needless to say, both the condemnation and the demand for
the respect of Angolan independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity fell on deaf ears. South Africa has not only
continued with impunity to commit these acts of aggression
but has also in recent months and weeks escalated them.

9. I wish to point out that paragraphs 1’ to 5 reflect
general principles which cannot be ignored in the present
situation. They emphasize the illegality of South African
acts of aggression against Angola as well as its utilization
of Namibian territory for this purposed In this regard,
they make clear that South African violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Aagola.as well as its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia constitute a
serious threat to international peace and security. These
paragraphs, moreover, reaffirm support ,for the legitimate struggle of the people of Namibia forliberationand
recognize the role played by Angola and other front-line
States in support of this struggle. Finally, these paragraphs recognize and underscore the need: to strengthen
the defence capabilities of Angola and other front-line
States in the light of continued and aescalating South
., IAfrican aggression.

7. Pertinent in this regard is the solemn warning contained
in Council resolution 428 (1978) to the effect that, in the
event of further acts of aggression, consideration would be
given to the adoption of measures against South Africa, in
accordance. with the appropriate provisions of the Charter,
including Chapter VII thereof. This unequivocal warning
makes it- imperative that the response of the Council to the
new acts of aggression committed by South Africa against
Angola should be action-oriented in the direction of adopting measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, with a view
to putting an end once and for all to such aggression. South
Africa must not be allowed to continue in perpetuity its
contempt and defiance of the resolutions of the Council.

10. Paragraphs 6 and 7 are meant to be action-oriented
in the context of the warning in resolution 428 (1978) that
the Council would consider measures. against South
Africa in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter, including Chapter VII thereof, in the event
of further aggression against Angola. It is considered that
the information that the Secretary-General is requested
to obtain and submit to the Council by 30 April would be
of great help in this direction. As made clear in paragraph7, the Council would take that information into
account in determining the most effective sanctions
against South Africa so as to ensure the cessation of its
acts of aggression against Angola and ,other front-line
States.

8. Our draft resolution is, to a large extent, selfexplanatory. It has seven operative paragraphs, which
would have the Security Council:
-First, strongly condemn the racist regime of South
Africa for its premeditated, persistent and sustained
armed invasions of the People’s Republic of Angola,
which constitute a flagrant violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of that country as well as a serious
threat to international peace and security;
-Secondly,
also strongly condemn South Africa’s
utilization of the international-Territory
of Namibia as a
spring-board for armed invasions and destabilization of
the People’s Republic of Angola;
-Thirdly,
demand that South Africa cease immediately its provocative armed invasions against the People’s Republic of Angola and that it respect forthwith the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity-of that
country;

11. This is obviously a mild draft resolution, particularly when viewed against the gravity of the situation with
which the Council is seized. However, its unanimous
adoption would represent a positive and hopeful step in
the international effort to meet the South African challenge. On behalf of all the sponsors, I commend it to all
members of the Council.

-Fourthly,
commend the People’s Republic of
Angola and other front-line States for their steadfast
support of the people of Namibia in their just and legitimate struggle against the illegal occupation of their territory by South Africa and for the enjoyment of their
inalienable. rights to self-determination
and, national
independence;

12. Just a final word. I wish, on behalf of the sponsors,
to request that the draft resolution that I have been
privileged tointroduce this morning should be put to the
vote this afternoon. The seriousness, of the question
under consideration would dictate that our meetings do
not proceed beyond this point without action by the
Council.

- Fifthly, request Member St.ates urgently to extend
all necessary assistance to the People’s Republic of
Angola and other front-tine States, in orderto strengthen
their defence capacities;

13. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

-Sixthly,
request the Secretary-General. to. obtain
available information from the People’s Republic of
Angola on the human casualties and material and other
damage resulting from repeated acts of aggression committed by the racist regime of South Africa;

14. Mr. MARTYNENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): The delegation
of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist.RepubKc wouldlikefirst
of all to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members
of the Council for having made it possible for us to take
2

part in the deliberations on the question ofSouth Aft&an
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.

r$gime with fictitious power and apparent legality for the
racist occupation and also declared the “elections” and
their results to be null and void. But as the manOeuvres of
the South African regime have shown, particularly the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of Pretoria on 19’
March fsee S/13280], the South African authorities are
persisting in their attempt to force a neo-eolonialist solution of the Namibian problem on the Namibian people.

15. Representatives of many countries who have spoken
in the discussion on this item have shed sufficient light on
the circumstances and facts of the aggressive attack by
South African armed forces on the sovereignty of the
independent country of Angola. The scale of the aggres‘sion is shown by the fact that the South African Air Force
subjected a number of Angolan towns to vicious bombing with napalm. South African infantry units constantly
invade the territory of that independent country. With
their tanks and‘armoured vehicles they make raids deep
into the country. Hundreds of Namibian refugees and
Angolan citizens, mainly women, old people and children, have fallen victim to this new act of aggression and
many of them-have perished or been severely disfigured
as a result of.the-napalm used by the aggressor. Great
material damage has been sustained.
‘I
16. It is quite ‘o&ious that the armed attack launched
by South Africa on the People’s Republic of Angola is not
a fortuitous, iFo1ated episode. The South African racists
have repeatedly violated the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola. The present
attack is yet one more link in the endless chain of crimes
perpetrated bythe racist regime of South Africa, a new
step in the escalation of the permanent aggression by
South Africa against young independent African States
and an open defiance of relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and decisions, as well as
the principles of the Charter.

20. Furthermore, showing their open defiance of the
United Nations and world public opinion, the Pretoria
regime recently stepped up its military preparations on
Namibian territory. A large number of tanks and other
military ~driel were sent to Namibia, tens of thousands
of soldiers in a state of mobilized military readiness have
been concentrated, and the illegally occupied Territory of
Namibia has been turned into a spring-board for aggressive attacks on neighbouringAfrican countries-Angola,
Zambia and others. If we add to .that South Africa’s
feverish preparations to produce its own nuclear weapons, then it becomes quite clear exattly how the Pretoria.
racists intend to resolve the Namibian problem.
21. In condemning South Africa’s acts of provocation,
we must note that responsibility for them must be borne
not only by Pretoria but also by the NATO countries.
With their assistance the racist army has been tieqed and
armed to the teeth. The racist military clique is playing a
punitive role, serving the interests of international capitat, which is interested in solving the problems of southern Africa in the neq-colonialist manner. The apaitheid
regime supports in all possible ways the Western monopolies and the so-called transna,tional corporations. They
are, furthermore, obstructing effective economic sanctions against the racist regime. Connivance and support
by NATO and the international monopolies leave Pretoria free to ignoie the will of the United Nations and
peace-loving public opinion, to perpetrate acts of aggres-,
sion and act as NATO’s striking force against sovereign
African countries.

17. As has alreiidy been noted during the discussion on
this question, the aim of the policy of systematic acts of
aggression against Angola is to destabilize the situation
in that country, fo’wreck plans for economic and social
development, and to try to shatter the unity of the frontline States and force them to stop supporting the just
struggle of the people of Namibia for their freedom and
independence.

22. It is an irrefutable truth that the unceasing acts of
mass repression by South Africa against the Namibian
people, as well as its aggressive attacks against neighbouring independent States, are a real and serious threat to
international peace and security, not only in Africa but
throughout the world, and.the continued estialation and
increasing scale of those actions further exacerbate the
situation.

18. The piratical raids on the territory of Angola are
part and parcel of the plan of the racists and theiraccomplices aimed at intimidating
the front-line States. In
organizing those forays, the South African racists and
their sponsors attempt to create friction and dissent
among the liberation movements and the independent
countries of Africa and to sow distrust of the freedom
lighters. They are trying to wreck the process of the free
implementation
by the Namibian people of the right to
selfdetermination,
to put traitors to the Namibian people in power and set up their neo-colonial puppet regime
in the Territory.

23. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Repubfic is convinced that the explosive situation in
southern Africa and the manceuvririg of the racists and
their protectors who try to consolidate the illegal occupation of Namibia and.thus spread their domination to the
whole of southern Africa dictates the urgent need for the
Security Council, which bears the main responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, to
adopt effective measures against the South African racist
regime. Only if the Council adopts urgent, immediate and.
effective measures against the racist regime, including
sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter,
can we be assured of a real guarantee for preventing
further acts of aggression by South Africa.

19. Cynically, trampling international law underfoot,
the South African racists have already chosen the shifting
path of real and insolent sabotage of United Nations
resolutions. Despite the agreement reached to hold free
democratic elections in Namibia under the auspices of the
United Nations, and disregarding the protests of international public opinion, South Africa managed, during the
rigged elections held last December, to “elect” their
puppets in Namibia, to the liking of the racist Pretoria
clique. As is well known, the General Assembly decisively
condemned Pretoria’s decision to force a so-called internal- settlement on Namibia that would create a puppet

The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.’

3

.

.

.

.
.

i.

.

.*
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

HDW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

‘.-

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may .be obtained
your bookstore

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vents dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adresses-vous
II : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Genbe.
KAK

lIOJIY=IHTb

ZiOAAHSfZI

OPI’AHNIAUUN

OIi%EASfHEHHhlX

HaJlaw%n ODraHuxu.utH
06~ennHenHb~x
HauwR MDZCHO rcynn~b
wntax
H areHTCTBax
BO BCeX pafiOHaX
Mnpa. HaBOAHTe
CnpaBKH
aamex
anmknox
uarasaae
mui nmunre
no anpecy : Opramfsaunx
HannR. Cesuna no nponame
nsnam#
Hbt+Fi~p~
HI(H Xe%esa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

Price: su.s.

NACIONES

HAUUH
s IHHMILIX
rara06 HJAaHHIIX
B
06xenrinennblx

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones

I.50

79-70002-December

1981-2,250
