S/2020/398

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2020
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2461 (2019) and paragraph 33 of Council resolution 2472 (2019) and
provides updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major
developments in Somalia during the period from 5 February to 4 May 2020 and
specific measures related to UNSOS between 1 November 2019 and 30 April 2020.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
On 20 February, the President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
“Farmajo”, signed the electoral bill into law, following its passage through Parliament
a day earlier. In the federal member states, steps were taken towards reconciliation
among some stakeholders in Galmudug, the new member s of the state assembly in
South-West State took office and Puntland held a consultative conference of political
stakeholders. However, relations between the Federal Government and some federal
member states remained strained. The deployment of Somali Nati onal Army forces to
the Gedo Region of Jubbaland resulted in clashes, with wider regional implications,
and opposition parties in Mogadishu continued to express concern about limited
political space. A decision-making forum of leaders of the Federal Government and
the federal member states has not been convened since June 2018.
3.
On 19 February, the House of the People approved bills concerning civil
aviation, quality control, the national census, the media, and retirement and benefits
for members of the armed forces, and submitted them to the Upper House for review
and approval. Mr. Farmajo commended the two houses on their cooperation, which
enabled the passage of 20 bills during the parliamentary session.
4.
On 5 March, in Istanbul, Turkey, opposition politicians belonging to the Forum
for National Parties stated their intention to form a single political alliance ahead of
national elections, urging like-minded opposition parties to join them.

20-06442 (E)

150520

*2006442*

S/2020/398

5.
On 16 March, Somalia confirmed its first case of coronaviru s disease
(COVID--19). The authorities announced a two-week ban on all international flights
from 18 March, which was subsequently extended indefinitely.
6.
On 15 April, the Speakers of both houses of Parliament announced their decision
to postpone the start of the next parliamentary session, originally scheduled for
10 April, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic and in accordance with the advice issued
by the Ministry of Health, until alternative virtual arrangements were in place.
7.
In South-West State, the selection of new state assembly members concluded on
19 March. The members were sworn in on 23 March. On 1 April, Ali Said Fiqi,
Mohamednur Mohamed Moallim and Shamso Mohamed Yarow were elected Speaker
and First and Second Deputy Speakers, respectively. On 20 April, the state assembly
voted in favour of a motion to give the state President, Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed
“Laftagareen”, a one-year extension, aligning the terms of office of the state President
and the state assembly.
8.
On 8 February, 2 March and 22 April, armed clashes erupted in Beledxaawo,
Gedo Region, near the border between Somalia and Kenya, between the Somali
National Army and militiamen loyal to the Minister of Security of Jubbaland,
Abdirashid Hassan Abdinur “Janan”. The clashes heightened ten sions between
Somalia and Kenya. Mr. Farmajo and the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, took
steps to de-escalate tensions, including through a telephone conversation on 5 March,
followed by high-level ministerial visits to Mogadishu and Nairobi. On 23 Ap ril, in
Nairobi, the President of Jubbaland, Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe”, and his
political opponents from the Jubbaland Council for Change reached an agreement to
recognize his contested election in August 2019 and form a coalition government.
9.
Heavy fighting erupted between Ahl al-Sunna wal Jama‘a (ASWJ), the Somali
National Army and the special “Haramcad” police in the Dhuusamarreeb area of
Galmudug on 27 and 28 February, which resulted in dozens of casualties. On
29 February, the ASWJ leadership surrendered to the Federal Government. Following
his election on 2 February, the President-elect of Galmudug, Ahmed Abdi Kaariye,
continued to reach out to the outgoing President of the state, Ahmed Duale Gelle
“Haaf”, and the political opposition, which culminated in the peaceful handover of
power on 12 April, albeit in the absence of the ASWJ leadership.
10. On 24 March, the Hirshabelle state assembly approved a budget of $14 million
for 2020, with the possibility of a supplemental budget in view of the COVID -19
pandemic.
11. On 6 February, Puntland ordered the closure of the National Independent
Electoral Commission office in Garoowe and suspended its activities in the state.
From 15 to 17 March, the President of Puntland, Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni,
hosted a consultative conference in Garoowe to discuss the state’s trajectory. A
delegation of the Federal Government led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ahmed
Isse Awad, also attended. The conference participants issued a communiqué, in which
they called for the postponement of the constitutional review process until after
elections and criticized the new electoral law, stating, inter alia, that it contradicted
the Provisional Federal Constitution. They also called for a consultative conference
of all Somali political stakeholders to deliberate and agree on ways to hold elections
in 2020/21. At the conclusion of the conference, Mr. Deni announced his intention to
travel to Mogadishu and federal member state capitals to advance the dialogue.
12. On 29 February, in the Sool and Sanaag Regions disputed by “Somaliland” and
Puntland, intermittent skirmishes resumed between forces loyal to the two sides, in
breach of the de facto ceasefire brokered in 2018 by the United Nations and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
2/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

13. On 27 February, the President of “Somaliland”, Muse Bihi Abdi, and opposition
party leaders signed an agreement on organizing parliamentary and local council
elections by the end of 2020.
14. On 11 February, Mr. Farmajo and Mr. Bihi met for the first time since each
assumed office in 2017. The Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, brokered the
meeting, which was held in Addis Ababa. On 13 February, Mr. Farmajo asked for the
forgiveness of the people of “Northern Somalia”, expressing regr et for human rights
violations committed by the regime of Siad Barre. Mr. Bihi accepted the gesture on
18 February during his annual address to the Parliament of “Somaliland”.

B.

Security developments
15. The security situation remained volatile, with 235 incidents in January, 274 in
February, 278 in March and 299 in April. This was due mainly to higher numbers of
terrorism-related incidents, such as mortar attacks, improvised explosive device
attacks and assassinations. Levels of crime and armed conflict-related incidents have
remained steady since January.
16. Al-Shabaab significantly increased its mortar attacks in Mogadishu. The Aden
Adde International Airport zone, in which the United Nations compound is located,
was attacked with 60 mm mortars on 17 February, 1 and 18 March and 19 and
26 April, the highest number of indirect fire attacks on the zone ever recorded. None
of the mortars that landed in the attack on 17 February detonated. The attack on
1 March injured an international contractor. The attack on 18 March resulted in slight
injuries to an international staff member. The attack on 19 April resulted in minor
injuries to an international contractor. The attack on 26 April left five civilians injured
and one dead in the vicinity of the zone, where one of the mortars landed. In a separate
incident on the same day, an improvised explosive device detonated near one of the
gates to the zone, without casualties.
17. Mortar attacks also increased countrywide, with a total of 29 between February
and April, compared with 7 between November and January. The attacks mainly
targeted the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and local security forces
in Bari, Hiraan, Shabelle Dhexe, Shabelle Hoose and Juba Hoose. On 11 March,
mortars targeting a police training centre in Jawhar, Shabelle Dhexe, landed near the
runway and the United Nations-AMISOM base, but caused no casualties or damage.
18. In addition to mortar attacks, Al-Shabaab maintained the capability to conduct
larger attacks against security forces in southern Somalia. In Shabelle Hoose on
19 February, the group launched two complex attacks with vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices against AMISOM and Somali National Army bases in Qoryooley
and Ceel Saliini, Marka district. The latter reportedly resulted in over 20 casualties
among members of the Somali National Army. On 16 March, the Somali National
Army and AMISOM liberated the town of Jannaale. In response, Al -Shabaab
increased its attacks in the area, including with indirect fire and a suicide vehicleborne improvised explosive device against AMISOM troops on 16 March, reportedly
leaving at least five soldiers dead. The group detonated two additional devices of the
same kind on 24 April in a foiled attack on the AMISOM-Somali National Army base
in Baraawe, Shabelle Hoose, in which the two suicide bombers were killed.
19. While a general decrease was observed in the number of civilian casualties from
Al-Shabaab activity, the group increased its high-profile attacks. In March, the
Governor of Nugaal was killed by a person-borne improvised explosive device in
Garoowe, while the Chief of the Somali Defence Forces was targeted by an
improvised explosive device in Shabelle Hoose, resulting in injuries to two soldiers.
A second person-borne improvised explosive device targeted a restaurant in

20-06442

3/18

S/2020/398

Mogadishu on 25 March, leaving four people dead. Al-Shabaab also used such
devices to destroy closed-circuit television cameras in Mogadishu for the second time
in 2020, thereby reducing the ability of the Somali authorities to prevent attacks.
20. An increase in assassinations claimed by Al-Shabaab was also recorded, with 7
in January, 16 in February, 21 in March and 16 in April. Six were attributed to
pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) elements in Mogadishu and Boosaaso,
Bari Region, representing a slight increase compared with the previous period, when
only three incidents were recorded. A total of 9 air strikes in February, 11 in March
and 10 in April were recorded, mainly in Juba Dhexe, Juba Hoose, Bakool and Bay,
targeting Al-Shabaab. In the first four months of 2020, there were 37 air strikes,
compared with 47 in 2018 and 63 in 2019.
21. On 4 May, an African Express Airways aircraft registered in Kenya, chartered
by the non-governmental organization INTERSOS to carry humanitarian cargo,
crashed on approach to Bardaale, South-West State, reportedly killing all six persons
on board. The cause of the crash has not been identified.

C.

Economic developments
22. On 25 March, Somalia reached the decision point under the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. The
country’s arrears to the World Bank and the African Development Bank were cleared
on 5 March through bridge loans from Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the European Union. IMF secured funding from over 100
member countries to clear the Somali arrears to the Fund.
23. On 6 March, the World Bank and IMF issued a joint staff advisory note on the
ninth national development plan, for the period 2020 –2024, noting that the plan
exceeded the standards of a typical interim poverty reduction strategy. Key drivers of
poverty are identified in the plan, and it provides a road map for strengthening
national resilience, building on the recovery and resilience framework.
24. The COVID-19 outbreak has already had a significant economic impact. The
Federal Government has projected an 11 per cent decline in nominal gross domestic
product for 2020, with inward transfers and remittances expected to fall by an
estimated 40 per cent. Revenue collection has declined. On 27 March, the Federal
Government issued a socioeconomic impact and required response plan costed at
$503.5 million, describing key macroeconomic, sectorial, fiscal and health sector
considerations that require additional and rapid support to mitigate the impact of
COVID-19.
25. The United Nations and the World Bank are coordinating their reviews of
existing programming as they plan their responses to COVID-19 across the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus. The plans are focused on accelerating or
scaling up existing programmes to mitigate the socioeconomic impact of the disease,
while adapting and adjusting other programming to changing market realit ies.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Preparations for elections
26. In the electoral law, a new first-past-the-post electoral system is proposed, with
275 constituencies in the House of the People and 54 Upper House seats. However,

4/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

several key issues require clarification for the law to be implementable, including
defining constituencies, allocating seats and ensuring the representation of women.
On 28 February, the Speakers of both houses of Parliament established a 17 -member
joint ad hoc committee to formulate recommendations that address key issues of the
law, in consultation with the National Independent Electoral Commission, the federal
member states and other stakeholders. The committee is scheduled to present its
recommendations at a joint parliamentary session, but timelines for the completion of
its work are unclear on account of the COVID-19 pandemic. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), in collaboration with UNSOM and the World
Bank, will provide videoconferencing facilities so that Parliament can continue to
work on elections and the constitutional review. UNDP and UNSOM also supported
the drafting of amendments to the parliamentary rule s and procedures to allow for
virtual proceedings and voting.
27. The first reading of the amendments to the political parties law was deferred to
the next parliamentary session. The delay in the resumption of Parliament will have
an adverse impact on deadlines for political parties to receive official registration and
nominate candidates.
28. In a meeting held from 15 to 18 March, the National Electoral Security Task
Force adopted its terms of reference and reviewed the draft concept of security for
voter registration. Police commissioners present provided an update on threat
assessments for Galmudug, Hirshabelle, South-West State and Banaadir. They also
agreed to conduct detailed assessments of provisional voter registration sites and to
establish state security task forces.
2.

Deepening federalism
29. The protracted political stalemate between the Federal Government and some
federal member states continued to hamper progress on critical national priorities.
While technical cooperation between federal and state ministries continued, a new
round of ministerial consultations on debt relief was postponed owing to the
withdrawal of Puntland and Jubbaland.
30. The United Nations continued to support international efforts aimed at
facilitating the resumption of political dialogue between the Federal Government and
federal member states. My Special Representative, in coordination with international
partners, met on several occasions with Mr. Farmajo and the Prime Minister, Hassan
Ali Khayre, to urge them to repair the frayed relationship in order to advance national
priorities. My Special Representative conveyed similar messages to the federal
member states, including during meetings held with the leaders of South -West State
and Puntland on 8 and 9 March, respectively, and through telephone calls with other
federal member state leaders. Mr. Farmajo has designated a focal point for relations
between the Federal Government and federal member states and has invited federal
member state leaders to appoint representatives to a secretariat that will prepare for a
summit in the second quarter of 2020.

3.

Constitutional review
31. On 6 February, the joint parliamentary Oversight Committee submitted to the
Speakers of the two houses of Parliament its report on the tripart ite working session
held in Istanbul on 5 November, as well as a revised draft constitution.
32. Further to the commitment of the Federal Government in the Mutual
Accountability Framework to conclude the constitutional review consultations by the
end of March 2020, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the joint parliamentary
Oversight Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission launched multi-stakeholder consultations in

20-06442

5/18

S/2020/398

Hirshabelle, Galmudug and South-West State on 1 March. Unresolved differences
between the Federal Government and Puntland and Jubbaland meant that
consultations were not held in those two states. The political impasse, the inability of
Parliament to resume its work in April and COVID-19-related movement restrictions
make it unlikely that a revised constitution will be adopted by June 2020, contrary to
the Mutual Accountability Framework.
4.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
33. On 7 March, the Hirshabelle administration stated that the land dis pute between
the Abadalla Aroni and Eli Omar clans in Cadale district, Shabelle Dhexe, had been
resolved, with the parties agreeing, inter alia, to pay compensation to some of the
victims. On 10 March, the Ba’ide and Sa’ad Yonis sub -clans, long-term antagonists
in Ceel Afweyn, Sanaag Region, began an exchange of compensation for the victims
of the conflict, following an agreement brokered by traditional and religious leaders
under the auspices of “Somaliland”.
34. Following the armed clashes near the Somali-Kenyan border in the Gedo Region
between the Somali National Army and militiamen loyal to Mr. Janan, my Special
Representative, together with international partners, engaged with the Federal
Government and the Jubbaland authorities to stop the violence an d de-escalate
tensions. On 8 March, the United Nations and 10 international partners issued a joint
statement in which they called upon all actors to exercise restraint, reduce the
presence of security forces in Gedo and avoid any actions that could trigge r violence.
They also urged dialogue between the Federal Government and Jubbaland and
underscored the importance of cooperation between the Federal Government and the
federal member states to achieve national priorities.
35. On 11 April, elders from the Majerteen and Awramale clans agreed to a ceasefire
following intermittent clashes over disputed land south-west of Kismaayo. The
clashes claimed more than 50 lives between 2 February and 2 April. Meanwhile, in
early April, following a clan conflict that resulted in over 25 fatalities in Wanlaweyn,
Shabelle Hoose, Mr. Laftagareen constituted an intervention committee to de -escalate
the conflict. On 24 April, a reconciliation conference involving the clans, the regional
administration and the Somali National Army began in the affected district. In
addition, on 6 April, an inter-clan conflict erupted between the Wagarda’a of Marehan
and the Saleeban of Habar Gidir in the villages of Balli-Cad and Foronta-Fora,
Galgaduud. Security forces were deployed on 7 April to stop the fighting and the
Galmudug authorities initiated reconciliation efforts.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
36. The new South-West State assembly has 14 members who are women (15 per
cent) and 81 who are men. This is a significant decrease in the representation of
women compared with the 22 per cent of members who were women in the previous
assembly, falling short of the minimum constitutional requirement of 20 per cent.
37. International Women’s Day on 8 March was observed in Mogadishu and federal
member states as a platform to increase awareness of gender equality and women’s
rights. UNSOM provided financial and technical support to all federal member states
and “Somaliland”, contributing to discussions on laws protecting women’s rights, as
well as to advocacy on the 30 per cent quota for women and their enhanced leadership
role in politics.

6/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

38. On 7 March in Garoowe, the Ministry of Women Development and Family
Affairs organized a panel discussion on ways and strategies to include a 30 per cent
quota for women in the Puntland local council elections law. On 11 March, UNSOM
trained 39 women in Kismaayo on gender mainstreaming and conflict -related sexual
violence as part of a three-day training workshop jointly organized by AMISOM and
the Ministry of Women, Family Affairs and Human Rights of Jubbaland.
2.

Youth empowerment
39. On 18 February, Mr. Bihi established the “Somaliland” youth development fund
to help to encourage creativity, innovation and entrepreneurship among young people.
40. Youth programmes implemented during the reporting period addressed
connections between employment, youth marginalization and inclusion, in particular
the political empowerment of young people and their inclusion in governance
mechanisms. The joint programme on the political empowerment of young people,
implemented in partnership by the Ministry of Youth and Sports, the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) in South-West State and Jubbaland, targeted the development of
inclusive processes to support and collectively empower young people in the
development trajectory of Somalia, including by establishing district youth councils
and providing capacity-building workshops for young people.
41. In February, with the support of UNFPA, 40 midwives graduated from the
Hargeysa Health Institute and 25 from the Mogadishu Midwifery Institute after two
years of intensive competency-based training.
42. UNFPA renewed efforts to eradicate female genital mutilation in Somalia by
engaging with young men and women through forums and community dialogue. On
6 February, it supported youth-led public forums in Garoowe and Hargeysa in
commemoration of the International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital
Mutilation. A total of 1,000 government officials, women activists, young people and
internally displaced persons participated in the events.

C.

Development coordination
43. The COVID-19 pandemic contributed to further delays in various development
coordination processes and the postponement of key milestones expected in March,
such as the endorsement and operationalization of a refined aid architecture aligned
to government road maps and the national development plan. Improvements to the
triple nexus are proposed under the architecture; however, different visions of the
architecture within the Federal Government continue to hinder progress on aid and
development policy cooperation. The United Nations, development partners, donors
and the Federal Government are discussing alternative measures to facilitate
development coordination, including virtual means.

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
44. During the reporting period, UNSOM recorded 277 civilian casualties,
including 158 killed and 119 injured, compared with 183 killed and 267 injured during
the previous reporting period. Clan militias were the main perpetrators, responsible
for 28 per cent of civilian casualties (78), followed by Al-Shabaab with 27 per cent (75).
Other perpetrators included State security forces with 23 per cent (64), unknown

20-06442

7/18

S/2020/398

perpetrators with 16 per cent (43, including 11 casualties from fighting in
Dhuusamarreeb, Galgaduud Region, between federal security forces and ASWJ),
unidentified foreign forces conducting aerial attacks with 3 per cent (9) and AMISOM
with 3 per cent (8).
45. On 18 February, Al-Shabaab carried out its first targeted assassination in 2020
when it shot dead a former electoral delegate in the town of Buurhakaba, Bay Region.
The delegate had participated in the electoral process in South-West State in 2016/17.
46. Violations of freedom of expression remain a concern, and attacks against
journalists continue. During the reporting period, six journalists were arrested in
Mogadishu, five in Puntland, two in South-West State and one in Jubbaland. Of these,
one journalist was charged with publishing false information and another was arrested
for canvassing public opinion about COVID-19. In addition, on 15 February, one
journalist was shot dead by unidentified armed men in Afgooye district, Shabelle
Hoose, and another was stabbed to death in Mogadishu on 4 May.
47. A total of 89 individuals were arbitrarily arrested or detained, of whom 49 were
subsequently released without charge or being brought before a court, as required
under the Code of Criminal Procedure. Most of those arrested or detained were
suspected of being Al-Shabaab members (55).
48. Two civilian men were executed in Boosaaso, Bari Region, after being
sentenced to death for raping and killing a 12-year-old girl in Gaalkacyo, Mudug
Region, on 11 February. Five members of the Somali security forces (police and
military) were sentenced to death by military courts in Mogadishu, South-West State,
Jubbaland and “Somaliland”. One suspected pro-ISIL affiliate was sentenced to death
by the Mogadishu military court after being found guilty of killing a police officer.
49. In line with United Nations guidance on protecting human rights during the
COVID-19 pandemic, UNSOM provided technical assistance to the government
authorities to support mitigation of the effects of the pandemic on human rights,
including the rights of persons in detention. To ease overcrowding in prisons, the
Somali authorities pardoned 936 inmates in April: 574 in “Somaliland”, 194 in
Puntland, 148 in Mogadishu, 11 in South-West State and 9 in Hirshabelle.
50. In response to concerns relating to the protection of civilians in the stand -off in
Gedo, my Deputy Special Representative, in his capacity as Humanitarian
Coordinator, called upon all parties to take all precautionary measures to minimize
harm to civilians and safeguard their movement out of conflict areas so that they
might have unobstructed access to humanitarian protection and assistance.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
51. UNSOM supported the implementation of the human rights due diligence policy
by providing technical assistance to the Mine Action Servi ce on the implementation
of mitigation measures for the Somali Police Force and by helping with the
development of a human rights training session for police officers supported by the
Service. UNSOM also assessed the implications, in connection with the po licy, of
United Nations support for non-United Nations security forces in Gedo, focusing on
the Somali Police Force, and recommended measures to prevent violations. In
accordance with established coordination mechanisms, two alleged incidents of
human rights and international humanitarian law violations by AMISOM, involving
10 civilians, were communicated to AMISOM. UNSOM also met with relatives of the
victims of some incidents in which AMISOM was implicated, to discuss the outcome
of a related board of inquiry and the status of the ex-gratia payment process.
AMISOM agreed to update the affected communities and finalize the report. The

8/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

Ministry of Defence is currently investigating allegations that Somali National Army
troops raped a 30-year-old woman and a 13-year-old child while conducting
operations in Jannaale, Shabelle Hoose.

C.

Children in armed conflict
52. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children in armed conflict reported 826 grave violations affecting 750 children
(600 boys and 150 girls), 11 attacks on schools, 2 attacks on hospitals, one military
occupation of a school and nine cases of denial of humanitarian assistance. A total of
258 children were victims of recruitment and use, 241 were abducted, 226 were
victims of killing and maiming and 79 were victims of sexual violence.
53. The violations were attributed to Al-Shabaab (526, or 63.7 per cent), unknown
armed elements and militias (143, or 17.3 per cent) federal and state arme d forces
(104, or 12.6 per cent), clan militia (48, or 5.8 per cent), AMISOM (4, or 0.5 per cent)
and Westland militia (1, or 0.1 per cent). A total of 16 incidents of deprivation of
liberty affecting 37 boys were attributed to the Somali security forces. A total of 1,283
children (699 boys and 314 girls) were separated from armed forces and armed groups
and handed over to partners of the United Nations Children’s Fund for rehabilitation
and eventual reintegration.
54. On 12 February, during the commemoration of the International Day against the
Use of Child Soldiers, the Federal Government reiterated its commitment to screening
its soldiers and forces being integrated into the Somali National Army, to identify and
separate any children. On 1 March, UNSOM negotiated the release and transfer of
nine children, allegedly associated with Al-Shabaab, from Huduur to Baidoa for
rehabilitation and eventual reintegration.

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
55. The sexual offences bill remains with the Cabinet for further discussions.
Meanwhile, UNSOM and the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development
continued preparations for the new national action plan on ending sexual violence in
conflict. On 5 March, it was agreed that consultative meeting s would be held with the
Somali security and justice sectors and at the state level.
56. UNSOM continued to provide capacity-building and training for prosecutors in
the Office of the Attorney General on a survivor-centred approach and on
investigations of sexual crimes. The Office recently established a task force to ensure
access to justice and defined pathways for victims and survivors to work with police
and service providers. On 10 March, it also released the annual report of the task
force, which highlighted progress on providing victims and survivors with access to
the formal justice system, notably with the support of women prosecutors.
57. In February, UNFPA supported the training of 210 health and social workers
from the public sector and non-governmental organizations to improve the access of
victims and survivors to timely and confidential services relating to gender-based
violence. In March, it supported the capacity enhancement of 27 national data gathering organizations to improve and harmonize data reporting for the monitoring
analysis reporting arrangement for conflict-related violence and the Gender-based
Violence Information Management System.
58. In total, from January to April, 56 incidents affecting 62 victims/survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence were documented. All those affected were women and
girls (56 minors and 6 adults). On 12 March, UNSOM followed up with the authorities

20-06442

9/18

S/2020/398

regarding the reported rape of a pregnant woman on 29 January in Baidoa. She had
received no medical treatment after the assault and gave birth five days later. A police
officer was found guilty of the crime and sentenced to death by the Baidoa first
instance military court on 19 February. The family of the survivor rejected the
intervention of traditional elders and insisted that the sentence be carried out.

V. Humanitarian situation
59. Despite some improvement in food security, the humanitarian crisis in Somalia
remains worrying. The COVID-19 pandemic presents specific risks, given the limited
health-care facilities, the potential disruption of aid delivery and the reliance of many
Somalis on diminishing remittances from the diaspora. The heightened risk of sexual
and gender-based violence during the pandemic is also a concern.
60. Somalia had recorded 722 COVID-19 cases as at 4 May. To support government
efforts, United Nations entities and partners launched the Somalia COVID -19 country
preparedness and response plan on 23 April, seeking $689 million to bolster
preparedness for and response to the direct public health and indirect immediate
humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences of the disease. The plan is focused on
the triple nexus and is aligned with the comprehensive socioeconomic impact and
response plan for COVID-19 of the Federal Government, launched on 27 March.
61. In February and March, there was a significant increase in displacement in
Jubbaland, where an estimated 56,000 people were displaced by conflict in Gedo,
adding to the 207,000 already displaced in that region. Overall, at leas t 2.6 million
people remain displaced by ongoing conflict and recurring climatic shocks. Many of
the internally displaced live in over 2,000 highly congested settlements, often at risk
of eviction from their homes. Thus far in 2020, more than 48,000 person s have been
evicted. Evictions are among the most prevalent protection threats, now compounded
by COVID-19. On 13 April, my Deputy Special Representative, in his capacity as
Humanitarian Coordinator, called for a moratorium on evictions for a three -month
period.
62. Levels of food insecurity and malnutrition remained high in many areas despite
the favourable deyr rains (from October to December 2019). Food security is
additionally at risk from the desert locust infestation in the Horn of Africa, the worst
such outbreak in over 25 years. On 2 February, the Federal Government declared a
national emergency over the locust upsurge, and on 27 February issued a desert locust
crisis action plan in conjunction with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. The plan requires $57 million to implement activities until December,
of which $24.7 million had been provided as at 4 May.
63. The gu rains (from April to June) began with moderate to heavy showers in some
regions, prompting many farmers to begin cultivation. The rains should boost crop
production and replenish pasture and water sources, but have already caused flash
flooding in several regions. In Puntland, a heavy downpour on 27 April left 8 people
dead and displaced more than 22,000 others in the town of Qardho, Bari Region The
rains will also elevate the risk of water-borne diseases and create conditions
conducive to locust breeding. Since January, at least 2,789 cases of acute watery
diarrhoea and cholera have been reported in Somalia, mostly in Hiraan, Banaadir, Bay
and Shabelle Hoose,compared with the same period in 2019. The numbers are
expected to rise as the rains intensify. The triple shock of floods, desert locusts and
COVID-19 is likely to exacerbate an already vulnerable situation for the 5.2 million
people in need.

10/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

64. Security continues to be a major constraint to humanitarian operations. From
1 January to 4 May, 54 incidents were recorded, in which two humanitarian workers
were killed, six injured, six abducted and three detained or temporarily arrested. One
third of the country is considered by humanitarian workers to be hard to reach,
including 23 districts where around 1.3 million people in need reside. In February,
aid agencies reached 845,000 people with humanitarian assistance. To build on that
response, agencies need prompt and adequate funding. As at 4 May, the 2020
humanitarian response plan was only 18 per cent funded, at $186.6 million of the
$1.05 billion requested.
65. On 6 March, Somalia officially deposited the instruments of ratification for the
African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa with the regional body.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

Operations
66. Transition operations in Shabelle Hoose resumed on 16 March with the seizure
of Jannaale by Somali National Army and AMISOM troops. Disruption operations
continued elsewhere in the region but planning for the second phase of Operation
Badbaado (securing the roads from Mogadishu to Baidoa and Beledweyne) has not
yet begun. During the reporting period, international partners supported the
generation of two new Somali National Army battalions, with a further two
regenerated by the Army from existing troops.
67. Following the liberation of Jannaale, an interim administration appointed by
South-West State was deployed to the town and launched community outreach and
initial stabilization activities identified together with the Ministry of the Interior,
Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, South-West State, the interministerial task force
and stabilization partners. To date, mobile clinics and food distribution have been
provided to approximately 2,000 vulnerable people, with the launch of cash -for-work
projects focused on brush clearance along roads into and within Jannaale, as well as
small canal repairs.

B.

Institutional capacity-building
68. On 27 February, the federal Cabinet endorsed the federal police legislation.
While 300 Federal Darwish forces had finalized training by mid -February, their
deployment to Shabelle Hoose hinges on the provision of weapons and equipment. In
Jawhar, 198 recruits finalized basic training, bringing the total number of state police
to 579. The integration of the state security forces of Puntland into t he state police
continued. Following the development of an asset management policy, with support
from the United Nations police, AMISOM police, the United Nations Office for
Project Services and UNDP, the joint police programme approved $218,000 on
4 March for its implementation.
69. In Mogadishu on 10 and 11 February, as part of the constitutional review process
and with United Nations advisory support, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs led
a consultation session with relevant federal line ministries on the justice and
corrections model. Discussions resulted in proposals for the composition of the
Judicial Service Commission and the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the
Constitutional Court, on which consultations will be held with federal member s tates.

20-06442

11/18

S/2020/398

70. In Mogadishu on 5 March, the Minister of Justice, representatives of federal
member states, international partners and the United Nations discussed justice and
corrections priorities for 2020. Conclusions included the need for continued support
for the constitutional review, reaching a political agreement on a justice and
corrections model and support for the expansion of justice into newly liberated areas.
71. During the reporting period, UNSOM provided training on prison management
and human rights to 88 Custodial Corps staff (70 men and 18 women) in Puntland,
Beledweyne and Kismaayo. As a measure to mitigate the spread of COVID -19, the
justice authorities, inter alia, suspended prison visits, new prison admissions, court
proceedings (except priority criminal cases, to be adjudicated online) and the
execution of judgments.
72. On 20 February, Somalia acceded to the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships and the International Convention for the Safety of
Life at Sea. On 12 March, eight federal ministries and the respective state ministries
agreed on an action plan for women in the maritime sector that will allow Somali
women to play a prominent role in the country’s blue economy.
73. On 18 March, the Office of the Defector Rehabilitation Programme, under the
Ministry of Internal Security, issued new operational protocols on handling voluntary
defections from Al-Shabaab. They are aimed at mitigating risks associated with
COVID-19 and avoiding the interruption of activities. In collaboration with UNSOM,
AMISOM and partners, the Ministry is revising standard operating procedures on the
reception and screening of former Al-Shabaab members.

C.

Supporting activities
74. On 3 March, the Diinsoor district council was inaugurated. The process was
facilitated by the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and
South-West State and was supported by a Peacebuilding Fund project. The council is
noteworthy because of its significant youth representation, as well as the selection of
10 women for 21 seats.
75. On 11 March, the Prevention and Countering of Violent Extremism
Coordination Unit in the Office of the Prime Minister organized a meeting with the
Deputy Minister of Religious Affairs, the Director of the Defector rehabilitation
programme and the Ministry of Justice to clarify their mandates on the prevention
and countering of violent extremism and future collaboration.
76. From 13 to 15 April, the Ministry of Religious Affairs, the Ministry of Health
and the Ministry of Communication conducted a three-day joint COVID-19
awareness campaign in the 17 districts of Mogadishu with the network of religious
scholars on the prevention and countering of violent extremism, coordinated by the
Prevention and Countering of Violent Extremism Unit and with technical and
financial support from UNDP.
77. UNSOM and the International Organization for Migration continued to support
the national programme of the Federal Government for the treatment and handling of
disengaged combatants. In April, over 230 former Al-Shabaab members received
transitional rehabilitation support through centres located in Baidoa, Kismaayo and
Mogadishu, while 50 graduated from the programme. Following the conclusion of the
Peacebuilding Fund pilot project targeting women formerly associated with
Al-Shabaab, two new rehabilitation centres for women were built, in Baidoa and
Kismaayo. The centre in Baidoa is providing gender-sensitive rehabilitation support
to 30 former female Al-Shabaab members and their dependants. An additional

12/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

30 women in Kismaayo are yet to receive support owing to operational constraints
linked to COVID-19.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
National Army
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
78. On 5 March, AMISOM completed the reduction of its troop ceiling by 1,000
troops, in accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2472 (2019).
UNSOS is currently providing logistical support to 19,626 AMISOM uniformed
personnel.
79. UNSOS continued to support AMISOM internal troop rotations and resupplies
to most forward operating bases in all sectors by air on acc ount of the main supply
routes being impassable and insecure. As a result, UNSOS conducted over 1,000
flying hours per month within Somalia, of which approximately 530 on average were
dedicated to transporting life support for AMISOM. UNSOS also increased borehole
drilling across all sectors to reduce overreliance on transporting potable water.
80. The planned road convoy to transport contingent-owned equipment for the
incoming Ghanaian formed police unit from Mogadishu to Baidoa remains under
consideration. Owing to the bulky nature of some of the equipment and the poor status
of the runway in Baidoa, UNSOS was unable to airlift all of it to Baidoa and therefore
requested AMISOM to escort the convoy by road from Mogadishu. The equipment,
consisting of several sea containers and vehicles, arrived in Mogadishu in September
and continues to incur high demurrage charges and monthly reimbursement costs
payable to Ghana for the unutilized equipment. The African Union has advised that a
new plan for the convoy will be prepared after the gu rains in May and June.
81. As at 30 April, the balance of the United Nations trust fund in support of
AMISOM was $2.9 million. Of that amount, $1.6 million is restricted by donor
Member States to specific purposes. UNSOS is engaging with donors for the purpose
of removing those restrictions to make the funds available for AMISOM priorities,
including emoluments for consultants and medical liaison officers.
82. Following the signature on 10 November 2019 by the United Nations, the
African Union and Uganda of a tripartite letter of assist for the deployment of four
military helicopters to AMISOM, and in order to ensure accountability and
transparency, the United Nations and the African Union jointly concluded two
predeployment visits to Uganda, from 11 to 13 February and on 12 and 13 March, to
confirm the readiness of the aviation unit to deploy. On 20 February, a delegation of
the Uganda People’s Defence Forces aviation unit, led by the Joint Chief of Staff, had
inspected the facilities at the Baledogle camp, where the crew will be based. When
the unit is deployed, AMISOM will have seven military helicopters. UNSOS has
made the arrangements necessary to support the deployment.
83. In response to the request by troop- and police-contributing countries for
increased training in the management of contingent-owned equipment,
self-sustainment and preparations for electoral security, UNSOS delivered training to
18 officers from Burundi (17 men and 1 woman) in Bujumbura on 9 and 10 March to
enhance efficiency in the management of contingent-owned equipment.
84. There was limited progress in the joint AMISOM-UNSOS wellness programme
aimed at enhancing security and facilities at 21 AMISOM forward operating bases.

20-06442

13/18

S/2020/398

Poor road conditions continued to hinder the delivery of mission-enabling units to
19 locations. Meanwhile, field defence stores and other materiel were pre -positioned
at eight forward operating bases, awaiting improved weather conditions to
recommence work.
85. With support from UNSOS, the Mine Action Service continued to support
AMISOM security operations and stabilization efforts by providing advice, analysis,
training and mentoring on the use of specialized equipment, explosive detection dogs,
community liaison officers and explosive ordnance clearance teams. From 5 February
to 3 May, it delivered training to 2,715 AMISOM uniformed personnel to enhance
their capability to find and destroy improvised explosive devices and to safely operate
within the threat environment. The Service conducted predeployment training
sessions for 200 AMISOM troops in Uganda from 25 February to 2 April and for 310
AMISOM troops in Burundi from 5 March to 18 April. It contributed to the safety
and security of strategic infrastructure through the deployment o f 21 teams working
with 42 detection dogs to conduct searches of 29,943 pieces of luggage, 112,711
vehicles, 252 buildings, 168,042 m 2 of built-up areas and 10,372,197 m 2 of open areas
throughout the sectors.

B.

Support for Somali national armed forces operations
86. In support of joint AMISOM and Somali National Army operations in Shabelle
Hoose, UNSOS supplied material for two forward operating bases to be constructed
in Jannaale. Construction of the National Army logistics base with the AMISO M
forward operating base at KM50 was completed on 15 March.
87. The Head of UNSOS met with the new Chief of Defence Forces of Somalia,
Brigadier General Odawa Yusuf Rage, in Mogadishu on 24 February and discussed
the provision of logistical support to the Somali National Army. UNSOS also
presented the Defence Forces with communication equipment to enhance
interoperability with AMISOM. The Chief of Defence observed that improvised
explosive devices had caused more fatalities to the National Army and the Soma li
population than bullets and requested that threat mitigation measures for such devices
be added to the United Nations logistical support package.
88. In response to requests from the Federal Government, the Mine Action Service
provided threat mitigation awareness on improvised explosive devices to 192 Somali
National Army personnel (190 men and 2 women) from 5 February to 25 April. In
addition, it provided explosive ordnance disposal and improvised explosive device
disposal refresher training for the Somali Police Force explosive ordnance disposal
teams in Cadaado and Baidoa from 2 to 6 February and from 16 to 20 February.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
89. United Nations entities continued to be present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 4 May, 370 international staff and 1,267
national staff were deployed throughout Somalia.
90. The United Nations continued to hold consultations with the Federal
Government to address the remaining challenges to the status-of-mission agreement
signed in 2014. In particular, the denial of gratis visas and work permits for United
Nations international contractors and United Nations personnel not in posse ssion of
laissez-passer remained unresolved.

14/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

91. In line with the Organization’s global response to the COVID -19 pandemic, the
United Nations presence in Somalia is developing and disseminating communication
on the disease. It is also providing technical assistance to the Federal Government
and federal member states in order to continue the constitutional review process and
preparations for the elections.

IX. Observations
92. The people of Somalia, just as the rest of the world, are affected by the
unprecedented impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. I commend the Somali authorities
for their actions to prevent and respond to the pandemic and for their decision to
extend additional resources from the Federal Government to the federal member
states for that purpose. I reiterate the full commitment of the United Nations to
working closely with Somalia in these efforts. In order to address the pandemic, the
country will need the continued support of the international community to tackle the
pandemic.
93. The pandemic has highlighted, more than ever, the need for federal and state
leaders in Somalia to come together, in a spirit of unity and compromise, to effectively
address one of the most serious global challenges of the era. There is no time to lose.
I remain deeply concerned that, despite my previous calls, as well as the continued
efforts of my Special Representative and the international community, the
relationship between the Federal Government and some of the federal member states
remains tense. I encourage Mr. Farmajo to revive a regular forum for the country’s
leaders in order to discuss and move forward on all national issues. I call upon leaders
of the federal member states to respond positively to such steps, beginning with the
appointment of representatives to the secretariat that will prepare for a summit of
federal and state leaders.
94. The year 2020 is critical for the advancement of national priorities, chief among
which is the holding of credible and timely “one person, one vote” elections. The
enactment of the electoral law is a sign of the commitment of Somalis to national
elections. I now urge swift action to formulate the regulations needed to make the law
implementable and for Parliament to adopt the amendments to the political parties
law. An implementable electoral framework also requires the broad support of all
federal member states, political opposition and civil society. I am concerned that the
electoral law does not include a 30 per cent quota for the representation of women in
Parliament. I call upon the Somali authorities and stakeholders at all levels to ensure
the participation and representation of women and minorities in the electoral process,
including by enshrining such aspects in relevant legal frameworks. Robust electoral
security planning is also crucial. I urge the National Electoral Security Task Force to
advance preparations aimed at securing the electoral process, including by completing
an assessment of securable areas.
95. I congratulate Somalia on reaching the decision point in the World Bank and
IMF Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. It is a significant milestone that will
allow the country to gain access to additional resources from international financial
institutions that can contribute to the delivery of lon g-term inclusive growth and to
poverty reduction. It illustrates the commitment of the Federal Government and the
federal member states to achieving progress despite the continuing economic,
political and security challenges. I urge the federal and state a uthorities to build upon
that positive step to strengthen their cooperation in advancing national priorities.
96. I am deeply concerned about armed clashes in the Gedo Region of Jubbaland
between federal and state forces, which resulted in casualties and t he displacement of
civilian populations. I call upon all actors to exercise restraint and avoid actions that
20-06442

15/18

S/2020/398

could spark further violence. It is essential that cooperation and dialogue be restored
between the Federal Government and the Jubbaland authoritie s.
97. I deplore the clashes that took place in Galmudug on 27 and 28 February
between the Somali National Army and ASWJ. Political differences must not be
addressed through violence. I am encouraged by the peaceful state presidential
transition on 12 April. Longer-term stability requires all stakeholders to work together
to establish an inclusive administration.
98. The meeting between Mr. Farmajo and Mr. Bihi is a positive step. I commend
Mr. Farmajo for issuing a public statement in which he acknowledged past human
rights violations by the regime of Siad Barre, and Mr. Bihi for accepting the gesture.
I call upon both leaders to build upon this engagement to improve relations and make
progress towards a resumption of the dialogue between Somali a and “Somaliland”.
99. The COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to exacerbate human rights
challenges in Somalia. In my briefing to the Security Council, I highlighted some of
the challenges witnessed in other countries, such as the rise in hate speech and
discrimination and limits on the media, civic space and freedom of expression. As
elsewhere, human rights have to be at the forefront of the Somali response to the
pandemic, with due attention given to supporting the most vulnerable people and
groups. I also urge the Somali authorities to protect freedom of expression, the
bedrock of a democracy, and to ensure the physical safety of journalists and their
freedom from harassment and arbitrary arrests.
100. The weak health-care system in Somalia lacks the capacity to respond to the
COVID-19 outbreak. A further spread of the virus would exacerbate the dire
humanitarian situation, in which 30 per cent of the population is already in need of
assistance. Immediate, fast-tracked and flexible donor funding is urgently required to
respond to the disease and mitigate its health, social and economic impacts. I applaud
the swift actions taken by the Federal Government to mitigate the threat and facilitate
continued access for emergency relief supplies. I urge the countr y’s neighbours and
the wider international community to continue to maintain unimpeded access for
health and humanitarian personnel and cargo and to facilitate the movement of
essential assistance and supplies into and within Somalia, including United Nati ons
shipments and personnel and those of its partners.
101. Somali National Army and AMISOM operations in Shabelle Hoose to recover
the town of Jannaale from Al-Shabaab demonstrate progress on the transition. The
further generation of numbers and capacities in both the Somali National Army and
the police is required to secure recovered areas, facilitate stabilization activities and
consolidate gains. Progressive investment in robust and community policing
alongside the effective delivery of justice will be crucial in preventing the resurgence
of Al-Shabaab in recovered areas. I urge the Federal Government to extend transition
operations to other areas and accelerate its force generation and security sector
reforms, together with the federal member states, with the support and coordination
of AMISOM and international partners.
102. Strengthening the improvised explosive device threat mitigation capabilities of
Somali security forces implementing the transition plan is key to enable them to
protect themselves and better prevent harm to civilians and critical infrastructure, as
they gradually assume security responsibilities from AMISOM. I call upon Member
States to contribute to the AMISOM and Somali National Army trust funds and to
allow more flexible use of their contributions.
103. I strongly condemn the attacks by Al-Shabaab, which disproportionately affect
civilians, and note the evolving threat posed by the group. Mortar attacks targeting
the United Nations and AMISOM facilities in Mogadishu are also unacce ptable and
16/18

20-06442

S/2020/398

a matter of grave concern. I call upon the Federal Government to take all measures,
in coordination with the United Nations in Somalia and AMISOM, necessary to
ensure the security of the international presence, without which the United Nations
cannot deliver on its mandate and support for Somalia and its people.
104. I remain grateful to the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, Member States, non -governmental organizations
and other partners for their continued support for peacebuilding and state-building in
Somalia. I pay tribute to the sacrifices of AMISOM and Somali security forces in
pursuit of peace and stability in the country.
105. I thank my Special Representative, James Swan, and all United Na tions staff in
Somalia for their continuing efforts and hard work in very challenging conditions.
Their security and welfare remain a top priority.

20-06442

17/18

S/2020/398

18/18

20-06442
