UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3287
5 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 5 October 1993, at 3 p.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. BARBOSA
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Sardenberg

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER
Mr. BIVERO

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86758 (E)

S/PV.3287
2
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA
FURTHER REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 745 (1992) (S/26529)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Australia,
Cambodia and Thailand in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
His Royal Highness Sdech Krom Luong Norodom Ranariddh, First
Prime Minister of the Government of Cambodia, and Mr. Hun Sen,
Second Prime Minister of the Government of Cambodia, were escorted
into the Council Chamber and took places at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

On behalf of the Security Council, I

should like to express a warm welcome to the First Prime Minister
of the Government of Cambodia, His Royal Highness Sdech Krom Luong
Norodom Ranariddh, and to the Second Prime Minister of the
Government of Cambodia, His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Butler (Australia) and
Mr. Soonsiri (Thailand) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.

S/PV.3287
3
(The President)
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the further report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 745 (1992); that report is contained in document
S/26529.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26517,
which contains the text of a letter dated 30 September 1993 from
the Permanent Representatives of China, France, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of the
statement issued on 30 September 1993 by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the five permanent members of the Security Council
following a meeting with the Secretary-General.
The first name inscribed on the list of speakers is that of
the First Prime Minister of the Government of Cambodia, His Royal
Highness Sdech Krom Luong Norodom Ranariddh.

I invite him to make

his statement.
Prince NORODOM RANARIDDH (Cambodia) (interpretation from
French):

It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to address

this meeting as First Prime Minister of the Royal Government of
Cambodia, along with His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, Second Prime
Minister of the Royal Government of Cambodia.
Let me begin by expressing, on behalf of the Cambodian people,
on behalf of His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk and on behalf of the
Royal Government of Cambodia, our deepest and eternal gratitude for
everything the international community, through the agency of the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), has done
for the Cambodian people in bringing to a successful end - I might

S/PV.3287
4
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
even say a historically successful end - 23 years of war, suffering
and factional upheaval.
We should like to take this unique opportunity to express our
heartfelt thanks to all the Members of the United Nations, but
especially to those who so generously sent either military
contingents or civilian personnel to serve in UNTAC, an operation
wisely and competently led by the United Nations Special
Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi, to whom we should like to pay
here a public tribute.

S/PV.3287
5
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
So we would like to express our gratitude to those countries
that were good enough to send their members to save Cambodia, but
also to restore peace and honour with independence, and to help us
regain our territorial integrity and our sovereignty.
I would not want to fail to take advantage of this opportunity
to pay a final tribute to all those who lost their lives, who
sacrificed their lives, for the cause of peace and democracy.
I spoke a moment ago about the success of the United Nations.
Allow me to call attention to what I believe are three essential
elements of that success, while elsewhere the United Nations despite very laudable efforts - is still encountering difficulties.
The first element is the commitment of the international
community.
costly.

People usually say that this operation was the most

That is true, but this most costly operation is but the

expression of the compassion of the international community for the
people of Cambodia.
them.

And today those people are paying a tribute to

It is not necessary to say anything more with regard to this

first essential element.

The contingents - 20,000 men - and

matériel, but more than that - the will of the international
community to save Cambodia - these were the important things.

Nor

should we forget that the United Nations chose the best of its
best.
The second element of the success it seems to me is even more
important, namely the will of the Cambodians to work together with
the United Nations.

I think this is an essential element, one

which deserves to be thought about deeply.

This cooperation - I

would even call it collaboration - took on several forms.

First,

people have talked about the massive, record participation:
90 per cent.

It was I think, unique, and by that high percentage

S/PV.3287
6
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
the Cambodian people have shown that they fully understood the
importance of the elections organized and supervised by the United
Nations.

The Cambodian people were able to overcome all obstacles

and meet every threat.
point.

Nobody will gainsay me on this particular

There were death threats first of all by a group called the

Khmer Rouge, for example.

So massive participation was a just

assessment for those elections.

Collaboration and cooperation of

an entire people; a necessary element.
But there were also collaboration and cooperation on the part
of our Head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, without whom this
success could not have been possible.

The Head of State,

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, always gave his full support to
Mr. Yasushi Akashi, the leader of the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

He also succeeded in overcoming all

the obstacles within the Supreme National Council of Cambodia.
That is the second element of collaboration:

that of the people,

that of the Head of State, but also that of the political parties.
The Cambodian political parties are represented here by the
Cambodian People’s Party, the Front Uni National pour un Cambodge
Indépendant, Neutre, Pacifique et Coopératif (FUNCINPEC) Party, the
Liberal Party.

You say, "But then there are the Khmer Rouge".

But

the Khmer Rouge participated in their own way - not always the best
way.

Mr. Akashi knew something about that.

So did the

representatives of the Five.
Often Mr. Khieu Samphan was more artistic than Ranariddh in
the National Supreme Council.

Fine!

But the collaboration of the political parties was essential.
That is the second important element that may be lacking for some
United Nations operations.

S/PV.3287
7
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
Finally, a third element for success, namely the will of the
Cambodian parties to seek reconciliation.
important element.

That is the third

Without in any way underestimating the United

Nations operation itself, the third element is also very important.
For example, after the elections, which were hailed by the
international community, then endorsed, I believe, on 15 June by
the Security Council, some problems did remain, even serious
problems, among the Cambodian parties themselves, but once again,
thanks to the Head of State and to the will of the two major
parties to become reconciled - why not say so? - they saved
Cambodia.

That is the last element which ensured that the United

Nations operation, mandated by the Paris Agreements of
23 October 1990, was hailed as the most successful operation ever
undertaken by the United Nations in a country which had suffered a
long conflict - even more than that, I was even going to say
genocide.

There you have it.

Nor could I fail to take this opportunity to express our
deepest gratitude to the Security Council, which always knew how to
adopt wise and moderate resolutions.

On several occasions they

faced problems created by various parties, at one time it was the
Party of Democratic Kampuchea, but the Security Council always knew
how to react firmly but wisely.

It was almost what one might call

an iron fist in a velvet glove.
The three elements for success I have dealt with.

The second

point I should like to make - and the Council is perhaps expecting
me to deal with it - is:

What is going on now and what will happen

in the future?
Members of the Council know that after these elections a
provisional national administration was formed with two

S/PV.3287
8
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
co-Prime Ministers.

That is an original formula.

It is not

exactly a canonical solution in terms of classic liberal democracy.
As a professor of constitutional law I might have to answer to my
students about this structure, which is rather unusual but
conforming - if one wished to conform - to principles.
say something about peace and national reconciliation.

One might

S/PV.3287
9
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
This is the solution that my suzerain, the Head of State, has
chosen, and this is the rather unusual solution that the major
parties have adopted.

One might say that Cambodians never do

things the way everybody else does; I must say, though, that it is
not everybody that has Prince Sihanouk as Head of State either.
Why is it that after the elections the international community
was worried - and it was worried, moreover, before the elections
too?

Because the Khmer Rouge were not taking part in them.

The

Khmer Rouge boycotted, threatened - but the elections passed off
just the same, successfully, with the massive, record turnout that
we saw.
But after the elections, that was not the end of the story.
Far from it!

Would we have the two-thirds majority needed to adopt

the new constitution?

And once the new constitution was adopted,

what would happen with the transfer of powers?
I know that the famous "Prime Five" - and they are famous got together, agreed, and thought up scenarios - the worst possible
scenarios, of course - for the transfer of power.

The two-headed

government, as the Khmer Rouge called it - and I should tell you
that meanwhile the Khmer Rouge continued to accuse us of being
"puppets", saying that we had one old puppet and one new one - but
they continued to insist on being advisers to the government, which
is to say that they continued to insist on being advisers to
puppets, which does not exactly make much sense, particularly
Cartesian sense, even though Mr. Pol Pot was a graduate of the
Sorbonne.
I do beg pardon if my statement seems rather disjointed; the
thing is that Mr. Akashi managed to persuade me to appear before

S/PV.3287
10
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
the Council only as recently as 12.10 this afternoon, so I have not
had the time, not even an hour, to prepare.
So, the two-headed government made it possible for the work of
the Constituent Assembly to take place in conditions of near
normalcy; it managed to meet, and elected the 12 members of the
Constitutional Commission, who drafted a constitution, of the
constitutional monarchy type, but extremely democratic in nature.
That constitution was adopted without difficulty - not unanimously,
but with 113 votes in favour - and unanimity would be even better
then a very large majority, would it not?
After that, a king was elected; you know who he is:

the New

York Times or the Washington Post published on its front page two
photographs of my suzerain, King Sihanouk, sitting in the same
chair - the caption was that it was the same chair, and also the
same man, and that the only difference was age.
Once a Head of State, a King, had been elected, he, knowing
that we were to take part in the General Assembly hurried, in
accordance with articles XIII and XIV of the Constitution, on the
proposal of the President of the National Assembly and the two
Vice-Presidents, to appoint the Prime Ministers of His Majesty’s
Government.

These are the first and the second Prime Ministers -

rather a difficult notion.

Here again, we have not exactly done

like everybody else, but what matter:
we understand each other very well.

here we are before you, and
This, more than anything, is

the key to success, that is to say, the key to peace and stability
in Cambodia.
The new, definitive cabinet will be formed; I shall not waste
your time by talking to you about the Constitution, but I should
like to reassure the purists in matters of constitutional law - and

S/PV.3287
11
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
I myself teach constitutional law - that the new Constitution does
say that once the transition period is over, there will be only one
Prime Minister, so please be reassured.
The ministerial portfolios have already been distributed
between the two or three parties; we shall hurry back to Cambodia
in order to appoint the ministers.

The fact remains that a

government has arisen out of 23 years of war, of unspeakable
suffering, in order to govern the country - not to govern it alone
but to govern it with the assistance of the international
community.
So, what are the problems that Cambodia will or must face?
This is the third point I wish to make in my statement here today.
The first of these rather extraordinary problems is the
problem of internal security, and here there are two kinds of
security problem involved.

First there is the security problem

resulting from the presence of armed men, of armed bands; because,
whether we like it or not, the United Nations operation has not
succeeded in disarming and demobilizing those famous "at least
70 per cent", because it wasted its time in fighting over whether
to put "70 per cent" - and I beg the Americans to excuse me here and the Americans said we must add the words "at least", and then
there were those who wanted them all disarmed.

We are far from

achieving that, and this is the situation we inherited.
Then there is also the security problem of that group called
the Khmer Rouge.

Let us no longer call it, please, the part of

Democratic Kampuchea.

That Party exists only in so far as the

Agreements of 23 October apply, that is, if there is a Supreme
National Council.

The day there is a new assembly, a new Head of

State, and, first and foremost, a new government formed in

S/PV.3287
12
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
conformity with those Accords, the Cambodian Supreme National
Council ceases to exist.

S/PV.3287
13
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
Therefore, we should no longer speak of a "part".

Moreover,

the old parts have merged within the framework of a National
Assembly and a Royal Government, with a royal administration and
royal armed forces.

What remains to be attended to is the matter

of the Khmer Rouge, which we call a "group".

Where do we stand?

First, as I had the honour to say in my speech yesterday, the
position of the Royal Government is very clear:
"We are prepared to welcome the Khmer Rouge into the royal
armed forces of Cambodia." (A/48/PV.15)
We are prepared to accept them into our Government, as advisers.
But in return we are entitled, as the legal, legitimate
representatives of the Cambodian people, to ask them, first of all,
to recognize the Constitution -

which they have done - and to

recognize His Majesty the King - which they did as well; but they
must also recognize the Royal Government whose Prime Ministers were
appointed by His Majesty the King in keeping with the new
Constitution.

That is not very much to ask.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank and express
all our gratitude to all the friendly Governments that have
recognized de jure the Royal Government of Cambodia as the
governmental structure which is the sole legitimate representative
of Cambodia.
Secondly - and these are not preconditions - the Khmer Rouge
group, like the three former Cambodian groups, must dismantle its
army and its administration, in order to merge into a single
national royal army and a single national royal administration.
This request seems to us to be reasonable and legitimate.
would they not do as the others did?

Why

We would also like the Khmer

Rouge group to open up its autonomous zone.

The Cambodian

S/PV.3287
14
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
Constitution makes it clear that the national territory is
indivisible.

The Khmer Rouge has recognized that Constitution, and

it must apply one of its fundamental provisions.

Again, it is a

completely reasonable request.
How to resolve all these problems?
response of Mr. Samphan.

We are awaiting the

Allow me to tell the Council that before

I came here, Mr. Khieu Samphan sent us a letter in which he
continues to speak of Vietnamese forces and of entente: "Vietnamese
forces" and "entente" which continue to attack the patriotic Khmer
Rouge forces.

And do not think that by "entente" he means us; this

is not the Hun Sen-Ranariddh entente.

By "entente" he means to

designate the United States of America, the United Kingdom, Russia,
France, Japan, Australia - this is the "entente" that would, with
Vietnam, destroy the patriotic forces.

Not long ago, the "entente"

was led by Mr. Yasushi Akashi and General Sanderson.
We hope that when the round table takes place - which will be
in a month, I believe, in November - His Majesty the King, in his
wisdom and magnaminity, will succeed in resolving this problem,
because we need national reconciliation.

We need peace, after 23

years of war and suffering.

Now we have to rebuild and reconstruct

Cambodia, which is in ruins.

On the subject of this round table, I

wish to make a clarification:

it will not be a party-to-party

discussion.

Let there be no mistake about this point.

be no discussion among parties.

There will

It is a meeting, presided over by

the King, among the legal representatives and a group.

That group

must decide very quickly whether it would like to remain within the
international community, within the sphere of legality, or outside
legality.

That is our position on this famous problem.

S/PV.3287
15
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
It remains only to speak of national reconstruction and
rehabilitation.

May we be allowed to take this unique opportunity

to express to the international community, and especially to France
and Japan, our gratitude for having been good enough to organize with well-known success - two conferences, one in Tokyo and the
other recently in Paris, on the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Cambodia.
I come to the conclusion, as follows.
Some Members of the United Nations, in light of the problem
this Organization is encountering at this time, would like us to
rest on the laurels of an outstanding success.

It is true that the

United Nations operation in Cambodia has been an outstanding
success.

One does not want to have a sequel, such as Rambo I or

Rambo II:

one Rambo was enough.

The first one was good, but

usually the sequel is not as good as the first one. I agree.
Cambodia agrees, that the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), which stems from the
23 October agreements, has been completed with the greatest
success.

Once again, I would like to pay it a tribute here.

has been completed.

It

S/PV.3287
16
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
None the less, I should like to draw the attention of the
Council to the fact that the peace Agreements contain four
important parts.

The third deals with guarantees given by the

international community, through the United Nations, with regard to
matters including the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and internal security of Cambodia.
The international community has an obligation under these
Agreements.

I have said that Cambodia has too few resources to

guarantee its own security.

As Cambodia has been devastated, it

must devote all the resources compassionately given by friendly
countries to economic, social and other types of rehabilitation.
Thus there is an obligation on the part of the international
community.
My next point concerns the fourth part of the Paris
Agreements, which refers to the rehabilitation and reconstruction
of Cambodia.

Bearing in mind these two essential parts, would it

not be reasonable - after the expenditure of so much money, after
so many efforts have been made, and after so many lives have been
sacrificed in a good cause - to have a small United Nations
presence in Cambodia, not to continue the peace-keeping operation
for which UNTAC was given a mandate in the Agreements of
23 October, but to increase the confidence that the Cambodian
people need, because there is still not complete security in
Cambodia?
Mr. Hun Sen and I are determined to strengthen national
reconciliation.

Mr. Akashi would confirm that no one hearing the

speeches made by me and by Mr. Hun Sen during the election campaign
could have believed that such reconciliation was possible.

But it

S/PV.3287
17
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
is possible.

No one is required to do the impossible.

But the

Cambodian people made it possible, and they must be helped.
We Cambodians are determined to rebuild our country together,
while maintaining internal peace, social peace and securing
international guarantees of our independence and security.
what we are determined to do.

That is

But a small United Nations presence,

following its massive presence, would help to strengthen the
confidence that already exists.
I apologize to my Chinese friends here when I say that if one
is Chinese one does not invest $2 billion and then try to save
$30 million.

What is needed is a small presence.

I have not come

here to beg.

Mr. Hun Sen and I have already decided that if our

request is too much for the Organization we shall do without.

But

this small presence is the first matter for consideration.
I should like to refer now to an operation that must continue,
no matter what the cost.

I refer to de-mining - a job that will

take 5, 10 or 20 years.

Millions of mines have been planted

everywhere.

We must look to the safety of present and future

generations of Cambodians.

We need people to cultivate the fields

again - thousands of hectares.

The de-mining cannot be done

without the presence and assistance of the international community.
Here, we should like to acknowledge the help of friendly countries
that have been especially concerned about the question of
de-mining.
We must also consider human rights.

In this context, I must

refer to the recent past - yes, the recent past.

We ask simply for

a United Nations presence in the shape of a permanent Centre for
Human Rights.

Human rights of all types are set out clearly in

Cambodia’s new Constitution.

S/PV.3287
18
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
My next point concerns national reconstruction.

Mr. Hun Sen

and I, as Prime Ministers of the Royal Government of Cambodia,
would prefer to keep the International Committee on the
Reconstruction of Cambodia, rather than have another coordinating
body established.

The International Committee could meet regularly

to assess the assistance promised by our friends.
have been made:
Paris.

Many promises

some $800 million in Tokyo and $123 million in

There must be a coordinating body, a United Nations

programme for Cambodia, perhaps.

There must be a United Nations

presence.
In addition to the bodies I have mentioned there is the United
Nations Economic, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
have raised the question of our cultural heritage.

I

I hope that

this body will consider the problems of vandalism and the theft and
sale of Cambodian works of art.

The efforts of UNESCO and of the

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) are very necessary.
My final, and most thorny, point concerns the military
observers.

As this matter gives rise to so many difficulties, I

shall give the Council some information.

S/PV.3287
19
(Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia)
First, it was His Majesty the King - at that time still Head
of State - who, together with his Excellency the Special
Representative, thought it would be advisable to have a small
presence of observers; if members prefer and if it would be
reassuring, one could call them liaison officers.
would be primarily psychological.
must have a time-limit:

But in any case their presence

six months, or maybe a little longer; it

is up to the Security Council to decide that.

As for how many, we

have said 20, but one could say 20, 30, 35 or 50.
mandate, the mission of the observers:
observers.

Their role

As for the

observers are simply

They cannot take any action or participate in any

operation; they can only observe.
Those are some of the points we should like to clarify, but
again, if this matter is problematic for the Security Council, His
Excellency Mr. Hun Sen and I are ready to forgo our request and
stand on the historic success, on the will of the Cambodian people
to assume responsibility for and take hold of the destiny of their
country.
That is how I wish to conclude my statement - a bit long, and
I apologize; that is the problem with making a statement without a
written text, but there are longer speeches made with a text.
I should like once again very humbly to express, from the very
bottom of our hearts, to the members of the Council, and through
them to their countries and their peoples, our deepest gratitude
for all the United Nations has done, with striking success, to help
Cambodia.

The success of the United Nations in Cambodia, as I said

yesterday, is but the expression of a desire held in common between
the international community, which wishes to save this people, and
this people, which wishes to save its country.

S/PV.3287
20
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

I

should like first of all to hail the presence here of His Royal
Highness Prince Norodom Ranariddh and His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen,
who are the embodiment of the national reconciliation that the
international community and France have long desired.

We thank His

Royal Highness for the very interesting comments he has just made
on the situation, past and present, in Cambodia.
My country, having taken the initiative four years ago of
convening the Paris Conference on Cambodia to rebuild peace and
democracy in that country with the unprecedented assistance of the
United Nations, is happy to see today that its objectives have been
reached.
The success of the elections in Cambodia is, first, a success
for the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC),
which, under the authority of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, for almost two years contributed to the
establishment of stability in the country and was able to cast out
the demons of fear and restore confidence to a population that was
battered and desperate after decades of civil war, terror and
occupation.
But it is also a victory for the Cambodian people, for while
UNTAC taught freedom of expression and the defence of human rights
to that courageous people desirous of regaining mastery over their
own fate, the Cambodians have now made those ideas their own.
France has looked on with great excitement as true political debate
was revived; we have followed the meetings held during the
electoral campaign that, despite the threats hanging over them,
were attended by hundreds of thousands of Cambodians who then went
to the polls with laudable enthusiasm.

France pays tribute to the

courage and determination of that people to which France has been

S/PV.3287
21
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
linked by history for more than a century.

My country also pays

tribute to the wisdom of its representatives, who knew how to
listen to the voice of reason and put their quarrels aside in order
to establish a coalition Government.

Finally, we pay tribute to

His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk, who has unquestionably been the
unifier of the Cambodian people throughout this difficult period.
It is thus with a sense of mission accomplished that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was able to leave
Cambodia a few days ago, declaring UNTAC’s mandate fulfilled and
passing powers to the legal Government.

Cambodia has regained its

full sovereignty and found again its rightful place in Asia and the
international community.

It has, in a way, rejoined the community

of law.
But the United Nations cannot be satisfied with merely leaving
the country and wishing the Cambodian people good luck.

It has the

duty to live up to its expectations, a duty that results also from
the actions carried out by the Cambodians themselves for the peace
process in the country.

Its representatives here with us today

recognize the useful role played by our Organization and ask it to
continue its presence in Cambodia in the area of reconstruction,
development and - constituting a victory of democratic ideas - the
enhancement and protection of human rights.
The Cambodian Government is also asking, through them, for the
maintenance of a team of military observers.

I can assure the

Council that my Government is prepared to give favourable
consideration to this request.

It is the Secretary-General’s

intention to open an integrated United Nations office in Cambodia.
France welcomes this idea, because we feel that such representation
will be a symbol of

the continued commitment of the international

S/PV.3287
22
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
community and the United Nations to the process of consolidating
peace in this country.
With the assistance of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, the Cambodian people will now be able to devote their
energies to the enormous task of rebuilding a State and an economy.
The Cambodian people can be assured, in this regard, of the support
of my country, which recently hosted the meeting of the Committee
for the reconstruction of Cambodia, and of its desire to engage in
multifaceted cooperation with Phnom Penh.
These positive points aside, there remains a problem we cannot
but mention:

the situation of the Khmer Rouge group.

themselves refused to participate in the elections.

They

If today they

wish to rejoin the international community, they must recognize the
legitimate authorities of this country, open up their zone
completely and accept the rules of democracy.

They must know that

any act of violence committed against the legal Government will
bring the unequivocal condemnation of the international community
down on its perpetrators and also, if necessary, against those who
have provided support or served as accomplices.
In this regard I must recall that while the second instrument
in the Paris Agreements, which spelled out the UNTAC mandate, is no
longer in force, the third instrument is.

It concerns, as members

know, the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
inviolability, neutrality and national unity guaranteed by the
States signatories of the Paris Agreements, as well as the
Declaration on the recovery of Cambodia.
Finally, the spirit of the Paris Agreements must be
maintained.

I would recall that recourse to the Co-Chairmen is

possible at any moment.

I believe I can say that Indonesia and

S/PV.3287
23
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
France will assume fully and without reserve their responsibilities
in this regard.

S/PV.3287
24
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
France hopes that the process of restoring peace and democracy
in Cambodia can be an example for the United Nations in the
implementation of its other peace-keeping operations.

This example

could also be kept in mind by the peoples and the leaders in
Europe, Africa and Latin America who are prepared to appeal to the
United Nations but not necessarily to clearly choose peace or to
make the necessary efforts to that end.
In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of France, to address
to His Royal Highness King Norodom Sihanouk and to the leaders and
the people of Cambodia, who are entering a new era, all my good
wishes for success.
Mr. WALKER (United States of America):

It is a profound

pleasure to welcome His Royal Highness First Prime Minister
Norodom Ranariddh and His Excellency Second Prime Minister Hun Sen
to the Security Council.
My Government would like to take this opportunity to express
our sincere appreciation and congratulations for the great
contributions you have made under the wise leadership of
His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk to bringing a real, lasting peace
to Cambodia.

We wholeheartedly applaud your success in forming a

new Government and in approving a Constitution that will help
guarantee democracy and respect for the human rights of all
Cambodians.
Prior to last May’s elections there were many voices of doubt
and even despair about the prospects for success in Cambodia.
Thanks to your efforts, the courage and determination of the
Cambodian people and the support of the international community,
those dire predictions have given way to a new-found hope and
confidence.

This triumph for peace and democracy has not come

S/PV.3287
25
(Mr. Walker, United States)
easily, however.

It has been won at the cost of blood and

sacrifice by many Cambodians and by personnel of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

We must help ensure

that that which has been won at such great cost is not lost.
I should also like to take this occasion to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for
Cambodia, Yasushi Akashi; to UNTAC Force Commander General
Sanderson; and to the men and women of UNTAC for their invaluable
contributions.

They have been a credit to their respective

countries and to the institution of the United Nations and stand as
a fine example of the contribution United Nations peace-keeping
operations can make to promoting international peace and security.
UNTAC represents what can be accomplished when the United Nations
perseveres through adversity and outbreaks of violence to help
rebuild a nation shattered by civil war and atrocities.

The

lessons of UNTAC will not be forgotten as this body responds to
other security challenges.
The future of Cambodia’s freedom and democracy is first and
foremost the responsibility of the Cambodian people.

However, it

also remains a matter of great importance to the United Nations and
to the international community, which have invested so much to help
the Cambodian people.

UNTAC has completed its mission, and the new

royal Cambodian government, under the leadership of His Majesty
King Sihanouk, has rightfully assumed all the rights and
responsibilities of a sovereign nation.

The challenge ahead for

the international community is to assist it in ways it finds
appropriate to ensure the continuation of the great progress that
has been achieved, and to allow Cambodia to enjoy the peace it so
richly deserves.

S/PV.3287
26
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
First of all, please allow me to extend, on behalf of the Chinese
delegation, our warm welcome to His Royal Highness
Sdech Krom Luong Norodom Ranariddh, First Prime Minister of the
Royal Government of Cambodia, to His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, Second
Prime Minister, and to the other members of their delegation who
are in our midst today.

I should also like to thank His Royal

Highness for the statement he made just now.
The Chinese delegation is pleased to note that at a time when
we are once again considering the question of Cambodia, encouraging
changes have taken place in that country.

In September of this

year, the new Constitution became effective in Cambodia,
King Sihanouk was enthroned, and the new Government started to
operate. All these developments show that the peace process in
Cambodia has entered a new and historic stage.
The Paris Agreements were signed two years ago by the various
Cambodian parties and the countries concerned.

The United Nations

Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) was established by the
Security Council soon after, reflecting the determination and
conviction of the Cambodian people and of the international
community to arrive at a political settlement of the Cambodian
question.

In order to achieve peace in Cambodia, the peace-loving

Cambodian people, with the assistance of the United Nations and the
countries concerned, made unswerving efforts, overcame various
difficulties and setbacks, and finally achieved success recognized
by the entire world.

For this, we wish to offer our warm

congratulations.
The solution to the question of Cambodia has set a successful
example for resolving regional conflicts throuqh peaceful means.
Practice has proved that where there is a will, there is a way.

As

S/PV.3287
27
(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
long as we rely on the peoples in the countries concerned,
earnestly implement the relevant agreements and adhere to the
principle of settling disputes through peaceful negotiations, no
matter how complicated and difficult the question is it will be
settled appropriately.
King Sihanouk has played an important role in promoting the
peace process in Cambodia.

The King is a leader beloved by the

Cambodian people and a statesman with vision.

Over the years, he

has made significant contributions to achieving Cambodia’s
independence, sovereignty, peace, unification and territorial
integrity, promoting national reconciliation and maintaining peace
and stability.

The Chinese Government and people have always

deeply admired and appreciated his endeavours.
In celebrating the victory in the peace process of Cambodia,
we should not forget those who have made outstanding contributions
to the cause of peace in Cambodia.

Some peace-keeping personnel,

including two members of the Chinese engineering detachment, even
sacrificed their precious lives.

The Chinese delegation wishes to

express its sincere condolences to their families.
China has all along devoted its efforts to the political and
comprehensive settlement of the Cambodian question and supported
the efforts of King Sihanouk and the Cambodian people to achieve
national independence, peace and reconciliation, and the stands of
the Cambodian Government on the safeguarding of national
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, neutrality and
unity.

During the phase of the rehabilitation and reconstruction

of Cambodia, China is in favour of the United Nations and the
international community providing, at the request of the Cambodian
Government, all the assistance conducive to safeguarding the

S/PV.3287
28
(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and
to promoting national reconstruction and economic development.
China sincerely hopes that Cambodia, after its protracted war,
will embark on the road of peace, stability and prosperity under
the leadership of King Sihanouk.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

Permit me to state how happy we

are, Sir, to see you presiding over our deliberations for the month
of October.

I am confident that under your able leadership the

Council will function smoothly and effectively.
We are grateful also to His Excellency
Mr. Adolfo Raul Taylhardat, the Permanent Representative of
Venezuela, for the most impressive manner in which he conducted the
affairs of the Council during the month of September.
a diplomat of great skill and experience.

He is indeed

S/PV.3287
29
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
It is a privilege and an honour for my delegation to extend a
warm and sincere welcome to His Royal Highness Prince
Norodom Ranariddh, First Prime Minister, and His Excellency
Mr. Hun Sen, Second Prime Minister of the Royal Government of
Cambodia.

Having listened to the eloquent report by His Royal

Highness, one can say with confidence that after many years of
trial and tribulation, Cambodia is now firmly set on the road to
democracy, peace and prosperity.
The Government of Pakistan played a modest role in the
international effort to restore peace and democracy in Cambodia by
contributing troops and civilian police monitors for the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

Some Pakistani

officials also helped in the conduct of the democratic elections in
that country.

We therefore share in the sense of accomplishment

and joy at the completion of the UNTAC mission.

Indeed, UNTAC was

a unique experience and perhaps the most elaborate and complex
operation ever undertaken by the United Nations.

Its successful

conclusion is in itself a tribute to the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi, who headed the
operation, the UNTAC personnel and, of course, above all, the
leadership and the people of Cambodia, without whose commitment,
cooperation, courage and determination success would not have been
possible.
As we rejoice with the people of Cambodia and the rest of the
world over the return of democracy and relative peace to Cambodia,
we cannot forget the sacrifices given by UNTAC personnel to realize
that noble objective.

Our sympathies and condolences go to the

families and the Governments of all those courageous UNTAC soldiers

S/PV.3287
30
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
who laid down their lives in the cause of peace and stability in
Cambodia.
The vital contribution of His Royal Highness King
Norodom Sihanouk throughout the entire long process cannot be
overemphasized.

During the darkest days of Cambodia, he continued

to serve as a beacon of hope for that country.

We welcome his

accession to the throne of Cambodia and hope that he will continue
to play a significant role in consolidating peace and stability in
his country and in bringing about genuine national reconciliation.
At this juncture, I would also like to reaffirm the full support of
the Government of Pakistan for the new Government of Cambodia.
We have been pleased to learn that an assessment of the UNTAC
experience is currently under way in the United Nations
Secretariat.

We are confident that an in-depth evaluation of the

various aspects of the United Nations operation in Cambodia will
lead to conclusions that might be helpful elsewhere.

It would be

useful if the results of this specific endeavour were also shared
with Member States.
The United Nations operation in Cambodia was also significant
in some other ways.

It had a clearly defined objective, it had a

definite time frame before it, it had the support of the
international community and it enjoyed the benefit of brilliant
leadership.
During the period of conflict and turmoil in Cambodia, which
is happily behind us now, the country’s infrastructure was heavily
damaged while its institutions suffered considerably.

Though the

mandate of UNTAC has come to an end with the establishment of a
constitutional Government in Cambodia, the need for international
assistance is still very much there.

To consolidate the gains

S/PV.3287
31
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
already made as well as to ensure national reconciliation and the
strengthening of democracy in Cambodia, it is important that the
reconstruction of Cambodia’s infrastructure and institutions is
completed as quickly as possible.

For this purpose the developed

and the wealthy countries will have to continue with the commitment
they have already demonstrated towards Cambodia.
My delegation has taken note of the joint letter written to
the Secretary-General by the First Prime Minister and the Second
Prime Minister of Cambodia, asking for the deployment of 20 to 30
international unarmed military observers for a period of six months
to oversee the security and military situation in Cambodia and to
report their findings to the Secretary-General.

My delegation

strongly endorses that Cambodian request.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Pakistan for

the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

New Zealand also welcomes very

warmly the presence here today of the two Prime Ministers of the
new Royal Cambodian Government:

His Royal Highness

Prince Ranariddh and His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen.

We pay a tribute

to both Prime Ministers, and to His Royal Highness King Sihanouk,
who has played such a pivotal role in the establishment of the new
constitutional arrangements.
Today the Security Council is able to enjoy a rare luxury in
the exercise of its responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security, because today we celebrate a
success.

And there can be little doubt that the United Nations

Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) and the process that it
oversaw were indeed successful.

As His Royal Highness noted in his

address yesterday to the General Assembly, there are many countries

S/PV.3287
32
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
and individuals who played important roles in bringing about that
success:

the members of the core group; the permanent members of

this Council; and most especially the countries of the region, the
members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which kept the issue of Cambodia before the eyes of the
international community for such a very long time.
A particular tribute must be paid to the Secretary-General, to
his Special Representative, Mr. Akashi, to the UNTAC Commander,
General Sanderson, and to all the military and civilian personnel
who took part in the UNTAC operation.
gave their lives for Cambodia.

Some of the UNTAC personnel

There can be no clearer

demonstration of the commitment of those individuals and of their
Governments to the restoration of peace.
As we all know, despite the well-intentioned efforts of the
outside world, our efforts alone could not have brought about the
success we are celebrating today.

They would have come to nothing

if they had not been matched by the determination of the Cambodian
people to put an end to the bloodshed and the fighting that have
made the recent history of Cambodia so tragic.

That determination

was evident before the elections in the large numbers of refugees
who returned to their country and in the huge numbers of people who
registered for elections.

But the most graphic proof came when the

elections were under way.

Ordinary Cambodian citizens showed that

they would not be cowed by threats of violence and the menace of
intimidation.

Instead, they seized the opportunity that was

offered to them and made the most of it.
We very much welcome the fact that, with one exception,
Cambodia’s leaders responded to that demonstration by their people
and put behind them their disagreements.

They fashioned a new

S/PV.3287
33
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
Government of National Reconciliation.

We note from His Royal

Highness’s statement to the General Assembly, and we heard again in
his statement today, that the new Government continues to hold out
to the Khmer Rouge the opportunity to join in the newly established
political process.

But given its grisly history, the Khmer Rouge

can expect little sympathy from the international community if it
continues to reject the path of peace and cooperation.
As with the past, so too with the future.

If Cambodia is to

continue the process of re-establishing a successful, functioning
society, then it will do so largely as a consequence of the efforts
of the Cambodians themselves.
their own destiny.

They must take the lead in shaping

S/PV.3287
34
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
But the international community must also play its part.

The

end of UNTAC does not mean the end of the United Nations
involvement in Cambodia.

In his report the Secretary-General set

out a number of proposals for continued United Nations involvement
in Cambodia.

In his address yesterday His Royal Highness

underscored those matters to which the Cambodian Government
attaches particular importance:

the establishment of an integrated

United Nations office in Phnom Penh; the continued presence of the
United Nations relief and development programmes; the establishment
of a human rights centre and a continuation of de-mining operations
within the framework of the Cambodian Mine Action Centre.

New

Zealand endorses all of those elements and is confident that they
will be given effect by the Secretary-General and the other parts
of the United Nations system.
As far as the Council is concerned, we note that the two Prime
Ministers have submitted a request to the Secretary-General for the
dispatch of 20 to 30 unarmed military observers for a six-month
period following the end of UNTAC.

The Council has just received a

report from the Secretary-General, and we look forward to
considering that request in the light of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations.
It is time for the Council to consider a further resolution on
Cambodia which will respond to this request for military observers
and will address other aspects of the post-UNTAC United Nations
presence.
week.

We would hope that this action could be completed this

In that connection, we recall the valuable initiative taken

by the United States during its presidency of the Council in
August, when it convened a meeting of an open-ended working group
of all countries interested in the Cambodia problem in order to

S/PV.3287
35
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
begin discussion of a draft resolution.

We hope that a similar

procedure will be followed in bringing to a conclusion a draft
resolution on the subject and that special efforts will be made to
consult the representatives of Cambodia and the other countries of
the region.

As His Royal Highness reminded the General Assembly

yesterday, many countries have played a special role in Cambodia.
Those countries continue to have a special interest in Cambodia and
have a valuable contribution to make.

The Council should take that

into account as it continues its work to help Cambodia on behalf of
the international community.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

I would like to extend

a warm welcome in the name of my Government to His Royal Highness
Prince Norodom Ranariddh on this historic occasion.

The United

Kingdom greatly appreciates and admires the vital role which he has
played, together with His Majesty Norodom Sihanouk, King of
Cambodia, and His Excellency Mr Hun Sen, in ensuring the successful
implementation of the Paris Agreements.

We hope that, with

steadfast international support, they will continue their efforts
to bring peace and stability to the benefit of all the Cambodian
people.
The United Nations operation in Cambodia has been a real
success, despite many predictions of impending disaster throughout
the pre-electoral period.

In his address to the General Assembly

yesterday His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Ranariddh rightly
recognized and paid tribute to the forces of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), which played a decisive
role in the effort to bring democracy and freedom to the Cambodian
people.

I would like to add my own Government’s appreciation of

UNTAC personnel and of UNTAC’s leader, Yasushi Akashi, for their

S/PV.3287
36
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
tireless work in very difficult circumstances.

I express my

sympathy and sorrow to the families of those who gave their lives
in Cambodia for the sake of peace.
Although UNTAC’s mandate has now ended, Cambodia still needs
and still deserves a helping hand from the international community.
The United Kingdom supports the United Nations continuing close
involvement in Cambodia through its agencies and specialized
programmes.

We look forward to the Secretary-General’s

recommendations on further United Nations involvement and will give
them our speedy and serious consideration.

The United Kingdom will

join others in the international community in providing support
through bilateral aid programmes.
Democracy is a fragile plant.

It is important that, with the

help of the international community, all Cambodians now work
together to nurture it and to cherish it.

It will require much

hard work and determination to consolidate the achievements made so
far.

The new Constitution is a significant and welcome step

towards this goal.

The United Kingdom is particularly pleased that

strong human-rights provisions form a central part of that
Constitution.

It is essential that they be respected.

The United Nations is often criticized as ineffective,
incapable of responding to the challenges of a world increasing in
turmoil.

The success of this United Nations operation in Cambodia,

indeed, the very presence of our distinguished guests in this
Chamber, demonstrates to these critics that the United Nations can
work as it Charter intended it to do, that even seemingly
intractable problems can be solved, that peace can be restored and
that light can illuminate the darkness that reigned in Cambodia not
long ago.

Let us hope that the example of Cambodia will be a

lesson to us, and an inspiration.

S/PV.3287
37
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

I am glad that this Security Council

meeting is being held today, and I am pleased with the way it is
now being held.

I wish to welcome His Royal Highness

Prince Norodom Ranariddh, the First Prime Minister, and His
Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, the Second Prime Minister, to our meeting
today.
My Government extends its full support to the Royal Government
of Cambodia, which has been established through a democratic
process and is based on the will of the Cambodian people.

Indeed,

with the extraordinarily successful general election last May, the
subsequent promulgation of the new Constitution, the accession to
the throne of His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk and the formation
of the Royal Government of Cambodia, the Cambodian people can at
long last devote their energies to resuming their own lives and
rebuilding their own country.

I would like on this occasion to pay

a high tribute to the persevering efforts of all those concerned,
especially the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
Mr. Akashi, and, most particularly, His Majesty
King Norodom Sihanouk, whose wisdom and leadership ensured the
success of the peace process.
I commend the outstanding achievement of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

UNTAC has played a

vital role in restoring peace, freedom and democracy to Cambodia,
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the Paris
Agreements.

Its achievement sets a new standard for peace-keeping

operations, and I am convinced that the experience gained through
UNTAC will provide the United Nations with useful insights for its
future operations.
Although UNTAC has completed its mandate and is scheduled to
withdraw by 15 November, this does not mean that we can turn our

S/PV.3287
38
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
attention away from Cambodia.

On the contrary, it is essential

that the international community lend constant support to the
efforts of the Cambodian people to rebuild their war-torn country.
Such support is particularly necessary now that the new Government
has been established.

S/PV.3287
39
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
In his address yesterday to the General Assembly, His Royal
Highness Prince Norodom Ranariddh noted that:
"... the new Cambodia needs aid and assistance from the
international community ... for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of our impoverished country." (A/48/PV.15)
This I believe is precisely what the Secretary-General of the
United Nations had in mind when he outlined the importance of postconflict peace-building in his report "An Agenda for Peace".
It goes without saying that economic assistance for
reconstruction and rehabilitation in Cambodia will strengthen and
reinforce the fragile peace which has been restored after decades
of conflict and unspeakable human suffering.
As a neighbouring Asian country, Japan has been closely
involved in the Cambodian peace process.

Japan supported the peace

effort through its participation in the Security Council
deliberations, by hosting international meetings, sending peacekeeping operation personnel and mediating among the parties to the
conflict.
In June last year my Government hosted in Tokyo the
Ministerial Conference on the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of
Cambodia, and last month in Paris Japan co-chaired with France the
International Committee on the Reconstruction of Cambodia.

At

those meetings a total of approximately $l billion was pledged for
Cambodian reconstruction, including Japan’s pledge of up to
$200 million.
The task of reconstruction has only just begun.

The Cambodian

people will be expected to concentrate all their energy and
resources on rehabilitation and reconstruction to ensure a durable
peace in their country.

The economic stability obtained through

S/PV.3287
40
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
such efforts will, in turn, foster social and political stability,
thereby making possible the prosperity and lasting peace of
Cambodia.
In closing I should like to reiterate that the completion of
the UNTAC operation marks just the beginning of a long process of
building a peaceful and prosperous Cambodia.

I therefore hope that

the Security Council will adopt as soon as possible a comprehensive
resolution that will seek to reinforce peace and stability in
Cambodia and ensure that the progress made thus far is
irreversible.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary)(interpretation from French):

First, I

should like to welcome here among us most warmly His Royal Highness
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, First Prime Minister of the Royal
Government, and His Excellency, Mr. Hun Sen, Second Prime Minister
of the Royal Government of Cambodia.
The message just brought to us is a faithful reflection of the
new chapter that is opening in the history of the Khmer people.

I

am sure that the Security Council will very carefully and in a
positive way consider the matters that were raised in Prince
Norodom Ranariddh’s speech.
Today’s meeting is a happy one which celebrates the efforts of
the people of Cambodia and of the international community to ensure
that peace and democracy triumph in Cambodia.

The establishment of

the constituent Assembly, following the election, the promulgation
of a new Constitution, the establishment of a new government and,
most recently, the election of the King of the Kingdom of Cambodia
are all striking and eloquent examples of what has been achieved.
In our world which is full of tension, flashpoints and wars,
we must properly appreciate the success of this effort which has

S/PV.3287
41
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
been able to put an end to the suffering and ravages that have
afflicted the people of that country so harshly, turning one of the
darkest pages of their recent history.

The United Nations

Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), with a modest Hungarian
contribution, has been the broadest and largest operation in the
history of the Organization, an operation that successfully
attained its objectives.
UNTAC, under the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Yasushi Akashi, and all of the
international personnel involved in it, worked under extremely
complex conditions to put Cambodia back on its feet and restore the
conditions necessary to ensure the functioning of the country.
Looking back we can say, with good reason, that the United
Nations presence in Cambodia can be regarded as a model.

Despite

major difficulties, casualties and much tension, all of which
occurred as Cambodia moved along the road towards the settlement
which had been envisaged in the Paris Agreements, the international
community was able to avoid the shoals in the path to
reconciliation and national reconstruction.
One of the most important lessons of this recent period was
how right the United Nations was to refuse to withdraw in the face
of difficulties and attempts at military or other kinds of
intimidation.

The credibility and authority of the world

Organization will be strengthened, provided that it is willing to
commit itself, on the basis of a clear and well-defined plan, to go
the distance in its efforts to prevent conflict, to keep or make
peace, and to build peace in post-conflict situations.
From this point of view, and now that UNTAC’s mandate has
drawn to an end, it is of paramount importance to keep what has

S/PV.3287
42
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
been won in Cambodia and to make sure that there is no movement
backwards so that all the opportunities now available in the
country are fully used in the interests of the rebirth of the Khmer
people, in restoring decent living conditions, ensuring full
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and for the
economic and social recovery of the country.
We pay tribute to His Royal Highness King Norodom Sihanouk and
express our conviction that, under his wise leadership, the
auspicious developments currently under way in Cambodia will have a
good influence, will open up a future of peace and prosperity for
that devastated country and, let me add, will be a good influence
not only on the Khmer people but also, without doubt, on the
prospects of finding settlements in other hotbeds of tension
throughout the world.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation)(interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian Federation was extremely pleased at hearing

of the proclamation of the Kingdom of Cambodia, the adoption of a
new Constitution in the country, and the establishment of the
organs of State authority in the country, the Government and the
Assembly.
We welcome the election of the King of Cambodia under the new
Constitution, His Royal Highness King Norodom Sihanouk, who has
made an invaluable contribution to the cause of national
reconciliation in Cambodia.

We regard as deeply symbolic the

presence here in the Security Council of Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
the First Prime Minister, and Mr. Hun Sen, the Second Prime
Minister of the Royal Government of Cambodia.

We greatly

appreciate their efforts to ensure the rehabilitation of the
country and we welcome their participation in this meeting of the
Security Council.

S/PV.3287
43
(Mr. Vorontsov,
Russian Federation)
These landmark events in the life of the Cambodian people, who
are weary of so many years of fratricidal conflict, have been made
possible by the successful implementation of the peace process in
Cambodia under the Paris Agreements and by the active role played
by the United Nations.

These events mark the triumphant conclusion

of the United Nations operation in Cambodia, which was one of the
largest operations in the history of the Organization.

The mandate

of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC),
which has now carried out the task - fraught with difficulties - of
bringing a settlement to the prolonged civil war, has now been
successfully discharged.
The Russian delegation would like to pay a special tribute to
all those whose outstanding efforts helped the Cambodians realize
their hope for a peaceful life, and here I have in mind the United
Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali, his Special
Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi, and all the personnel of the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia.

It was their

devotion and their determination to achieve the goals set, often at
considerable risk to their own lives, that made it possible to
conclude this decisive stage along the path towards consolidating
the peace process in the country.
For its part, Russia participated directly in these efforts;
we sent our representatives to the military and civilian components
of UNTAC, and we also sent people for the electoral unit during the
elections.

The Russians did their work in a very responsible

manner, and we feel justly proud of them.
These events in Cambodia were a major victory, not only for
the Cambodian people and for the whole international community as
represented by the United Nations, they were also a major victory

S/PV.3287
44
(Mr. Vorontsov,
Russian Federation)
for democracy.

We attach special significance to the fact that the

Cambodians, with the help of the United Nations, were able to pave
the way to peace and national concord in their country by means of
the freest and most democratic method:

the ballot box.

Russia, which itself is resolved to continue its democratic
transformation by applying the fundamental principle of democracy,
free elections, feels particularly close to the path the Cambodians
have chosen and understands it well.
Now that the time has come for their country to return to
normal life after the torment of many years of civil war, the
Russian Federation, together with the other members of the
international community, is willing to help the Cambodian people to
rehabilitate their homeland, although we do realize that, in the
final analysis, it is the people themselves who bear the
responsibility for the future of Cambodia.

We support the

democratically elected Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and
are willing to continue mutually beneficial cooperation in the
interests of a renaissance of Cambodian society either through
multilateral efforts in the United Nations or through bilateral
channels.
The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker is the Minister for

Foreign Affairs of Thailand, His Excellency Squadron Leader
Prasong Soonsiri, who wishes to make a statement on behalf of the
Foreign Ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand, and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

S/PV.3287
45
Mr. SOONSIRI (Thailand):

Mr. President, first of all,

allow me to express my sincere appreciation for the invitation to
participate in this meeting and to address this body in the
presence of His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Ranariddh and
His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, the First and Second Prime Ministers of
Cambodia, respectively.
May I also join the others who have spoken before me, Sir, in
offering to you sincere congratulations upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of October. Our
congratulations also go to Ambassador Adolfo Raúl Taylhardat, the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, who so ably guided the
Council last month.
In addressing the Council this afternoon, I am speaking also
in my capacity as Chairman of the Standing Committee of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), which comprises
Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore
and Thailand.
Throughout the Cambodian conflict, ASEAN took an active role
in achieving the peaceful settlement of that conflict.

Indonesia,

together with France, co-chaired the Paris Conference that
culminated in the signing of the Paris Peace Agreements which
formed the basis of the peace process in Cambodia.

We, the members

of ASEAN, warmly welcome the successful completion of UNTAC’s
mission in Cambodia. The implementation of the Paris Agreements,
which began with the cease-fire, enabled the elections to be held
in May, followed by the adoption of the Constitution.

This process

has culminated in the formation of the new Government under the
leadership of His Majesty Samdech Preah Norodom Sihanouk, King of
Cambodia.

S/PV.3287
46
(Mr. Soonsiri, Thailand)
We have listened with interest to and welcome the statement of
His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Ranariddh, the First Prime
Minister of Cambodia.

We wish to express full support for the

proposals put forward by him here - as well as at the General
Assembly - on behalf of the Cambodian Government, which call,
first, for the establishment of a United Nations Integrated Office
in Phnom Penh; secondly, for the maintenance of representative
offices of the United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the World Food Programme and other United
Nations specialized agencies; thirdly, for the maintenance of the
human rights component of the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia (UNTAC) and its expansion into a permanent human rights
centre; fourthly, for the continuation of the de-mining operations;
and, fifthly, for the presence of a small number of military
observers in Phnom Penh.
We also look forward to the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of a Special Representative in Cambodia.

ASEAN is

confident that a highly qualified person will be appointed, and we
hope that he will be a person who is familiar with the issues
involved and will be able to establish an excellent rapport with
the Cambodian leaders and Government.
ASEAN is gratified to note that efforts to consolidate genuine
national reconciliation continue.

We note that there is already

agreement for the convening of a round-table discussion between the
Cambodians next month.

The Cambodian Government has also expressed

its readiness to welcome the Khmer Rouge within the Royal Army and
within the Government as advisers.

S/PV.3287
47
(Mr. Soonsiri, Thailand)
ASEAN would like to pay a special tribute to the SecretaryGeneral; to his Special Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi; to
General John Sanderson, UNTAC Force Commander; and to the brave men
and women of UNTAC for their dedication and tireless effort, which
has culminated in the successful conclusion of their difficult
mission.

Here, may we offer our sincere condolences to the

Governments and families of the UNTAC personnel who lost their
lives in the service of peace.
The success of UNTAC, despite some inevitable mistakes and
errors, is one in which the United Nations and the international
community can rightly take pride.

Many key lessons can be learned

from UNTAC for future United Nations peace-keeping and
peace-building operations.
In conclusion, ASEAN shares the hope and expectation of the
Cambodian Government and people that the United Nations and the
international community, through the International Committee on the
Reconstruction of Cambodia (ICORC), will continue to assist the
Cambodian nation in its reconstruction and rehabilitation.

ASEAN

and Thailand stand ready to contribute our share in such efforts.
We believe that Cambodia, under the able leadership of His Majesty
King Norodom Sihanouk, will finally take its rightful place in the
South-East Asian region and contribute to bringing peace, stability
and prosperity to our region.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs

of Thailand for his statement and for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the representative of Australia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.3287
48
Mr. BUTLER (Australia):
the Security Council.

This is an important occasion in

The Council and the Secretary-General should

be congratulated on the success of the operation of the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), which gave
effect to the Agreements on a comprehensive political settlement of
the Cambodia conflict signed in Paris in October 1991.

Those

Agreements were a momentous achievement on which many countries had
worked, and Australia is proud to have been among them.
The Agreements have brought enhanced stability to our region
and have restored peace and sovereignty to a neighbouring people people who, as the Australian Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, said
at the time of the signing of the Agreements,
"have suffered beyond measure through more than 20 years of
war, civil war and horrifying genocide.

No people have been

more deserving of peace and an opportunity to rebuild their
nation."
Our heartfelt congratulations go to the Cambodian people who
demonstrated - massively - courage and commitment to the democratic
process.

This was a vital element in the success of UNTAC.

We

acknowledge, too, their democratically elected leaders, whom we are
honoured to have with us today, His Royal Highness Prince
Norodom Ranariddh and His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, respectively
First and Second Prime Ministers of the Royal Government of
Cambodia.

And, of course, we pay a tribute to His Majesty King

Norodom Sihanouk, whose wisdom, leadership and patriotism were and
are of inestimable value.
I said a moment ago that the UNTAC operation gave effect to
the Paris Agreements on Cambodia.
whole reality.

In fact, that is not quite the

With the successful conclusion of UNTAC, a very

large part of the Paris Agreements have been implemented.

But the

S/PV.3287
49
(Mr. Butler, Australia)
Paris Agreements remain in force.

They have the full support of

this Council, as expressed in resolution 718 (1991); and the
signatories, and the international community generally, remain
committed to their continued implementation.

Those Agreements

continue to provide a rational framework for future international
involvement in Cambodia.
I am sure Council members are familiar with the three
principal areas of continuing international involvement in
Cambodia, as highlighted in the Paris Agreements.

They figured

prominently in Prime Minister Ranariddh’s historic address to the
General Assembly yesterday.

I would like to recall them.

First, given the tragic and massive human rights abuses to
which the Cambodian people have been subjected and which, for many
of us, are the essential backdrop and rationale for our commitment
to the peace process, the Paris Agreements wisely foreshadow a role
in Cambodia for the United Nations Commission on Human Rights,
building on the admirable achievements of the human rights
component of UNTAC.
Secondly, the Paris Agreements also contain a declaration on
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of devastated Cambodia.
Clearly, this is an essential and urgent task if the hard-won peace
is to be consolidated and made durable.

Australia welcomes the

renewed assurances of international donor commitment to Cambodia
given at the senior-officials meeting in Paris on 8 and 9 September
of the International Committee on the Reconstruction of Cambodia,
as well as the understanding evident in Prime Minister Ranariddh’s
statement yesterday of the need for Cambodia to establish
appropriate aid-delivery mechanisms.

S/PV.3287
50
(Mr. Butler, Australia)
Finally, the third Paris Agreement commits both Cambodia and
the international community to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and inviolability, neutrality
and national unity of Cambodia.
Australia looks forward to the next stage of the Council’s
consideration of the question of Cambodia.

We believe strongly

that if this accords with the wishes of the sovereign Government of
Cambodia, the Council should adopt a resolution which would mark
the conclusion of UNTAC in a manner appropriate to the scale of the
operation and the significance of its achievements, and would then
set the course for international involvement in the continuing
implementation of the Paris Agreements in the post-UNTAC era.
a resolution would be, we suggest, the most useful contribution

Such

this Council could now make to the formidable task of nationbuilding on which the new Cambodian State is now embarked.

S/PV.3287
51
The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as President of the Security Council, on behalf of the members of
the Council:
"On behalf of the members of the Security Council, I wish
to thank His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Ranariddh, First
Prime Minister, and His Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, Second Prime
Minister, of the Royal Government of Cambodia for their
presence here and to express the satisfaction of the Security
Council at the auspicious developments that have taken place
in Cambodia since the holding of the elections of 23 to
28 May 1993, in particular the proclamation of the Cambodian
Constitution on 24 September 1993 and the creation of the new
government of Cambodia.
"I also take this opportunity to congratulate His Majesty
King Norodom Sihanouk, Head of State of Cambodia, on his
accession to the throne and to pay tribute to the continuing
role played by His Majesty in the quest for national
reconciliation and a better future for all Cambodians.
"In the light of the successful completion of the mandate
of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia
(UNTAC), the Security Council reiterates its recognition at
the remarkable work carried out by UNTAC, under the leadership
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Yasushi Akashi.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of the
continued support of the international community to the
consolidation of peace and democracy and the promotion of
development in Cambodia.

S/PV.3287
52
(The President)
"Taking into account the letter dated 26 September 1993
addressed to the Secretary-General by His Royal Highness
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, First Prime Minister, and His
Excellency Mr. Hun Sen, Second Prime Minister, and the further
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 745 (1992) which members of the
Council have just received, the Council will continue to study
the situation in Cambodia and will consider what action it
should take."
This statement will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/26531.
There are no further names on the list of speakers for this
meeting.
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda will be fixed in
consultation with the members of the Council.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
