A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/44
23 December 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 65
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/54/552)]
54/44.

Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types
of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons,
Recalling also its resolution 51/37 of 10 December 1996 relating to the prohibition of the
development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons,
Taking note of paragraph 77 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,1
Determined to prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction that have
characteristics comparable in destructive effect to those of weapons of mass destruction identified in the
definition of weapons of mass destruction adopted by the United Nations in 1948,2
Noting the desirability of keeping the matter under review, as appropriate,

1

Resolution S-10/2.

2

The definition was adopted by the Commission for Conventional Armaments (see S/C.3/32/Rev.1).

99-77683

/...

A/RES/54/44
Page 2

1. Reaffirms that effective measures should be taken to prevent the emergence of new types of
weapons of mass destruction;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament, without prejudice to further overview of its agenda,
to keep the matter under review, as appropriate, with a view to making, when necessary, recommendations
on undertaking specific negotiations on identified types of such weapons;
3. Calls upon all States, immediately following any recommendations of the Conference on
Disarmament, to give favourable consideration to those recommendations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Conference on Disarmament all documents
relating to the consideration of this item by the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session;
5. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report the results of any consideration of the matter
in its annual reports to the General Assembly;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session the item entitled
“Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons: report of the Conference on Disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
