Reeolu1ion1 adopted on the reporta of the Sixth Committee

of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 18 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 18 the Declaration of the
Rights of the Child 19 or other instruments of international law.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3319 (XXIX). Respect for human rights in armed
confticts

The Oeneral A.ssembly,
Conscious that a better application of existing humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts and the
development of further' rules remains an urgent task in
order to reduce the suffering brought about by ali such
conflicts,
Recalling the successive resolutions adopted in the
preceding years by the United Nations relating to human rights in armed confticts· and the debates on this
subject,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General 2º on the
first session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, held at
Geneva from 20 February to 29 March 19~4. and on
the Conference of Government Experts on Weapons
That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or Have Indiscriminate Effects, convoked by the International Committee of the Red Cross at Lucerne from 24 September
to 18 October 1974,
W elcoming the decision by the Diploma tic Confer·
ence to invite national liberation movements recognized
by the regional intergovernmental organizations concerned to participate in its work,
Welcoming the work of the first session of the Diplomatic Conference and the work of the Conference of
Government Experts,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for convoking the second session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of lnternational Humanitarian Law Applicable
in Armed Conflicts in 1975 and to the lnternational
Committee of the Red Cross for its readiness to convoke in 1975 another Conference of Government Experts on Weapons That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or Have lndiscriminate Effects;
2. Urges ali participants in the Diplomatic Conference to do their utmost to reach agreement on additional rules which may help to alleviate the suffering
brought about by armed confticts and to respect and
to protect non-combatants and civilian objects in such
confticts;
3. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to ac·
knowledge and to comply with their obligations under
the humanitarian instruments and to observe the international humanitarian rules which are applicable, in
particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 21
18 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), anncx.
11 Resolution 1386 (XIV).
20 A/9669

and Add. l.

11 Carnegie Endowmcnt for lntcrnational

Pcacc, Tire Hague
Conv~ntions and Declarations 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University Press, 191.S).

147

the Geneva Protocol of 1925~~ and the Geneva Conventions of 1949;~ª
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on relevant
developments concerning human rights in armed confticts, in particular on the proceedings and results of
the 1975 session of the Diplomatic Conference;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the ítem entitled .. Respect for human rights in armed conflicts" and emphasizes the need
to allocate adequate time during that session to consider the results of both sessions of the Diplomatic
Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of
International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed
Confticts.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3320 (XXIX). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 24
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV)
of l 7 December 1970, 28 I 9 (XXVI) of 15 December
1•971, 3033 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3107
(XXVlll) of 12 December 1973, in which it urged
the Government of the host country to make certain
that the measures taken to ensure the protection and
security of permanent missions to the United Nations
and their personnel were adequate to enable those missions to perform properly the functions entrusted to
them by their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Government of
the·host country with respect to the United Nations and
the missions accredited to it, their personnel and their
correspondence under the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 211 the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 26 and general intemational law,
Recalling the duty of ,missions accredited to the
United Nations and their personnel to respect the laws
and regulations of the host country,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concern to Member States, including the host country, as well as to the Secretary-General,
N oting the recommendations of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, contained in paragraph 88 of its report,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,
1. Expresses its deep concern at incidents which
have taken place at sorne missions accredited to the
United Nations and which have involved the personnel
of these missions;
22 Lcaguc of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
23 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7.S, Nos. 970-973.
2• Oflicia/ Records o/ the General .As.umbly, Twenty-mlllh
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/9626).
i5 Resolution 169 (II).
2s Resolution 22 A (1).

----~------ - - - - - - - - -

148

Gf'neral AAe1Dbl,--Twenty-ninth Seul-

2. Strongly condemns any acts of violence against
the premises of missions and their personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status of such missions
and personnel under intemational law;
3. Urges the host country to exert all-round efforts
in order to take ali the necessary measures and ensure
their effective implementation for the purpose of guaranteeing adequate security for missions and their personnel and creating normal conditions for the functioning of missions to the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to take all necessary
measures to apprehend, prosecute and punish those
guilty of criminal acts against missions and their personnel;
5. Urges the host country to continue to implement
fully and effectively its Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and Official Guests of the United States27
and, in particular, to take ali appropriate enforcement
and preventive measures to make certain that demonstrations and picketing, especially where there is reason
to believe that they may be accompanied by violence
or may prevent the conduct of normal business of missions to the United Nations, are held in conformity with
this law and closely monitored by the police to prevent
any acts of violence against the missions accredited to
the United Nations and their personnel;
6. Notes the difficulties which diplomatic missions
and their personnel encounter from time to time when
parking their automobiles, and the need to maintain
public safety;
7. Appeals to the host country to review the measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles
with a view to facilitating the desires and needs of the
diplomatic community and to consider terminating the
practice of serving summonses to diplomats;
8. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to c<H>perate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffic problems;
9. Requests ali members of the diplomatic community to respect the laws and regulations of the host
country;
10. Believes that the host country, the Secretariat,
the diplomatic community and the organizations concerned should in every way seek the improvement of
relations and the promotion of mutual understanding
between the diplomatic community and the local population in order to ensure conditions conducive to the
effective functioning of the United Nations and the
•missions accredited to it;
11. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the host
country, the New York City community and the New
York City Commission for the United Nations and
for the Consular Corps to accommodate the needs,
interests and requirements of the diplomatic community
and to provide hospitality;
12. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country in 1975, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI), with the purpose of examining ali matters
falling within its terms of reference;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide ali
necessary assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to call its attention to issues
of mutual concem relating to the implementation of the
27 United States

Public Law 92-539 (see A/8871/Rev.1).

Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and lmmunities of the United Nations;
14. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly, at
its thirtieth session, a report on the progress of its
work and to make, if it deems it neoessary, appropriate
recommendations;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3321 (XXIX). Question of diplomatie asylum

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the fact that a number of States have
granted diplomatic asylum and that severa! conventions on this subject have been concluded in Latin
America,
Considering that it is desirable to initiate preliminary
studies on the humanitarian and other aspects of the
question of diplomatic asylum,
l. Invites Member States wishing to express their
views on the question of diplomatic asylum to communicate those views to the Secretary-General not later
than 30 June 1975;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
circulate to Member States, before the thirtieth session
of the General Assembly, a report containing an analysis of the question of diplomatic asylum, taking into
account in particular:
(a) The texts of relevant intemational agreements;
( b) Relevant decisions of tribunals;
( c) Toe consideration of the question in intergovernmental organizations;
(d) Relevant studies made or being made by nongovemmental bodies concemed with intemational law;
(e) Relevant views of qualified publicists;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirtieth session an item entitled "Report of the Secretary-General on the question of diplomatic asylum".
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3349 (XXIX). Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955 and 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 conceming the procedure for the review of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recalling further its resolutions 2552 (XXIV) of
12 December 1969, 2697 (XXV) of 11 December
1970 and 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the United Nations",
Taking note of the observations which were submitted by Govemments in response to the inquiry made
pursuant to resolutions 2697 (XXV) and 2968
