S/PV.8745

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8745th meeting

Thursday, 12 March 2020, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. King
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Ben Lagha
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-06547 (E)
*2006547*

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

bringing this war to a comprehensive close. The parties
must therefore exercise maximum restraint to prevent
such a terrible outcome. It is imperative that they uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Indiscriminate attacks affecting civilians or civilian
objects are unlawful and reprehensible.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Griffiths is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Amman, Jordan.
The Security Council will now begin
consideration of the item on its the agenda.

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you very much indeed, Sir,
for giving me the opportunity to brief the Security
Council. The last time I did so (see S/PV.8725), I warned
that the military situation in Yemen was growing
increasingly dire. Today, I see the country at a critical
juncture. The parties to the conflict will either move
Yemen towards de-escalation and the resumption of the
political process, or, I fear, towards greater violence
and suffering that will make the path to the negotiating
table more arduous.
The most alarming military escalation has taken
place in Al-Jawf, the governorate to the east of Sana’a.
I am deeply concerned about the rationale driving these
escalations and the impact of the violence on Al-Jawf’s
people. Thousands of families have been displaced
by the recent fighting, as I think we will hear from
Mr. Rajasingham, and are in critical need of shelter
and assistance.
This escalation could trigger conflicts in other
governorates and drag Yemen downwards into a new
and irresponsible cycle of violence. This would have
devastating humanitarian and political consequences.
It would gravely endanger civilians and delay the longawaited and much-needed political process aimed at
2/19

12/03/2020

Over the last week, I travelled to Yemen to stress
the need to stop the fighting. In Ma’rib, I met with local
Government officials, political parties, tribal chiefs,
civil society leaders, including women and youth, and
persons displaced by the conflict. Let me, through
the Council, thank the Governor of that governorate,
Governor Al-Arada, for all his support and hospitality
shown to me on that day. I listened to the concerns
of all those I met about the military escalation and
the humanitarian challenges, and I assured them of
the commitment of my Office to supporting peace
in Yemen. I heard from the people in Ma’rib a strong
demand for peace, but not a peace that would be dictated
from a position of military dominance.
In Sana’a, from which I have just come, I also
discussed the need to stop the fighting in Ma’rib
governorate. I met with Ma’rib tribal representatives
and communal figures living in Sana’a to listen to
their views and concerns about the conflict in Ma’rib.
To be very clear — I wish to be very clear — there
is no justification for military escalation in Ma’rib.
Ma’rib must not become the next epicentre of Yemen’s
tragic conflict.
The governorate of Al-Hudaydah continues to
experience clashes, particularly in the city and in the
southern part of the governorate, and civilian casualties
are, regrettably, increasing. Developments since
yesterday’s distressing and indeed tragic incident at
the joint observation post in the city of Al-Hudaydah
threaten to undermine the de-escalation mechanism
put in place and the achievements of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. Under the leadership of my
colleague General Guha, the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA),
approved, of course, by the Security Council, is
working to mediate and restore trust between the
parties after yesterday’s events. I call on both parties
to work through the established mechanisms to recover
that calm. I should add that UNMHA continues to face
movement restrictions. For example, its patrols have not
been granted access to the city of Al-Hudaydah since
20 October 2019, which, naturally enough, hampers the
implementation of its mandate.
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

I am also observing with much concern the violence
elsewhere in the country. Clashes have continued in
the Nihm district of Sana’a governorate — and we
have discussed that in the Security Council before (see
S/PV.8725) — and in the governorates of Al-Dhale’e,
Shabwah, Taiz and Saada. In short, as we have discussed
before, there is a real risk of a protracted military
escalation across much of Yemen. We must do all we
can to support the parties in containing and reversing
the current trajectory.
As Council members know, since the start of the
escalation in January, I have been calling publicly for
the parties to agree to an immediate and unconditional
military de-escalation and to work with my Office to
achieve that goal. It is imperative that the parties agree
to participate in a public, accountable, nationwide
de-escalation mechanism that quiets the tempo of war
and steers Yemen off this precarious path I have been
describing. I repeated this call when I was in Ma’rib on
7 March, and I have received initial, positive responses
from the parties. These reactions must now translate
into tangible commitments on the ground.
Any de-escalation discussion should also be
reinforced by efforts to resume the political process,
which is also a subject we have discussed in this Chamber.
The de-escalation and the political tracks should be
supported and enhanced by an expeditious move to
seriously address certain issues that have tangible
effects on people’s lives and, as confidence-building
measures, build confidence between the parties.
I would like to add that I join the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights in its statement
condemning the death sentences handed down by a
court in Sana’a to 35 Yemeni parliamentarians earlier
this month. To say the least, the fragmentation and
politicization of the judiciary and other institutions is a
serious cause for concern.
Despite the alarm I am expressing today, I also want
to share with the Security Council the messages I have
heard from Yemenis that reassure me that, despite all
the foregoing, the expeditious resumption of a peaceful
political process remains within reach. On 26 and
27 February, my Office convened a group of Yemeni
public and political figures here in Amman — and I am
grateful for the Government of Jordan for allowing that
meeting to go ahead — and these figures expressed a
shared view that a durable peace can only emerge from
a negotiated political settlement. Many participants

S/PV. 8745

called for the prompt resumption of a comprehensive
political process with no preconditions. Several
expressed a frustration, which I share, that the political
process has been stalled since the last round of official
peace talks, which took place in Kuwait in 2016, three
and a half years ago.
Over a third of the participants at that meeting
were Yemeni women leaders. During my meetings with
them, they emphasized the importance of including
in political negotiations a diverse array of Yemenis,
including women, youth, and tribal and social leaders.
I completely agree with that call and that need and
that requirement, and I will continue to work to get
the parties to ensure the full representation of women
in political consultations. Indeed, I raised the matter
earlier today in Sana’a.
Despite this bleak season, the parties have indeed
exhibited some willingness to continue engaging in
confidence-building measures with a humanitarian
purpose. As Council members know, the parties are
taking important steps towards finally implementing
the agreement that they reached in mid-February, again
in Amman, on a large-scale exchange of prisoners. My
Office has continued to work with them, as has the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to fulfil that
promise. Meanwhile, the World Health Organization
continues its efforts aimed at ensuring that the medical
air-bridge flights, which have Cairo as their next
destination, operate, thereby allowing Yemeni patients
to travel abroad for medical assistance that they cannot
receive in Sana’a.
But much more must be done. All parties bear a
responsibility to ease the impact of war on civilians.
They must work assiduously on prisoner exchanges
and on opening and securing access roads in Taiz,
Al-Hudaydah, Ma’rib and elsewhere; we discussed
that very issue in Ma’rib with the Governor to whom
I have referred earlier in my briefing. The parties must
also work on ensuring the payment of public-sector
salaries across the country. Sana’a’s airport must be
opened for commercial flights to alleviate the suffering
of the Yemeni people. These are crucial humanitarian
measures — and none of them are particularly new — and
they must not become the subject of politicization.
However, there is a limit to how much we can
achieve in the absence of that political process to which
I referred. We must maintain the focus — and I pledge
that we will — on reviving a process that ushers into

20-065473/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen an inclusive transition away from conflict. As
Council members know, we have consulted widely
among Yemenis — and will continue to do so — on
the key elements of such a transition. Several common
themes have emerged, and I have communicated them
publicly to the Security Council before, but they bear
repeating, if you would allow me, Mr. President, so as
to ensure that the people of Yemen know what is on
offer and in prospect.
During a transition, power will need to be shared
among different political and social components,
including women, of course, and civil society, in the
spirit of partnership and consensus. Transitional
security arrangements will need to be agreed in order
to provide for the security of Yemen’s people and to
lead towards the State’s monopoly over the use of force.
Lastly, the Yemeni people will need guarantees
of humanitarian relief, reconstruction and economic
recovery across the country to ensure that the suffering
caused by the war is relegated to the past. We all hope
that that will soon become the reality for Yemen.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: As the Council has just heard
from the Special Envoy, escalating hostilities in Yemen
have pushed peace further away than it had seemed just
six weeks ago. That is dangerous territory and we join
Mr. Griffiths in his call for all parties to freeze military
activities and work towards de-escalation.
The renewed fighting underlines the urgency of
the five priority issues on which we have briefed the
Council for more than a year now: first, the protection
of civilians and respect for international humanitarian
law; secondly, humanitarian access and delivery;
thirdly, funding for the United Nations aid operation;
fourthly, the Yemeni economy and, fifthly, progress
towards peace.
The first issue is the protection of civilians, which
is a requirement of international humanitarian law.
Civilian casualties last year decreased by one-third
from the 2018 figures. That is good news, but it is
only part of the story. There are also several alarming
trends. Children now account for one in four civilian
casualties — up from one in five in 2018. More than
half of all civilian casualties now occur in family
homes — up from 40 per cent in 2018. In other words,
4/19

12/03/2020

violence — although killing and injuring fewer
people — is now more likely to strike families in the
places they should feel safest. It is no surprise that
90 per cent of those incidents result in psychosocial
trauma that can last long after physical injuries heal.
When we look at data from this year, we see that
civilian casualties are again rising. In February, 187
civilians were killed or wounded across Yemen; that is
more than six people every day and an increase of 20 per
cent since January. Much of that increase is due to the
fighting Mr. Griffiths has just described, occurring
in Al-Jawf and Ma’rib, which has displaced tens of
thousands of people in the past several weeks. Nearly
all civilians have fled Al-Jawf’s capital, Al-Hazm,
leaving behind only the most vulnerable. Some families
have moved into remote desert areas that are difficult
to reach. The rest mostly head towards Ma’rib — an
area already hosting more than 750,000 people forced
from their homes by earlier rounds of hostilities. We
again join the Special Envoy’s call for the fighting to
stop now. We need a nationwide ceasefire. I also call on
the parties, at all times, to protect civilians, in line with
their obligations under international law. That includes
taking constant care to spare civilians and meeting the
essential needs of those who are displaced because of
the fighting.
My second point is equally a matter of international
humanitarian law — safe, rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access. For months, we have been
transparent about the severe obstacles facing principled
humanitarian action in Yemen. In the north, those
restrictions have become untenable. Everyone agrees
that a new approach is needed and we appreciate the
close cooperation with our donors and partners in
setting out that approach over the past few weeks. Our
common objective, as the Secretary-General confirmed
last month, is to maintain principled aid delivery to the
millions of people who depend on it to survive. To that
end, we are also intensifying dialogue with the de facto
authorities to ensure that the right conditions are in
place to facilitate that work. We are also preparing to
adjust programmes in case there are conditions that are
not in place or improve only temporarily.
As the Council heard last month, the de facto
authorities agreed to drop their proposed 2 per cent
levy on projects conducted by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Since then, they have agreed
to an acceptable format for NGO country agreements.
Necessary food security assessments, which are
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

essential for knowing how many people need assistance,
have also started in many areas in the north, albeit with
some access challenges that we are trying to resolve
with the authorities.
The World Food Programme has reached agreement
with the authorities to start the retargeting and
biometric registration exercise immediately. Although
senior leadership engagement is there to ensure that the
agreement is followed, new conditions have emerged.
It is frustrating to see last-minute issues raised at the
technical level. That again puts us in discussions with
the authorities after more than eight months of sustained
negotiations. We have communicated to the de facto
authorities from all directions the need for actions over
words. We appreciate the recent steps forward.
We also remain clear-eyed about what remains to
be done and the need to avoid backsliding on what has
recently been achieved. Specifically, we are asking
de facto authorities to process the 71 aid projects still
pending approval. We need more monitoring missions
to be approved, and we need urgent humanitarian
assessments to proceed on the basis of global standards.
Those points are essential if we are to maintain
principled aid programmes at the scale that people need.
On a related note, I would also recall the danger
posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker, where we have seen
no progress. Independent technical experts recently
modelled what a spill from the FSO SAFER might look
like. In every scenario, nearly all the oil would wash
up on the shores of Al-Hudaydah and Hajjah. That
would devastate coastal communities in the north, as
well as the fisheries and marine environment on which
they depend. Neighbouring countries would also be
affected. The first step to preventing such a catastrophe
is the United Nations-led technical assessment, which
we remain eager to undertake.
Humanitarian agencies also face challenges in
Government-controlled areas, although not as severe as
in the north. The Government of Yemen, for example,
has left 44 humanitarian projects pending approval.
On average, those projects have been waiting more
than five months to start. A key multisector needs
assessment has also stalled again in the south due
to shifting Government demands on how it should
proceed. Fortunately, food security surveys have been
able to move ahead and results are being analysed now.
Insecurity also remains a challenge in parts of
the south, including several recent incidents that have

S/PV. 8745

affected humanitarian action. We remain grateful to the
Government and local authorities for the support they
are providing on those issues.
My third point concerns funding for the United
Nations aid operation. Large-scale humanitarian
assistance has mostly managed to keep the situation
stable in Yemen and everyone agrees that the underlying
needs remain severe. The aid operation is saving
millions of lives. More than 13 million people receive
food aid and other kinds of assistance every month.
Preliminary data collected over the past several weeks
seems to confirm that this is having a pronounced
effect on countering severe food insecurity. But with
delays in key assessments in the north and the south, it
is not yet possible to quantify any changes over the past
year or to confirm whether or not there are pockets of
large, unmet needs.
As assessments proceed, we intend to roll over
the 2019 response plan to maintain the programmes
that have helped prevent famine, roll back cholera and
otherwise save millions of lives. That technical rollover will require considerable funding, although likely
somewhat less than last year’s plan.
We started this year on a very strong financial
footing. But income projections now show more than
30 major programmes will reduce or start to close down
by the end of April without additional funding. That
would disrupt core, life-saving services for millions
of people, including emergency food aid, treatment
for malnourished children, vaccines for children and
shelter for families fleeing conflict, among others. I
want to be clear that those cuts would be purely due
to lack of funding. That means that even if we see
sustained progress in removing obstacles to principled
aid delivery, we could still find ourselves up against
another crippling constraint — no money.
We want to acknowledge the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for co-hosting, with the United Nations, a highlevel pledging event in Riyadh planned for 2 April. The
event is an opportunity to show the world’s commitment
to the Yemeni people. It is also an opportunity to
reaffirm humanitarian principles which, in Yemen,
may include donors choosing to disburse pledges in
instalments as conditions for aid agencies improve.
My fourth point concerns the Yemeni economy,
which is a major driver of humanitarian needs.
Commercial food and fuel imports continue to enter the
country through all ports and in line with established

20-065475/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

averages. That is essential in a country where nearly
everything must be imported. However, fewer people
are able to afford what they need to survive, as the
Yemeni rial remains far below its pre-crisis value. In
the south, the rial is trading around 650 to the United
States dollar; in the north, the rate is closer to 600. A
dispute between the parties over banknotes is driving
a disparity in the two rates. Rapid depreciation of the
rial was a key factor in pushing Yemen towards famine
in 2018. The Famine Early Warning Systems Network
noted last month that it anticipates a steady depreciation
of the rial in the coming months and warned that the
risk of famine is expected to increase due to pressure
on market systems, including the exchange rate. One
of the most effective solutions to the exchange rate
problem has been foreign exchange injections to
strengthen the currency. We need a regular programme
for those injections.
My last point concerns progress towards peace. Now
is the time to take bold steps — such as opening Sana’a
airport — that will give the people of Yemen hope that
political dialogue, not war, will prevail in their country.
Humanitarians have been remarkably successful in
mitigating some of the worst consequences of the crisis
for civilians, but only a political solution can end the
crisis altogether.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): At the outset, I wish
to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting
Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham, as
well as both of their teams, for all the work that they
are doing under very difficult circumstances. We come
here every month and hear these briefings, which
normally swing between optimism and pessimism, but
we all know the underlying realities of the situation in
Yemen and the risks that the Yemeni people face. In
that connection, I have to say that I find it astonishing
that the kind of fighting that both Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Rajasingham have described today continues to
take place.
I want to begin by echoing both Mr. Griffiths’ and
Mr. Rajasingham’s pleas to all parties for the fighting
to stop and for de-escalation to begin. As Mr. Griffiths
said, the process must be public, accountable and
nationwide. We have to enter into more and broader
6/19

12/03/2020

negotiations that actually make tangible progress. The
United Kingdom calls upon all the parties to please
act in good faith, engage in the process and seize the
opportunity to ensure that 2020 is the year we bring
this dreadful conflict to a close. Mr. Griffiths has laid
out the road map to that destination and we urge the
parties to follow it without delay.
I also want to echo what Mr. Griffiths said about
his time in Ma’rib — the conflict cannot be solved on
the battlefield. In that connection, I wish to mention the
continuing obstructions placed on the Redeployment
Coordination Committee by the Houthis. I note the
announcement today that the Government of Yemen
has suspended its participation in the Committee. Less
engagement is not a route towards peace in Al-Hudaydah
or Yemen as a whole.
Again, the United Kingdom urges and implores all
the parties to constructively cooperate with Lieutenant
General Abhijit Guha and the United Nations Mission
to support the Hodeidah Agreement. There is one
positive development in that there has been increased
engagement between Saudi Arabia and Oman — at
least, that is how it seems. Increased dialogue between
regional actors is key for stability, not just in Yemen but
in the region as a whole.
Regarding
humanitarian
access,
I
think
Mr. Rajasingham is absolutely right to cite the issue in
the context of international humanitarian law. The fact
that the number of children’s casualties has risen from
one in five to one in four is shameful. It should horrify
us all and urge us to redouble our efforts.
On the difficult issue of the operating environment
for humanitarian actors, I know there have been some
small signs of improvement in the north of Yemen, but
much remains to be done. We call on the Houthis to
deliver on the minimum operating requirements that
the international community has clearly set out. The
world’s worst humanitarian crisis cannot be allowed to
deteriorate any further. We look to the United Nations
and the international community to remain united
in response to access constraints, which we saw was
possible at the helpful donor meeting in Brussels on
13 February. Any plans to scale back assistance should
be fully coordinated in order to limit the impact on
Yemenis in need.
I wanted to echo what Mr. Rajasingham said about
the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Again, it is incredible that
we come here every month and every month we hear
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

how precarious the situation with that tanker is, yet
nothing gets done. So, while I know negotiations are
under way to find a diplomatic way forward, I once
again call on the Houthis to either allow the removal of
the oil or allow a repair mission to proceed. Continued
Houthi inaction on this issue is nothing short of
reckless. They are playing dice with people’s lives and
the environment in a very important part of the world.
Such huge environmental and humanitarian damage
must be avoided and all steps must be taken to that end.
I followed with interest what was said about the
economy. We are very concerned that the Central
Bank of Yemen may run out of foreign currency
reserves in the next few weeks, which will of course
have dire humanitarian and political consequences.
Significant external financial assistance to the Central
Bank on the scale of $1 billion to $2 billion dollars,
we believe, is urgently needed so that imports can
come in. I heard what Mr. Rajasingham said about the
banknotes, which is obviously a situation that needs to
be resolved quickly. The currency needs to stabilize so
that ordinary Yemenis can afford the food and medical
supplies they need.
We look to the Government of Yemen to urgently
come up with a credible and transparent plan that
reassures potential donors of their investments to the
Yemeni people. Again, I think that this is an issue on
which we are drawing closer and closer to the precipice,
so we really do need to take action.
Lastly, if I may, I would like to say something
about COVID-19. The last thing Yemen needs is an
outbreak of that virus. I note the increasing restrictions
that many States are implementing in the region. It is
good to know that United Nations agencies are taking
steps to ensure that the effect on their work is as limited
as possible.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Today is
Ambassador Karen Pierce’s last day as representative
of the United Kingdom. I wish to thank her for her final
statement at the Security Council and, in my capacity
as the representative of China, I would like to thank her
for her outstanding contribution to the Council’s work.
I pay tribute to her. I also wish her every success in her
new post. She will be missed.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8745

Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): Since this is the last time
that we will have the pleasure to sit next to our dear
colleague Ambassador Pierce, allow me to also express
our appreciation to Her Excellency for her important
contributions to the work of the Security Council. We
wish her every success in her future responsibilities in
Washington, D.C..
(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for
their briefings.
Yemen has witnessed a relatively calm situation
recently, signalling the start of a positive breakthrough.
However, military operations have resumed in a
number of areas in a trend of escalation that gives
cause for concern, further complicating the crisis and
threatening the political settlement while obstructing
the implementation of current agreements.
The continued escalation has further exacerbated
the humanitarian situation and increased the suffering
of the brotherly Yemeni people. In the light of the
latest developments, my country’s delegation stresses
the need to reach an immediate ceasefire. We also call
for continued efforts to advance a political settlement,
which is the only solution to the crisis in Yemen, and
support the call of the Special Envoy for Yemen for an
immediate and unconditional end to military operations
and the start of a comprehensive and inclusive
de-escalation process.
We also renew our support for the legitimate
leadership of Yemen and for international and United
Nations efforts to advance a political settlement in that
brotherly country. My delegation also calls on the parties
to continue building on the outcome of the consultative
meeting held in Amman and efforts to build mutual trust
in order to start a transitional process in line with the
terms of reference established by the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanisms,
the outcomes of the comprehensive national dialogue
and relevant Security Council resolutions. That
would end the current crisis and restore security and
stability in Yemen, while maintaining its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
The Yemeni people are still suffering from an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The continued
fighting has exacerbated and increased the extent of
the crisis, including by displacing tens of thousands

20-065477/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

of people, putting at risk their safety, livelihood and
well-being. Tunisia renews its call for relief efforts
to be intensified and obstructions to the work of the
humanitarian organizations to be removed in order to
ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need.
We also commend donors and welcome the convening
of a pledging conference to finance the Humanitarian
Response Plan in Yemen, which will be held in Riyadh
next month in cooperation between the United Nations
and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
To conclude, my delegation stresses once again the
utmost importance of securing the access of United
Nations personnel and experts to the FSO SAFER oil
tanker to undertake the necessary maintenance. That
would mitigate the huge environmental risks that
threaten the region.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I too would
like to pay tribute to my friend Ambassador Pierce for
her devoted service to the Security Council and thank
her for her wisdom and partnership. While I will miss
her being seated to my right, I can personally say that
the Trump Administration is most excited to have her as
our ally in Washington, D.C., and I am looking forward
to seeing her frequently on my trips there. I thank her
for her service.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and the Acting
Assistant Secretary-General for their briefings.
Regrettably, little has changed in Yemen since we met
last month (see S/PV.8725). Violence has escalated,
including by the Houthis taking the city of Al-Hazm
in Al-Jawf governorate. We are hopeful that the
parties will recommit to de-escalation, followed by a
resumption of talks towards a political solution. We
urge full implementation of the Riyadh agreement.
When the United Nations is ready to convene talks, the
parties must be prepared to field strong delegations and
represent all Yemenis, including women.
Once again, we are forced to call specific attention
to Houthi obstruction of humanitarian operations,
which has become the unacceptable refrain of these
briefings. We reiterate our message from last month
to the Houthis — time is running out. We ask that
they please not make it impossible for us to continue
providing aid in the areas where they are present. Aid
obstructions are unacceptable and have already caused
many aid programmes to shut down.
We therefore urge the Houthis to take immediate
steps to meet all the minimum conditions for
8/19

12/03/2020

principled humanitarian operations before the end of
this month. Those include lifting access restrictions;
allowing unimpeded assessments and oversight of
projects; approving backlogged agreements with
non-governmental
organizations;
implementing
biometric registration; and maintaining the elimination
of so-called taxes on aid projects.
While there have been faint glimmers of progress
in negotiations with the Houthis, statements and
agreements alone will not save lives. We expect the
Houthis to demonstrate verifiable progress and a
commitment to ensuring the minimum operating
conditions for the principled delivery of assistance.
In the absence of credible Houthi actions to address
our concerns, the United States will suspend United
States assistance to Houthi-controlled areas in
Yemen at the end of March, except for certain critical
life-saving programmes.
We are actively engaging with other donors on
that effort to create a permissive environment for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance — consistent with
the principle of independence — in the world’s largest
humanitarian emergency. We continue to look to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
play a strong role in coordinating with United Nations
agencies and donors, as discussed in Brussels. We
recognize, however, that each agency must make its
own decision regarding the suspension or reduction of
assistance. The United States welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2511 (2019) on 25 February, renewing the
Yemen sanctions regime, and we reiterate the obligation
of all Member States to implement the sanctions in full.
Finally, the United States once again urges the
Houthis to allow United Nations inspection and
maintenance of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. In adopting
resolution 2511 (2020), the Security Council emphasized
the environmental risks and the need, without delay,
for access of United Nations officials to inspect and
maintain the tanker. We are grateful to the Special
Envoy for continuing to raise this issue in Sana’a and
we believe that an arrangement can be worked out for
the disposition of the oil. The Houthis must stop using
the FSO SAFER as a bargaining chip.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also first express
our appreciation for Ambassador Pierce’s outstanding
contributions to the work of the Security Council. We
wish her every success in her new assignment.
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

On the subject of our meeting this morning, I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their comprehensive
briefings and we very much agree with their plea to stop
the fighting and engage in de-escalation immediately.
That is the most important message and the most
important step that needs to be taken right now.
We are extremely worried that fighting in the north
continues and that military gains could lead to a further
advance of front lines and fuel a cycle of ever-growing
violence and escalation. An attack on Ma’rib would
be very alarming news. We urge all relevant actors, in
particular on the Houthi side, to refrain from seeking
territorial gains by force, which would jeopardize
the lives of thousands of civilians and threaten the
security of the 2 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs), which have found refuge in Ma’rib. There is a
significant risk of the fighting and violence in the north
impacting the volatile military situation in other parts
of Yemen. The recent air strike on Al-Salif, in the north
of Al-Hudaydah governorate, is a stark reminder that
the fragile stability in Al-Hudaydah and beyond needs
to be preserved.
We also agree with Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Rajasingham that all parties must adhere strictly to
international humanitarian and human rights law and
protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Women
and children are among those suffering the most from
the dire military and humanitarian situation. All actors
should alleviate their suffering and put the needs of
vulnerable populations first.
Mr. Griffiths has spoken about his efforts in past
weeks, calling for de-escalation, and we could not
agree more with that. We call on all actors to break the
cycle of violence and engage constructively and without
delay in efforts to de-escalate the situation. We very
much welcome and support the efforts of the Special
Envoy aimed at the establishment of a de-escalation
mechanism. His visit to Ma’rib last weekend, which he
mentioned today, sent a clear and important signal in
that regard and has our strong support.
For sustainable and lasting de-escalation, a
minimum degree of confidence is indispensable.
We therefore urge all sides to further engage in
confidence-building measures and to demonstrate
good will. We need to see implementation of the agreed
prisoner exchange, the continuation of mercy flights,
access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker and unrestricted

S/PV. 8745

and full cooperation with the United Nations Mission to
support the Hodeidah Agreement. On all these fronts,
much more needs to be done.
Confidence-building measures, as well as informal
meetings and exchanges among representatives of all
sides, as facilitated by the Envoy at the end of last month
in Amman, are crucial for the resumption of formal
political talks. We particularly welcome the high level
of women’s participation at that meeting, which should
set the standard for all subsequent talks. Political
leaders and their vision for a future Yemen must be
judged on their ability to provide a safe, prosperous and
healthy environment for all Yemeni people, taking into
account the diverse interests and groups in the country.
There is no alternative to an inclusive political process.
The slow progress of the direct talks between the
Houthis and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well as
the lack of progress in the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement, underline the urgency of a swift restart of
the political process under United Nations auspices.
The Security Council has a responsibility to call on the
involved parties to engage.
Before I conclude, I wish to say a word on the
humanitarian situation. Given the ongoing and
escalating fighting in the north, we are witnessing
further degradation of the already catastrophic
humanitarian situation, as we heard in this morning’s
very sobering briefing. Against that backdrop, it is even
more incomprehensible that the political leadership
in Sana’a is treating humanitarian workers and aid
organizations in a way that calls into question the whole
humanitarian operation in the north. We have tolerated
such increasing restrictions for far too long. As a result,
8 million people in need are not being reached.
That is absolutely unacceptable. We must not
wait any longer to send clear and hard messages to
the authorities in Sana’a. In that regard, we appreciate
the lead taken by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. Without respect for the
humanitarian principles and the safety of humanitarian
staff, life-saving assistance cannot and will not get
in. Therefore, we once more reiterate that it is the
responsibility of all parties, especially the Houthis, to
cease any harassment of humanitarian staff; facilitate
safe, rapid and unhindered access; lift bureaucratic
restrictions; and enable project agreements without
further delay.

20-065479/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic):
Ms. Pierce is leaving us, but not before having left a
deep mark on the Council. As a woman ambassador,
she has shown what is possible to the many women out
there who sometimes do not believe that there is a space
for them in politics and diplomacy. She has increased
the visibility of women in international affairs and
provided an example of bridging the gender gap and the
empowerment of women. We appreciate that, during her
tenure, she has strived to ensure that women’s rights and
gender equality were on the table and that our societies
are more inclusive and just. For that, we are grateful.
I congratulate her once again on her appointment as
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom to the United
States, the first woman to hold that position. Her voice
has always been an inspiration. It has been courageous
and has driven many of our decisions in the Security
Council, and I know that it will continue to do so in her
future endeavours. I wish her all the best.
(spoke in Spanish)
We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham for their contributions. We reiterate
our appreciation of their efforts, in their respective
fields, under the complex circumstances described in
their presentations.
I would like to highlight a few points.
First, we remain concerned about the increase in
hostilities that began at the beginning of the year and
which seems to be continuing unabated. In particular,
military engagements are on the rise, putting at risk
the political progress that has been so painstakingly
achieved. Tensions in southern Yemen are also a cause
for concern. The devastating impact of the situation on
the civilian population makes an immediate nationwide
ceasefire more urgent and the need for justice and
accountability more pressing. We are greatly concerned
about the growing lack of institutions and condemn
the arbitrary actions committed against civilians in
Houthi-controlled areas. We reiterate that the parties
to conflict have an obligation to respect international
law, including international humanitarian and human
rights law.
Secondly, the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, with the associated risks on the ground for
an already highly vulnerable population, compels us to
reiterate, once again, that all parties to the conflict have
an obligation to allow safe, unrestricted humanitarian
10/19

12/03/2020

access. The situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, for
example, is truly untenable.
As we had warned, there has been an unprecedented
outbreak of desert locust swarms in recent weeks,
including in areas that are rarely affected by that
phenomenon. The Yemeni Government has requested
a rapid intervention to support efforts to combat what
it considers to be a serious pest threatening food
security in the country. We call for support from the
international community in that matter. Yemen, as we
know, was on the brink of famine in 2018. If we do not
take immediate action now to counter that scourge, we
could find ourselves in a similar situation. The parties
must facilitate access to relevant organizations in order
to avoid an even more catastrophic situation.
Thirdly, with regard to the economic situation,
the Director of the Yemeni Banking Association has
indicated that banks cannot provide the population
with sufficient cash. He stressed that the problems
faced by the banks relates to the duplication of
banking and financial regulations between two central
banks in Sana’a and Aden, between which there is no
coordination. A solution needs to be found to alleviate
the economic situation in the country and avoid an
economic collapse.
The statistics that continue to come out of Yemen
about people who depend on humanitarian assistance for
their livelihoods, which Mr. Rajasingham has already
mentioned, are terrifying. We are talking about real
people. It is on their behalf, now more than ever, that
we must reach a broad and inclusive political agreement
based on mutual respect and full compliance with the
commitments undertaken. We reiterate that only an
inclusive, sustainable and credible peace process can
definitively open the door to avenues for development
and prosperity for the Yemeni people. We reiterate our
readiness to support Yemen and its people in achieving
that fundamental goal.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham for their
updates and for their committed work and unwavering
cooperation with the Council and reaffirm our support
for them.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply
concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation
in Yemen. At the same time, slow movement on the
political track shows a deep divide between the current
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8745

situation and a future of peace and prosperity for
all Yemenis.

appeal for access to be granted in order to avoid an
environmental disaster in the Red Sea.

However, we must not be discouraged. The Council
and its members are well positioned to influence the
course of events on the ground. It is clear that we need
a Yemeni-owned dialogue facilitated by the United
Nations, not military adventurism. The commencement
of such a dialogue should not depend on the
implementation of agreements but rather be geared
towards building trust and confidence and, ultimately,
easing the suffering of people.

We close with a call for de-escalation and dialogue,
with an immediate emphasis on saving lives and the
longer-term goals of rebuilding Yemen, addressing
underdevelopment and re-establishing the rule of law.

We acknowledge that the Stockholm Agreement
was able, among other things, to avert a crisis at
the arterial Al-Hudaydah port, and that the Riyadh
agreement addressed the immediate threat of fighting
in the South. However, to await further implementation
of those agreements before beginning peace talks
is tantamount to inaction. Without progress on the
political front, the conflict will not be resolved.
In the light of the urgent need to resume dialogue,
we underscore the role of the international community
and urge all States to encourage the parties to engage
constructively. We call on the parties to the conflict to
work towards a nationwide ceasefire, which would help
to create an environment that can facilitate positive
talks. As we seek to promote dialogue between the
parties, the Council must, at a minimum, strongly
discourage any actions that would jeopardize the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen.
Lasting peace can only be achieved through an
inclusive process that allows for the recognition of the
aspirations of all persons for whom peace is secured. In
our endeavours towards durable peace, we emphasize the
significance of ensuring an inclusive and participatory
process. Such an approach would strengthen the
social fabric and facilitate positive sociopolitical
transformation. The involvement of all groups is
critical for supporting and bolstering sustainable peace.
The importance of inclusion in addressing and defusing
underlying tensions that have ruptured the social fabric
cannot be overstated. To that end, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines encourages the unconditional creation
of opportunities for the meaningful involvement of all
groups, particularly the marginalized.
Before concluding, I must once again express
our concern about the continuing denial of access to
United Nations staff to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We

Before I cede the floor, and since this will be
the last time that we have the privilege of having our
colleague, Ambassador Karen Pierce with us in the
Chamber, I would also like to wish Ms. Pierce all the
best in her next assignment. We will surely miss her. I
had so welcomed the opportunity to learn from her vast
experience, knowledge and wisdom. I will cherish the
short time I did share with her and continue her work
and her methods. She makes all women proud. She is
our dame.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I too would like to express our sincere wishes
for the success and future professional achievements of
Ambassador Pierce. She has done a great deal personally
and as a diplomat to ensure the productive work of the
Security Council. We will certainly miss her.
We also wish to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and
Mr. Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for their overview of the
political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We
commend the work of our United Nations colleagues
on the ground in Yemen in the face of this acute crisis.
In Yemen, we continue to see a deadlocked political
settlement process, an escalation of hostilities and a
degradation of the humanitarian situation. We must
be aware that all those factors bring us closer to the
point of no return, after which it will be impossible
to put together a functioning unity of Yemeni State
institutions. Unfortunately, the data provided today by
Emergency Relief Coordinator Rajasingham cannot
convey the full magnitude of the bleak situation in
Yemen, where a humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding.
The conflict has already done irreparable damage
to the country’s economy. Recovery will require a great
deal of time and money. The people of Yemen have
borne the brunt of the devastating consequences of the
crisis. Most are hungry, need some form of assistance
and are unable to access the basic medical services
and treatment. The situation in Yemen therefore
requires the close attention and assistance of the entire
international community.

20-0654711/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

However, the Yemeni parties themselves must also
take steps to improve the humanitarian situation. There
is a pressing need to open the international airport in
Sana’a. We once again call for a negotiated solution to
the Yemeni conflict. The parties must exercise restraint
and eschew the use of force. The history of the Yemeni
conflict shows that militaristic approaches do not work.
Without a formula for a lasting comprehensive
settlement of the Yemeni conflict, the humanitarian
investments that are now critical to the population
of the country will evaporate over the long term.
Despite Mr. Griffiths’ mediation efforts, the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement has not
yet been achieved. The responsibility for that failure
lies with the Yemeni side. The Riyadh agreement has
also not been implemented.
It is imperative to unite around the Special Envoy
and assist him in his diligent efforts to engage with
all stakeholders and help them realize the futility of
trying to use force to resolve Yemeni problems. With
each passing day of war, the cost of post-conflict
reconstruction in Yemen increases immensely, playing
into the hands of terrorist groups that capitalize on
chaos and entrenching their position in the centre of
the country.
We reaffirm our full support for Mr. Griffiths
in his work to prompt the parties to the Yemeni
conflict to acknowledge that there is no alternative
to a political settlement. It is necessary to implement
confidence-building measures and establish a
comprehensive ceasefire. The Russian Federation will
assist the United Nations mediation efforts, including
through establishing contact with all political forces in
the country and other stakeholders.
We are convinced that it is still possible to reach
an agreement, in particular on confidence-building
measures, through the establishment of a comprehensive
ceasefire and the relaunching of inter-Yemeni talks.
What is needed is political will. We call on all parties
to proactively join Mr. Griffiths’ mediation efforts.
In conclusion, we stress that, like any conflict in the
Middle East, the conflict in Yemen cannot be resolved
by trying to point fingers. As history shows, that
approach only complicates efforts to resolve conflict.
In that connection, we once again recall the importance
of Council resolution 598 (1987), which called on the
Secretary-General to develop a security architecture
for the region, in cooperation with the States of the
12/19

12/03/2020

region. We draw attention to the Russian blueprint of
collective security in the Persian Gulf area, which is
aimed precisely at unblocking conflict situations and
developing confidence-building measures. The French
Government has also put forward useful ideas. The
Iranian Government proposed initiatives for peace as
well. Such proposals create a constructive environment
for improving the situation in the Persian Gulf region.
We are nearing the day when, exactly five years
ago, the bloody and, at the same time, unnecessary war
in Yemen began — a war that is costing hundreds of
millions of dollars every day. That money could have
been spent on addressing the challenges of countering
terrorism, developing the economy and dealing with
the threats of the pandemic. We call on all Yemeni
parties to renounce mutual accusations and to take
responsibility for the fate of their own State. We call
on the Yemeni people to urgently start negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations to achieve a
comprehensive settlement in Yemen in order to put the
country back on the path of sustainable development.
We want to see a peaceful and stable Yemen, coexisting
in peace and security with all countries of the region
without exception.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Envoy and the Acting Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for
their briefings and I reiterate to them France’s full
support. The violence that they described, the risk of
an increasing military escalation and the humanitarian
repercussions are a source of great concern. We fully
support their call for de-escalation and we reiterate that
only a comprehensive and inclusive political solution
can lead to a way out of the crisis in Yemen.
We deplore the ongoing escalation in northern
Yemen. It seriously jeopardizes the de-escalation
efforts made to date. For that reason, we call on the
parties to put an end to it without delay and to choose the
path of negotiation. The direct contacts and mediation
undertaken by the Special Envoy should make it
possible to achieve a ceasefire as soon as possible, in
particular in Al-Jawf and Ma’rib.
In the south, the Riyadh agreement, which we
welcomed, must be fully and rapidly implemented.
Beyond that, efforts towards a comprehensive political
agreement that is fully representative of all Yemenis
must continue under the aegis of the Special Envoy,
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

whose role is key in coordinating all efforts. The talks
must resume without preconditions.
Moreover, as we continue to reiterate at every
meeting, respect for international humanitarian law
is non-negotiable: it is binding on all. The protection
of civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure, must
be the top priority. Children accounted for a quarter
of civilian casualties in 2019, which is an increase
over the previous year. That development is of great
concern. All parties are obliged to respect international
humanitarian law.
With regard to humanitarian access, much
progress is still needed to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, including to enable the United
Nations to assess the needs. In addition, it is essential
that the United Nations has access to the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, which poses a grave potential threat to the
environment. An oil leak would have a devastating
impact on the entire region. We also share the concern
about the structural collapse of the economy and
its consequences.
France will continue to work tirelessly for a
political solution in Yemen and, more broadly, for an
easing of tensions in the region. Our authorities are
fully mobilized and committed to that end.

S/PV. 8745

military escalation and call on the parties to refrain
from any action that could jeopardize the progress
made towards the resumption of peace talks and the
implementation of the various agreements towards a
political settlement of the conflict.
My delegation supports the appeal made by the
Special Envoy during his recent visit to Yemen for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and the unconditional
resumption of the peace talks. Those talks must be
inclusive of all sectors of society, including women,
whose achievements we celebrate in this month
of March.
My country remains concerned about the ongoing
human rights violations and non-respect for the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law in a country where one of the worst humanitarian
crises in the world is taking place.
On 25 February, we renewed our solidarity with the
people of Yemen and our commitment to maintaining
international peace and security through the adoption
of resolution 2511 (2020) (see S/PV.8732). My
delegation expresses the hope that this new resolution
will play a decisive role in accelerating the political
process and overcoming obstacles to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

Finally, as it is our last meeting in the presence of
Ambassador Karen Pierce, I, too, would like to extend
to her the warm congratulations, recognition and
gratitude of the Permanent Representative of France.
In my personal capacity, I would also like to convey to
her my admiration. She is an exemplary individual, a
model diplomat and a source of inspiration. I wish her
the very best and every success in the new prestigious
duties that await her.

In conclusion, my delegation urges the parties to
respect their commitments and to build trust in order
to resume dialogue once and for all and to give every
opportunity to the political process, which alone can
lead to lasting peace.

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham for their briefings.

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian
Affairs
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their important updates.

On 18 February, Martin Griffiths sounded the alarm
about the consequences of a new escalation of violence
on the peace process in Yemen and the progress made
since last year (see S/PV.8725). Mark Lowcock, of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
was also not overly optimistic about a humanitarian
situation that is deteriorating daily.
Today, the picture that has just been presented to
us is far from encouraging. We therefore condemn any

I will conclude my statement by paying tribute to
Ambassador Pierce and wish her every success in her
new duties.

Despite the enormous efforts of the Special Envoy
and humanitarian workers, the situation remains of
great concern. That is of even greater worry today as
the world struggles with the coronavirus pandemic,
which is limiting the ability to travel and perform
normal duties. I hope everyone is well and stays healthy.
In response to the briefings, Indonesia would like to
highlight three points.

20-0654713/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

12/03/2020

First, regarding the political track, we are
particularly troubled about the lack of progress towards
the resumption of dialogue, as well as the escalation of
violence in Ma’rib and Al-Jawf. It is significant that,
until now, Ma’rib was untouched by the open conflict
and was a safe haven. We applaud the Special Envoy
for his quick response in visiting the area, thereby
demonstrating the support of the United Nations to
the people.

My delegation would like once again to emphasize
that all concerned must commit to dialogue before it is
too late and Yemen slips back into large-scale conflict
and even greater humanitarian tragedy. Measures must
be taken to implement agreements and avoid making
a bad situation worse. As we prepare to celebrate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, it is inconceivable to have a humanitarian
catastrophe reminiscent of the world war era.

Sadly, the violence has resulted in thousands of
people being displaced. My delegation echoes the call of
the Special Envoy for a halt of all military activity and
the start of a comprehensive, inclusive and accountable
de-escalation as well as dialogue. We reiterate our
position that the military approach or pursuit of
territorial gain cannot settle the conflict in Yemen.

Before concluding my statement, allow me to take
this opportunity to join others in paying tribute to Her
Excellency Ambassador Dame Karen Pierce for her
dedication, constructive engagement and contribution
to the work of the Security Council. For Indonesia,
it has been such a privilege to serve in the Council
together with Ambassador Pierce, not only during
our current membership but also during our previous
membership, in 2007 and 2008. We will certainly miss
her, and we wish her all the very best and success in her
next assignment.

Secondly, on the humanitarian track, it is evident
that the current fighting will impair the humanitarian
efforts to secure the displaced thousands of people.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned that the
hostilities may drive Yemen back to the high civilian
casualty levels of 2018. We therefore urge the parties to
abide by international humanitarian law in that regard.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, we also
urge the removal of impediments to assistance. It is
imperative that the Houthis also grant access for the
United Nations team to the FSO SAFER oil tanker
before it is too late. That call was made in resolution
2511 (2020), which we adopted in February, and we will
keep monitoring the situation.
My third point is on the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, including the Hodeidah
Agreement. It was a grave disappointment to read the
statement issued by General Abhijit Guha on 8 March
on the air strike in Al-Salif. The air strike illustrates
the fragility of the situation in Al-Hudaydah. As we
have previously stated, Al-Hudaydah is the centre of
gravity and the humanitarian lifeline in the country.
Parties must do their utmost to implement the
Agreement, particularly the ceasefire. We would
also like to reiterate the call by General Guha for the
parties to continue working through the Redeployment
Coordination Committee to ensure that the ceasefire
holds and that de-escalation continues. With regard
to the Stockholm Agreement, we similarly call for
its implementation, including the prisoner-exchange
agreement and the memorandum of understanding
on Taiz.
14/19

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): First, I would like to
join my colleagues in expressing my sorrow at seeing
our dear Dame Karen leaving us. As many people have
said, she has been such an inspiration. Her positive
and constructive approach to everything we do in the
Council has really been such an important lesson for
us — especially for us young members, the rookies. I
am sure I speak not only for myself in saying that we
will feel like orphans when she is gone. But fortunately,
it is a small world, especially when travel picks up and
the world is again connected, so not only do I hope but
I am sure that our paths will cross again.
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths
and Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for
their briefings.
We are very concerned about the ongoing escalation
in northern Yemen, with the latest clashes taking place
in Al-Jawf governorate. Another 70,000 people have
reportedly been displaced as a result of this latest
fighting, adding to the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Unfortunately, civilians continue to bear the brunt of the
conflict. As reported by the United Nations, during the
first two months of this year, the fighting has resulted
in the killing of 74 people, including 43 children, and
injury to another 107. We call on all parties to the
conflict to maintain the protection of civilians as a
priority and to adhere to international humanitarian
and human rights law.
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

We are also alarmed by the latest ceasefire
violations in Al-Hudaydah governorate. We urge all
parties to refrain from undermining the Al-Hudaydah
ceasefire and recall the importance of implementing
the Stockholm Agreement. We call on all parties for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and the start of
an unconditional de-escalation process. As has been
repeated so many times before, there is no military
solution to the conflict. Only a political compromise
that is inclusive, comprehensive and mediated by the
United Nations can lead to a lasting solution. Despite
the challenges, we encourage the parties to break
the cycle of violence and return to implementing the
existing agreements and confidence-building measures.
We also urge all international stakeholders to support
the Special Envoy in his efforts to bring about the
resumption of political talks.
As pointed out in the earlier briefings, humanitarian
conditions in Yemen are deteriorating. In addition to
lack of food and medical necessities, there are also
worrying reports about a possible cholera outbreak. In
this context, we welcome the readiness of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to host a high-level pledging event for
Yemen, on 2 April, in Riyadh.
Unfortunately, the delivery of humanitarian aid
continues to be obstructed, particularly in northern
Yemen, for which there can be no excuse. We
reiterate the obligation of all parties to allow safe
and unrestricted humanitarian access and to respect
humanitarian principles.
We also repeat our call on the Houthis to grant
United Nations officials access to the FSO SAFER
oil tanker without delay, in order to prevent an
environmental disaster. We also urge the Houthis to
grant access to the representatives of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Finally, we express our appreciation to those
members of Security Council who supported resolution
2511 (2020), extending the Yemen sanctions regime and
addressing several relevant issues brought out in the
latest final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2020/70).
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We wish to thank
Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings
this morning.

S/PV. 8745

South Africa remains steadfast in supporting
the work of the Special Envoy in his tireless efforts
aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the situation in
Yemen. We would like to express our concern about
the persistent and dire humanitarian situation and our
dismay at the recent escalation in hostilities, which is
hampering progress towards a political solution. We
remain concerned at the latest clashes, which come
after a months-long lull and relative calm, particularly
because the parties had displayed such sturdy interest
in de-escalation. It would be important for all parties to
observe a nationwide cessation of hostilities and return
to the negotiation process in an effort to work towards
a comprehensive and sustainable political solution
for Yemen.
We are particularly concerned about the impact this
crisis has had on the civilian population, specifically
as war casualties spike in such places as the Al-Hazm,
Ma’rib and Al-Jawf governorates. The war in Yemen
is having a disproportionate impact on Yemeni women
and girls, who are exposed to increased risk of violence,
exploitation and abuse. More than 3.25 million women
in Yemen are facing increased health and protection
risks. South Africa commends the efforts of the Special
Envoy and UN-Women to promote women’s inclusion
in the peace process through initiatives such as the
Yemeni Women’s Pact for Peace and Security.
We reiterate our call for the full implementation of
the Riyadh agreement and the December 2018 Stockholm
Agreement. We call on all the parties to the conflict
to allow free, regular and unimpeded passage of food
and other humanitarian aid and not to take actions that
would deprive civilians of their rights to food and basic
health services. In this regard, we remind the parties to
the conflict that all necessary measures should be taken
to respect the Geneva Conventions. We also stress that
the only sustainable solution to the conflict in Yemen
is a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement that is
inclusive and fair and puts the interests and well-being
of all the citizens of Yemen first.
As I conclude, I should like to join other delegations
in taking this opportunity, on behalf of the South
African delegation, to congratulate Karen on her new
appointment and to wish her well on her upcoming
duties in Washington. We will miss her friendship and
activism, not just in the Security Council but on a broad
array of issues around the United Nations as a whole.

20-0654715/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant
Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for their
valuable briefings.
Viet Nam is closely following the situation in
Yemen. We are deeply concerned over the recent military
escalation in Al Jawf governorate, which has claimed
the lives of dozens of civilians and displaced tens of
thousands of people. We were alarmed by the report
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) on the humanitarian situation that
has prevailed in the country since the beginning of
this year, with 24 million people requiring assistance,
including about 14.3 million in acute need. The new
wave of hostilities in northern Yemen has worsened
the humanitarian crisis. Furthermore, this escalation is
undermining the hope of the Yemeni people for national
reconciliation and peace. We share the Special Envoy’s
concerns, which arose during his recent visit to Ma’rib
province, about the potential risk of Yemen slipping
back into a large-scale conflict.
The pursuit of any military solution in Yemen will
only prolong the suffering of the people and further
weaken the whole country for many years to come.
There is no military solution to this conflict.
In this vein, at today’s meeting allow me to suggest
the following points.
First, all parties involved in the conflict must
immediately stop military action and return to the
de-escalation process towards an unconditional and
long-lasting ceasefire. We join other delegations
in calling for additional efforts to be made by the
concerned parties to implement all aspects of the
Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, and
we reiterate that only a comprehensive and negotiated
solution with United Nations mediation can bring
sustainable peace to Yemen.
Secondly, the parties to the conflict, especially the
Houthi, must take the immediate and necessary steps to
protect civilians and further facilitate the humanitarian
work of the United Nations and its relevant partners,
so that international aid can reach the Yemeni people
in need in a timely manner. We are grateful to the
United Nations, the World Health Organization and
countries of the region for their collaboration in the
launch of the medical air-bridge, and we are looking
forward to a more regular operation of those flights.
We welcome OCHA’s humanitarian commitment to
16/19

12/03/2020

Yemen amid concerns on operation hindrances. In that
connection, we urge all parties concerned to facilitate
the inspection and maintenance of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, in accordance with resolution 2511 (2020), in
order to avert possible severe consequences.
Thirdly, the United Nations and countries of the
region should continue to encourage the Yemeni parties
to engage in constructive dialogue. In this regard, we
commend the organization of the consultative meeting
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Yemeni public
and political stakeholders in Amman, Jordan, two
weeks ago. We fully support the work of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA) and the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, and we call on all parties in Yemen to further
cooperate with UNMHA so that it can effectively carry
out its mandate.
Finally, let me join other members of the Council
in expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Karen
Pierce for her excellent contribution to the work of the
Council. Her dedication and constructive engagement
truly set an example for new members like us. As the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, I would like to
express our thanks for her cooperation and very strong
support for Viet Nam and myself so far, and I wish her
all the best in her next assignment in Washington, D.C.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I should like to thank Martin Griffiths and
Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings.
Belgium shares the serious concerns voiced by all
delegations that took the floor before me concerning
the recent escalation of violence in Yemen. More than
ever before, the political process must resume. Any
de-escalation of violence will remain fragile if it is not
underpinned by a political process. The talks between
Saudi Arabia and the Houthi are a good starting point,
but at some point the Government of Yemen will need
to be involved in the talks, and the process must be led
by the United Nations.
The next steps in the political process must be taken
as quickly as possible, under the auspices of the United
Nations. The process must be inclusive and feature the
meaningful participation of women and young people.
It must also reflect the ethnic, geographical, social and
political diversity of the people of Yemen.
As we have heard, the operational environment
for humanitarian actors in Yemen, in particular in the
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

north of the country, remains very challenging. All
restrictions, obstructions and meddling, which violate
humanitarian principles, must be ended. We continue in
particular to call upon the Houthi to provide access to
the FSO Safer oil tanker in order to allow the situation
to be assessed and to avert an environmental disaster.
Finally, all the parties must uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law and, where
applicable, international human rights law.
(spoke in English)
Here I should like to add my voice to the farewell
remarks addressed to our dear Karen. Yes indeed,
we will miss her. It has been both a privilege and a
pleasure to work with her around this table, and, like
my colleagues, I would like to wish you every success
in Washington, D.C.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China thanks Special Envoy Griffiths and Acting
Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for
their briefings. China commends their active efforts
to end the conflict in Yemen and to improve the
humanitarian situation in the country.
There has recently been an escalation in military
operations in many parts of Yemen, which has had
negative impacts on United Nations mediation efforts
and political dialogue among all parties and received
extensive attention. In such circumstances. it is
imperative that all parties in Yemen strengthen their
political will and reach a ceasefire agreement as soon
as possible so as to create conditions conducive to
resuming comprehensive political negotiations.
The only way to end the conflict in Yemen is
through an inclusive and comprehensive United
Nations-led political process. Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity must be
safeguarded through the joint efforts of all parties to the
conflict in Yemen. The Stockholm Agreement and the
Riyadh agreement are the political outcomes of arduous
negotiations between the parties and should therefore be
implemented effectively. The signatories should honour
their political commitments, the countries of the region
should step up their mediation efforts and the United
Nations should also continue to play a constructive role.
We hope that a large-scale prisoner exchange can take

S/PV. 8745

place as soon as possible so as to enhance mutual trust
among the parties.
China has always maintained communication
with all parties in Yemen and will continue to make
diplomatic efforts to facilitate the narrowing of
differences and the broadening of consensus among
the parties.
China is also concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The Yemeni people face multiple
difficulties, including the threat of violence, severe
shortages of food and commodities, seriously
inadequate medical services and natural disasters. Some
humanitarian problems are directly attributable to the
armed conflict and therefore should be tackled through
humanitarian aid and political efforts, while others are
the result of economic instability, the degradation of
infrastructure and insufficient development capacity.
Greater attention should be paid to such problems, and
long-term economic and social measures should be
taken as soon as possible to address these problems.
All parties in Yemen should fully cooperate with the
humanitarian relief operations and relevant agencies of
the United Nations to provide humanitarian access. We
also hope that the United Nations humanitarian agencies
will closely follow the situation on the ground, including
the spread of COVID-19, in Yemen, and provide full
support and assistance to the Yemeni people.
China supports the efforts of the Government of
Yemen to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and has been
providing emergency food aid, medical equipment and
other assistance to the Yemeni people, through bilateral
and multilateral channels. An agreement on economic
and technical cooperation has been signed with the
Government of Yemen, and we will continue to deliver
more concrete services to the Yemeni people and make
constructive efforts so that Yemen can embark on the
path to peace and development.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
requested the floor to make a further statement.
(spoke in English)
My understanding is that she wishes to take this
opportunity to respond to the kind words expressed by
members of the Council.

20-0654717/19

S/PV.8745

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will not take up
much of anyone’s time. I apologize to Mr. Griffiths
and Mr. Rajasingham, who have had their briefings
hijacked by this attention.
I would like to thank everybody for their incredibly
kind words and all their friendship and cooperation and
that of all their missions during my time in the Council.
I am incredibly lucky to have been able to serve at the
United Nations. I am very proud to be part of the United
Nations family. I cannot put it better than my own
Foreign Secretary who says that the United Nations is
a force for good. I think we can remember that every
day as we go about our work. I thank everyone very
much indeed.
The President: I believe that all members wish
Ms. Pierce all the best in her new post. I am sure that
we will have many opportunities to see each other,
upon her invitation and that of Mrs. Craft. Once again,
I thank Ambassador Pierce.
(spoke in Chinese)
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you and your friendly delegation
every success.
As Ambassador Pierce prepares to leave us, I would
like to congratulate her on her new appointment. We
thank her and appreciate all her work and cooperation
and wish her every success in her new post.
The Houthi militias continue to block United
Nations peace efforts, including by refusing to honour
their obligations under the Stockholm Agreement,
which was sponsored by the Organization. The
Government of Yemen signed the Stockholm Agreement
in good faith with a view to ending the suffering of the
Yemeni people and as part of the confidence-building
measures undertaken to find a comprehensive political
solution to the crisis in Yemen. In addition, the recent
military escalation on several fronts, in particular the
military operations in Al-Jawf, which have led to the
displacement of civilians, are a serious indication that
the Houthi militias were never serious about achieving
peace and have, in the five years since they started
this futile war, been indifferent to the suffering of the
Yemeni people.
18/19

12/03/2020

The Houthi militias repeatedly bomb civilians in
Ma’rib, Al-Jawf, Nihm, Taiz, areas on the west coast,
Al-Dhale’e and Al-Bayda. For more than a year, they have
targeted hospitals and refugee camps and escalated the
situation while refusing to implement the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement. They restrict the movement of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement,
undermine the work of the Head and members of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and target
joint observation posts. Yesterday, a Government
officer, Colonel Muhammad Sharaf Al-Sulaihi, was
targeted as he was performing his duties at one of the
observation posts in Al-Hudaydah. He remains in very
critical condition.
As a result, the Government of Yemen has
suspended the participation of the Government team in
the Redeployment Coordination Committee. We hold
the Houthi militias responsible for what has happened.
Their acts are proof that those militias will not heed
the voice of reason and choose peace. The Government
of Yemen calls upon the Security Council and the
international community to shoulder their responsibility
and compel the Houthi militias to implement the
agreements concluded, cease the aggressive military
operations that have led to increased humanitarian
suffering in all its manifestations, and end the killing,
destruction, blockades and gross violations undertaken
in total disregard for the efforts of the United Nations,
the Security Council and the international community.
No political negotiation can succeed when previously
brokered peace agreements are not implemented. Nor
can one succeed while military escalation and economic
warfare are ongoing, while coercive measures are taken
against humanitarian workers or when humanitarian
aid is looted and diverted from those in dire need. The
Yemeni people’s desired goal is to achieve lasting peace
in Yemen on the basis of agreed terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and all
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). Any attempt to circumvent
these terms of reference or to overlook the root causes
of the crisis will serve only to prolong the conflict and
crush the hopes of Yemenis for the building of a new
federal Yemen, based on the values of justice, equality
and the rule of law, and the fair distribution of power
and wealth, while correcting all the wrongs of the past.
20-06547

12/03/2020

The situation in the Middle East

The Government of Yemen underlines its rejection
and condemnation of Iranian interference in Yemeni
affairs. Iran continues to supply the Houthi militias
with military support and weapons, encouraging
them to block and undermine United Nations efforts
aimed at ending the war, violence and terrorism. Iran’s
actions target the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, but they
also constitute a serious threat to the countries of
the region and to international and regional security.
The international community and the Security
Council should pressure Iran to end its interference in
Yemen’s affairs.
Following instructions from His Excellency
Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, the President
of the Republic, the Government of Yemen is exerting
tremendous effort to implement the Riyadh agreement,
which benefits the State, the Yemeni people and all
political actors. It is also an important step towards
unifying under one banner all forces and efforts within
the State to end the coup and abort the Iranian-Houthi
project in Yemen and the region. We value the efforts of
our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as sponsors
of the Riyadh agreement aimed at guaranteeing the
agreement’s implementation.
The Government of Yemen is sparing no effort
to try to end the suffering of the Yemeni people by
implementing incremental plans at several levels,
including revitalizing State institutions, improving
tax and customs revenue collection, resuming oil
exports — which had ceased for a period of more than
four years — as well as reactivating our financial,
economic, service and control sectors. These efforts
have helped us make certain strides in recovery.
The decision to block the circulation of new bank
notes in the national currency is a continuation of the
economic war that has targeted citizens’ livelihoods and
undermined the national economy by creating a vast
market for hard-currency speculation and exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis. This irresponsible decision
has deprived more than 120,000 employees and
retirees in militia-controlled areas of their salaries,
since payments could not be transferred to them. The
Yemeni Government has adopted various financial
and economic policies with a view to countering
the impact of that decision, but we need the support
of our brothers and sisters within the international
community, without whose continuous assistance and

S/PV. 8745

help to reform — especially in the absence of a vibrant
national economy — the situation could deteriorate
once again.
The Houthi militias have been standing in the way
of humanitarian work, looting and imposing levies
on relief aid. Their actions constitute a dangerous
precedent that violates all principles of humanitarian
work and aid and threatens to postpone the delivery of
assistance needed by millions of Yemenis. The militias
continue their acts of killing by targeting residential
areas and places of worship. They also engage children
in fighting their absurd war and arrest and sexually
assault women. This phenomenon poses a serious threat
to the Yemeni society and violates international law
and accepted social norms.
The Yemeni Government condemns the death
sentences issued by the Houthi militias against 35
members of the House of Representatives and the
confiscation of their real estate and other assets in
Yemen and abroad. Such rulings are null and void. It
is not the first time that the militias have issued such
rulings against political opponents and others, with
a view to financing their war effort. We call on the
Council and the international community to condemn
such practices and put pressure on the militias to revoke
the sentences.
Finally, we have come before the Council many
times to speak about the issue of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, moored just outside the port of Ras Isa, which
is under the control of the Houthi militias. We have
called for pressuring the militias to allow a United
Nations technical team to gain access to the tanker and
provide maintenance so as to avoid the environmental
disaster that would result if more than a million
barrels of crude oil leak into the Red Sea. Yesterday,
the Permanent Representatives of several Red Sea
coastal States addressed a letter to the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations indicating the potential risks of such an
environmental disaster.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

20-0654719/19
