General Assembly-Thirtieth Se11ion

64

to enter ínto such agreement, subject to the approval
of the General Assembly, and to arrange with the Preparatory Commission for the provisional application of
that agreement as appropriate.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

General Assembly, at its thirty-4irst session, proposals
?n the_ organizational arrangements of the special fund,
mcludmg draft statutes, in order to enable the fund
to become operational not la ter than 1977.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3504 (XXX). Special fund for the land-locked
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Rec{llling its re<;olution 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, by which it requested the Secretary-General
to submit to it, at its special session devoted to devel- opment and international economic co-operation, a
comprehensive study on the transit problems of the
land-locked developing countries and a complete study
on the establishment of a fund in favour of those
countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1755 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, by which the
Council defined the scope of a complete &tudy on the
establishment of the fund,
A ware of the recognized problems and •particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind the various resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and its related organs and by
the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of the land-locked developing
countries,
Aware also of the need to implement immediately
the resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and other related organs of the United Nations calling
for special measures in favour of those countries,
Reafjirming that the land-Iocked developing countries, as a result of their geographical Iimitation, are
doubly disadvantaged, especially with regard to their
additional transport, transit and transshipment costs,
Expressing its conviction that this adverse situation
has severely limited and hindered the development efforts of those countries, and noting with concern that,
up to this date, not enough concrete and effective operational measures have been taken,
Expressing its appreciatian to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for the preparation of the comprehensive report on this subjeot, 70
Having c'?nsidered the report of the Secretary-General on spec1al measures related to the particular needs
of the· land-locked developing countries7º with a view
to the establishment of a special fund,
Recalling its decision at its seventh special session
regarding the immediate establishment of a special fund
in favour of the land-locked developing oountries, 71
Reafjirming further the need to assist the land-locked
developing countries in accelerating and intensifying the
development of th~ir transport infrastructure,
l. Decides to establish immediately a special fund
for the land-locked developing countries to compen.xite
for their additional transport and transit costs;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to the

3505 (XXX). lntegration of women in the
development process

10 A/10203.

O/Jicial Records of the General /-,ssembly, Seventh
Special Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/10301), p. 10, itero 7.
71 See

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975
International Women's Year,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling further its i:_esolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 Sept~mber 1975_ on development and international
econom1c co-operatton,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3276 (XXIX) of
10 December 1974 on the World Conference of the
International Women's Year and 3342 (XXIX) of
17 December. 197 4 on "'.ornen and development, and
also Econom1c and Social Council resolution 1959
(LIX) of 28 July 1975 on the World Conference of
the International Women's Year,
T aking note of the principies of the Declaration of
~exico on the Equality of Women and their Contribut10n to Development and Peace, 1975,72 and the World
~lan of Action for the Implementation of the Objecttves of the International Women's Year, 73 adopted by
the World Conference of the International Women's
Y ear, held at Mexico C:ity from 19 June to 2 July
1975, and ~lso the _resolutions of the Conference relating
to the full mtegrat1on of women in development, 74
Recognizing that the results of the World Conference of the International Women's Year, in particular
the Wo~ld Plan of Action, indicate that the role of
~ornen m the development process must be made an
mtegral part of the establishment of the new intemational economic order,
·
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
185~ (LVI)_ of 16 May 1974 on the significance of the
full mtegratton of women in development,
A ~are_ that the economic value of the substantial
contnbution of women to over-all development has not
been widely recognized,
Recognizing that women, owing to the unequal treatment _they have endured, constitute a vast potential
force m. the process of economic and social change, as
well as m th~ struggle against all forros of exploitation
and oppress1on,
Emphasizing that accelerated development requires
~he real and effective participation of roen and women
m ali areas of national activity and the creation of the
nec~~sary condition~ . ~or equality of rights, opportumties and respons1b1hties for men and women

'

72

Re[;ort of the JJ;orld Co'.'ference of the International
Women s Year (Uruted Nations publication Sales No
E.76.IV.1), chap. l.
'
.
78 Ibid., chap. U, sect. A.
74 /bid., chap. 111.

Reeolutiona adopted on the reportl of the Second Committee

1. Recognizes that the World Conference of the
International Women's Year has established that improvement of the status of women constitutes a basic
element in any development process;
2. Urges all States to undertake the necessary
changes, as appropriate, in their economic and social
structures in order to ensure the participation of
women, on an equal basis with meo, in the development process;
3. Invites the relevant organizations within the
United Nations system, particularly the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, to
pay special attention to development programmes relating to women, ínter alia, in the fields of agriculture,
industry, trade and science and technology;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, on
the basis of information received from Governments
and relevant organizations of the United Nations system, as well as on the basis of existing studies, a preliminary report, for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session, on the extent to
which women participate in fields such as agriculture,
industry, trade and science and technology, with a view
to making recommendations on ways and meaos of increasing and upgrading the participation of women
therein;
5. Urges all Governments to give special attention
to the inclusion of the question of the integration of
women in the development process in United Nations
conferences and meetings on matters which have an
impact on the participation of women in development;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3506 (XXX). lmplementation of the decisions
adopted by the General Assemhly al its seventh special session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and -3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order and its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, which laid
the foundations of the new international economic
order,
Recalling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975, in which it set in motion the implementation of agreed measures in sorne important
areas as the basis and framework for the work of the
competent bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system with a view to facilitating the solution
of problems affecting the world,
Convinced of the necessity of achieving concrete
results through effective implementation of such measures and through the adoption of complementary actions in ali competent forums,
Determined to keep under constant review t1le negotiations and decisions to be taken in other forupis on
international economic co-operation and development,

65

Convinced that the full and effective participation of
the developing countries in deliberations and decisionmaking concerning the world economy is required in
order to achieve more equitable and more durable international economic relations,
Convinced also that the results to be achieved at the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the Conference on Intcrnational Economic Co-operation and the next session of
the World Food Council will give addcd impetus to the
efforts of the international communitv towards achievement of the objective of development:
l. Urgts all States to implement promptly the policy
measures adopted at its seventh special session;
2. Requests all organizations, institutions and subsidiary organs of the United Nations system to assign
the highest priority to the implementation of the measures set out in General Assembly resolution 3362
(S-VII) and to submit progress reports to the Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, within
their respective fields of competence;
3. Decides to assess the implementation of resolution 3362 (S-VII) at its thirty-füst session, with a view
to facilitating, ínter alia, the forthcoming exercise of
the revision of the International Development Strategy
for_ the_ Second United Nations Development Decade,
takmg mto account the consideration of this matter by
the . Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first
sess1on;
4. Requests in particular the Secretary-General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to submit an evaluation of the results of the
fourth session of the Confercnce to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, through the Economic
and Social Council, in view of the importance of the
results of the fourth session of the Conference to this
assessment;
5. Decides to utilize the report of the Conference
?n Jntemational Economic Co-operation, referred to
m paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution · 3515
(XXX) of 15. December 1975, for consideration
within the context of the exercise mentioned in paragraph 3 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to submit to the General Assembly, through
t~~ E~ono_mic and Social Council, a report on his part1c1pat1on m the Conference on International Economic
C?--~peration for the consideration of the Assembly
w1thm the context of the exercise mentioned in paragraph 3 above.
·
2 441 st plenary meeting
15 December 197'5
3507 (XXX). Institutional arrangements in the
field of the transfer of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
·
J!earing in mind section 111, paragraph 1, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) wherein it decided that:
