A/RES/70/236

United Nations

Distr.: General
30 December 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 83

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2015
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/70/509)]

70/236. Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its sixty-seventh session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-seventh session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and
codification of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the
Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development
and codification of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which,
given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be suitable
for the progressive development and codification of international law and therefore
may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new
topics for the consideration of the International Law Commission, and noting in this
regard the recommendation of the Commission that such proposals be accompanied
by a statement of reasons,
Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law
Commission of the information provided by Member States concerning their views
and practice,

_______________
1
2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/70/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

15-16990 (E)

*1516990*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/236

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session

Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the
International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with
appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Law Seminar,
Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of
the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on
the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth
Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commission as a
body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between
the two bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question
time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in General Assembly resolution 58/316 of
1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-seventh session; 1
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
work accomplished at its sixty-seventh session;
3.
Takes note of the final report on the topic “The Most-Favoured-Nation
clause” contained in the annex to the report of the International Law Commission,
and encourages its widest possible dissemination;
4.
Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work
on the topics in its current programme, taking into account the comments and
observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the Sixth Committee;
5.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views by 31 January 2016 on the
various aspects of the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all
the specific issues identified in chapter III of its report, regarding:
(a)

Protection of the atmosphere;

(b)

Identification of customary international law;

(c)

Crimes against humanity;

(d) Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation to the
interpretation of treaties;

2/6

(e)

Protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts;

(f)

Immunity of State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction;

(g)

Provisional application of treaties;

(h)

Jus cogens;

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session

A/RES/70/236

6.
Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their comments and observations by
1 January 2016 on the draft articles on the topic “Protection of persons in the event
of disasters”, adopted on first reading by the Commission at its sixty-sixth session; 3
7.
Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to include
the topic “Jus cogens” in its programme of work,4 and encourages the Commission to
continue the examination of the topics that are in its long-term programme of work;
8.
Recalls that the seat of the International Law Commission is at the
United Nations Office at Geneva;
9.
Notes that the International Law Commission, in view of General
Assembly resolution 69/118 of 10 December 2014, considered the feasibility of
holding part of its sixty-eighth session in New York on the basis of information
provided by the Secretariat regarding estimated costs and relevant administrative,
organizational and other factors, including its anticipated workload in the final year of
the present quinquennium and, having regard to all the factors at its disposal,
concluded that it would not be feasible for it to hold part of its sixty-eighth session in
New York without causing undue disruptions;
10. Also notes that the International Law Commission nevertheless affirmed
its wish that consideration be given to the possibility of holding one half session in
the next quinquennium in New York and indicated that, taking into account the
estimated costs and relevant administrative, organizational and other factors, such a
possibility could be anticipated during the first segment of a session in either the
first year (2017) or the second year (2018) of the next quinquennium;
11. Takes note of the recommendation made by the International Law
Commission in paragraph 298 of its report that preparatory work and estimates
proceed on the assumption that the first segment of its seventieth session (2018)
would be convened at United Nations Headquarters in New York, and takes note also
of the request of the Commission that the Secretariat proceed to make the necessary
arrangements for that purpose so as to facilitate the taking of the appropriate decision
by the Commission at its sixty-eighth session, in 2016;
12. Decides, without prejudice to the output of those deliberations, to revert
to the consideration of any recommendation by the International Law Commission
in this regard during the seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
13. Takes note of paragraph 299 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify
concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs, additional to those
provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;
14. Welcomes the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its
methods of work, 5 and encourages the Commission to continue this practice;
15. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity and to consider making proposals to Member
States to that end;

_______________
3

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/69/10), para. 53.
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/70/10), para. 268.
5
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10), paras. 370–388.
4

3/6

A/RES/70/236

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session

16. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take costsaving measures at its future sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and
effectiveness of its work;
17. Takes note of paragraph 309 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at
the United Nations Office at Geneva from 2 May to 10 June and from 4 July to
12 August 2016;
18. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
International Law Commission and the Sixth Committee at the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued
practice of informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members
of the Sixth Committee and the members of the Commission attending the seventyfirst session of the Assembly;
19. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission, to continue to adhere as far as possible to the
structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider
presenting concise and focused statements;
20. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law
Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to
enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
21. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on
which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in
written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
22. Takes note of paragraphs 311 to 317 of the report of the International
Law Commission with regard to cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and
encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of articles 16 (e), 25
and 26 of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the
Commission and other bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the
usefulness of such cooperation;
23. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
24. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission, including in the preparation of
memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Commission;
25. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and
summary records of the International Law Commission; 6

_______________
6

See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual reports
of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly.

4/6

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session

A/RES/70/236

26. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to
include the provisional summary records on the website relating to the work of the
International Law Commission;
27. Takes note of paragraph 300 of the report of the International Law
Commission, underlines the importance of the publications of the Codification
Division to the work of the Commission, and reiterates its request that the
Secretary-General continue to publish the Work of the International Law
Commission in all six official languages at the beginning of each quinquennium, the
Reports of International Arbitral Awards in English or French and the Summaries of
the Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice
in all six official languages every five years;
28. Stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of
the International Law Commission, and welcomes the continuation of the
experimental measures taken to streamline the processing of summary records
during the sixty-fifth session of the Commission, 7 which have led to a more rational
use of resources, and expresses its satisfaction that the summary records of the
Commission, constituting travaux préparatoires in the progressive development and
codification of international law, will not be subject to arbitrary length restrictions;
29. Takes note of paragraph 304 of the report of the International Law
Commission, stresses the unique value of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely publication in
all official languages;
30. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary
contributions to the trust fund on the backlog relating to the Yearbook of the
International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to the trust fund;
31. Takes note of paragraph 305 of the report of the International Law
Commission, expresses its satisfaction with the remarkable progress achieved in the
past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission in all six languages, and welcomes the efforts made by the Division of
Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its
Editing Section, in effectively implementing relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog;
32. Encourages the Division of Conference Management to provide
continuous necessary support to the Editing Section in advancing the Yearbook of
the International Law Commission, and requests that updates on progress made in
this respect be provided to the Commission on a regular basis;
33. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain
and improve the website relating to the work of the International Law Commission,
expresses its appreciation to the Division for the establishment of a new website for
the Commission, and encourages it to continue updating and managing the website;
34. Expresses its satisfaction to the Codification Division for the successful
completion of the digitization and posting on the website of the entire collection of the
documents of the Commission in Russian, and encourages the Division to continue to
pursue its efforts with respect to documents in the remaining official languages;

_______________
7

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10), para. 183.

5/6

A/RES/70/236

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session

35. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to
be held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
that an increasing number of participants representing the principal legal systems of
the world, including in particular those from developing countries, will be given the
opportunity to attend the Seminar, as well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and
appeals to States to continue to make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the
United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar
with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to
continue to consider ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar;
37. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the
debate in the Sixth Committee for the deliberations of the International Law
Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the seventieth session of the General Assembly, together with such
written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following
established practice;
38. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after
the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its
report containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the
specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to
the Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by
the Commission;
39. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the
International Law Commission available as soon as possible after the conclusion of
the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States with due
anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for reports in the General
Assembly;
40. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider
ways in which specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of
particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help Governments to
have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
41. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the seventy-first session of the General Assembly commence on
24 October 2016.
82nd plenary meeting
23 December 2015

6/6
