A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/69
22 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 18
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/53/23 (Part II))]
53/69. Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization,1
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular its resolution 52/79
of 10 December 1997,
Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options
of self-determination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to achieving complete
decolonization by the year 2000,
Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims
of the Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories to achieve self-determination,

1

A/53/23 (Part II), chap. III. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23.
99-76363

/...

A/RES/53/69
Page 2

Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with the terms of Article 73 (e) of the Charter of the United Nations,
Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on
decolonization,
1. Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken
by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat;
2. Considers it important to continue its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of
information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options of self-determination available for
the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Public Information to take
into account the suggestions of the Special Committee to continue their efforts to take measures through
all the media available, including publications, radio and television, as well as the Internet, to give
publicity to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a) To continue to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Territories, basic material on
the issue of self-determination of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(b) To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred
to above;
(c) To maintain a working relationship with the appropriate regional and intergovernmental
organizations, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, by holding periodic consultations and
exchanging information;
(d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of
information on decolonization;
(e) To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present
resolution;
4. Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to continue to extend their cooperation
in the dissemination of information referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.
78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
