S/PV.9052

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9052nd meeting

Thursday, 2 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rama/Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Singh
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Ms. Zeya

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Strengthening accountability
international law

and

justice

for

serious

violations

of

Letter dated 24 May 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/418/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36943 (E)
*2236943*

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Security Council, to Her
Excellency Mrs. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent
Representative of the United States, for her service as
President of the Council for the month of May. I am sure
I speak for all the members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield
and her team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Strengthening accountability and justice for
serious violations of international law
Letter dated 24 May 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Albania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/418/Rev.1)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
distinguished Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, the Marshall Islands, Morocco,
Myanmar, the Netherlands, North Macedonia,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Joan
Donoghue, President of the International Court of
2/33

02/06/2022

Justice; Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Dapo Akande,
Professor of Public International Law, University of
Oxford.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/418/Rev.1, which contains the
text of a letter dated 24 May 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Albania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Judge Donoghue.
Judge Donoghue: I am grateful to His Excellency
Ambassador Ferit Hoxha for inviting me to participate
in this signature event, which I am pleased to join via
video-teleconference from the seat of the International
Court of Justice in The Hague, the Netherlands. I
welcome this opportunity to share with the Security
Council and the broader United Nations membership
some reflections on the ways in which the Court can
contribute to the pursuit of accountability for atrocities
that violate international law.
Before I do so, allow me to say a few words about
Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade, who passed
away in Brasilia only a few days ago. Judge Cançado
Trindade joined the International Court of Justice in
2009, having already served as a Judge and President
of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, as
Legal Adviser to the Ministry of External Relations of
Brazil and as a professor at several universities across
four continents. Much more can and will be said about
the contributions made by Judge Cançado Trindade
to public international law, but I wanted to take this
opportunity to pay tribute briefly to a colleague and
friend, who will be sorely missed by the members of
the Court and international lawyers around the world.
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

I shall now turn to the remainder of my brief
remarks. Over its 76-year-long history, the Court has
decided a number of cases that involve injuries to
persons and property in the context of armed conflict
and widespread human rights abuses. Applicants
instituting those proceedings frequently invoke a desire
for accountability as one of their key motivations for
bringing a case before the Court. While there are within
the United Nations system a number of mechanisms
for strengthening the accountability of States, the
International Court of Justice plays a special role. Its
proceedings are public and are held on the basis of
established procedures. Its judgments and orders on the
indication of provisional measures are legally binding
on the parties to a case.
The limited time available does not allow me to
describe in detail the many contributions made by
the International Court of Justice that promote the
accountability of States. I shall simply recall that the
Court has had opportunities to pronounce on important
aspects of the legal framework of accountability,
including the relationship between international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
in times of armed conflict, the customary nature of
certain conventional obligations and the principles
of reparation for mass violations that occurred in the
context of armed conflict. The Court has also had
occasion to decide on the responsibility of particular
States for violations of those fundamental provisions
of international law and on the consequent reparations.
Before addressing the merits of any contentious
case brought before it, however, the Court must satisfy
itself that it has the jurisdiction to do so. In some cases,
the Court has broad scope to consider the litigants’
claims and any counterclaims — for example, when
both parties have recognized the Court’s jurisdiction
as compulsory, pursuant to Article 36, paragraph 2 of
its Statute. That was the case in Concerning armed
activities on the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v.
Uganda), during which the Court was able to consider a
wide range of violations of international law that were
alleged to have occurred in the context of hostilities
involving the two States.
In other cases, however, applicants have invoked as
the basis for the Court’s jurisdiction the compromissory
clause of a particular convention, such as the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, or the International Convention on

S/PV.9052

the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
In such cases, the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice is limited by the scope of the particular
convention concerned. The Court may therefore not be
in a position to address the full range of the allegedly
unlawful conduct that occurred as part of the relevant
incidents.
The Court took note of that limitation in two cases
arising out of conflicts in the former Yugoslavia,
in which its jurisdiction was predicated only on the
Genocide Convention, stating that,
“[The Court] has no power to rule on alleged
breaches of other obligations under international
law, not amounting to genocide, particularly those
protecting human rights in armed conflict. That is
so even if the alleged breaches are of obligations
under peremptory norms, or of obligations which
protect essential humanitarian values, and which
may be owed erga omnes.”
Accountability for atrocities is no doubt enhanced
when the governing law is clear and agreed among
States and where a mechanism is in place to ensure that
inter-State disputes can be adjudicated, in parallel with
proceedings in which individuals are held to account.
Those were among the concerns that motivated the
elaboration by the International Law Commission
of draft articles on the prevention and punishment
of crimes against humanity, which are currently
under consideration by the General Assembly. I note
in particular that the draft articles provide a basis
for inter-State disputes to be adjudicated by the
International Court of Justice or in arbitration, thereby
promoting the goal of State accountability in relation to
crimes against humanity.
Today, when armed conflicts and mass atrocities
continue to drive human suffering in various parts of
the world, I take this opportunity to remind Member
States that the Court can promote accountability
only to the extent that Member States accord it the
jurisdiction to do so. The adoption of a convention on
crimes against humanity would be one way to promote
accountability for violations of some of the most
fundamental obligations found in international law.
The Court stands ready to decide any disputes over
which it would have jurisdiction on the basis of such
a convention.
The President: I thank Judge Donoghue for
her briefing.

22-369433/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
Ms. Bachelet: I would like to thank the delegation
of Albania for organizing today’s important open
debate on accountability and justice.
Impunity fuels and intensifies many of the
crises currently on the Security Council’s agenda.
That emboldens perpetrators, silences victims and
undermines the prospects for peace, human rights and
development. Our collective experience has shown
that justice and accountability are fundamental to the
pursuit of peace and security.
I am therefore encouraged by the international
community’s growing resolve to fight impunity, through
the United Nations system and beyond, including
through a renewed focus on both State and individual
responsibility for serious violations of international
law. In that context, I am privileged to sit on this
panel with the President of the International Court of
Justice, an institution central to the common objective
of upholding the rule of law at the international level.
United Nations intergovernmental organs have
taken significant steps to advance accountability, often
with a specific focus on fostering individual criminal
responsibility for international crimes. The Council’s
creation of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
to enhance criminal accountability for the crimes of
Da’esh/ISIL was accompanied by the establishment by
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
of independent investigative mechanisms to do the
same for Syria and Myanmar. Through further action
by the Human Rights Council, there are currently no
fewer than 12 active specific human rights mechanisms
addressing various forms of accountability.
Today I would like to highlight three ways in
which my Office contributes to efforts to strengthen
accountability and justice for serious violations of
international law. First, the Human Rights Council
has stepped up its response to serious human rights
violations that may also amount to international crimes.
That includes creating mechanisms with mandates to
establish the facts and circumstances of violations;
collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse information
and evidence; identify those responsible; and make
recommendations
towards
establishing
future
accountability.
4/33

02/06/2022

My Office is continually strengthening its
support for such mandates, which we see as key
contributors to justice and the rule of law, including by
accelerating and streamlining the operationalization
of mandates. The work of those mechanisms has been
used by international courts addressing both State
and individual criminal responsibility, as well as by
national prosecutors and judges pursuing international
crimes, including under the principles of universal and
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
The conviction in Germany of Syrian Colonel
Anwar Raslan for overseeing torture at a Syrian
detention centre nearly a decade ago adds to the growing
number of jurisdictions working with diverse partners,
including vital society actors, towards delivering
accountability for international crimes.
My Office is committed to providing the support
necessary for each mandate entrusted to it in order to
operate in line with the highest standards of human
rights fact-finding, including through the use of modern
methodological and investigative techniques. Efforts
have focused on the gathering and preservation of
information with a view to increasing the likelihood that
it can be used in diverse legal proceedings; strengthening
the chain of custody; explaining and procuring the full
and informed consent of victims, witnesses and other
information providers in accountability contexts; and
ensuring the effective preservation of, and access to,
digital materials.
Secondly, together with the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General and the wider United Nations system,
my Office is working to enhance the Organization’s
support for national transitional justice mechanisms,
including truth commissions and reparations
programmes. An important element emerging from
such work is the need to tailor transitional justice
initiatives to adequately address, and comprehensively
respond to, the underlying patterns and root causes of
violations.
Our work indicates that, for justice responses to
be truly effective, they must be people-centred and
gender-sensitive, and seek, respect and acknowledge
the views of victims. That means, in particular, both
promoting the meaningful involvement of victims
and marginalized communities and emphasizing
their access to remedies and reparations, including
rehabilitation, with a particular focus on mental health
and psychosocial support. It also means supporting
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

national stakeholders, including civil society actors,
to identify innovative, pragmatic and context-specific
justice solutions to achieve tangible differences in
people’s lives.
Thirdly, my Office has been strengthening the
focus on gender sensitivity in all phases of justice
and accountability processes. In particular, we have
developed specific guidance on integrating gender
sensitivity into investigations and the analysis of the
root causes of violence and abuse, as well as on the
pursuit of gender-sensitive reparations, including
specifically for victims of sexual and gender-based
violence. In that regard, it is vital to meaningfully
involve women and girls, along with other victims and
beneficiaries, in justice and accountability efforts, as
leaders and agents of change.
One of the aims of today’s open debate is to work
towards establishing a global strategy for enhancing
the role of the international community in holding
States and others accountable for serious violations of
international law. To that end, allow me to put forward
some views from my own perspective.
First, enhancing the normative and institutional
framework will further strengthen the legal basis
for accountability and justice efforts upon which
national and international accountability actors can
build their proceedings. In my view, the adoption
of a convention on the prevention and punishment
of crimes against humanity would fill a significant
gap in the current international framework and
facilitate international cooperation in the area. The
relevant treaties that provide a jurisdictional basis
for accountability, including the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, deserve universal
adherence and should be ratified by all States, and I
equally encourage all States to accept the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in the
common interests of the entire international community.
Crucially, investigative and accountability mechanisms
mandated by the United Nations intergovernmental
organs must receive adequate and sustainable funding
and the necessary technical capacity to discharge their
mandates effectively.
Secondly, it is essential that efforts promoting
independent and impartial investigations, justice and
accountability have the Council’s support. In that regard,
I encourage further reflection on how the Security
Council, drawing on the full breadth of its mandate and

S/PV.9052

legal power, can systematically and consistently support
appropriate justice and accountability measures. In its
own process, the Council could also consider regularly
inviting briefings by investigative and accountability
mechanisms, as well as relevant civil-society actors in
the field.
Lastly, placing victims at the centre of accountability
strategies will contribute to the sustainability of
accountability and justice efforts. That is not only the
right thing to do in acknowledgement of the victims in
whose names these processes were created, it also helps
identify and address the conditions that led to serious
violations in the first place. Most importantly, that
means providing a space for the full participation of
victims and affected communities in all their diversity
to ensure that their voices are heard, including,
whenever possible, in the Council itself.
The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Akande.
Mr. Akande: My congratulations go to you, Sir, and
the Albanian delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council.
I would like to begin by noting that the international
community has made important strides over the past
few decades in putting the issue of accountability and
justice for serious violations of international law on the
agenda. A month from now, the world will celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the
first permanent tribunal established to prosecute and
punish international crimes. However, it would also be
fair to note that the commitment to holding individuals
to account for international crimes has wavered in
recent years, while the need for justice that can satisfy
the demands of the victims of grave atrocities has not
diminished. The reality that impunity increases the
risk of cycles of violence and suffering remains as true
today as it ever was.
In order to strengthen accountability and bring
about justice for international crimes, we need to see
progress made on two levels. First, it will be important to
develop some of the rules that underpin the prevention,
investigation and punishment of such crimes, and
secondly, we need a commitment to ensuring that the
institutions that implement those rules are able to do
their work and can function better than they do now.

22-369435/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me start with the progress that can be made
in strengthening the norms on which accountability
is based. It is clear that international law prohibits
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and the
crime of aggression. Those prohibitions are recognized
by all States and clearly form a part of customary
international law. There are also established treaty
regimes that deal with some of those crimes. However,
although crimes against humanity are clearly prohibited
under customary international law, there is at present
no corresponding treaty that establishes obligations
of prevention and punishment with regard to that
category of international crime. The International
Law Commission has developed a draft convention on
the issue that would express the obligation of States
not to commit crimes against humanity and create a
framework in which States can cooperate to punish and
suppress those crimes. States should begin negotiations
with regard to the adoption of such a treaty, which would
ensure that the framework for punishing crimes against
humanity is put on a similar level to those relating to
genocide and war crimes.
Most of the attention with respect to accountability
for international crimes has focused on the three crimes
that I have just mentioned — genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. But that is incomplete,
because there is a fourth international crime, the crime
of aggression, which often goes unaddressed, sadly.
The Nuremberg Tribunal stated that
“[t]o initiate a war of aggression is not only an
international crime; it is the supreme international
crime differing only from other war crimes in that
it contains within itself the accumulated evil of
the whole”.
Five years ago, the parties to the Statute of the
International Criminal Court activated the amendments
to the Statute that define the crime of aggression and
confer jurisdiction on the ICC with respect to that crime.
In order to improve the normative framework with
regard to accountability for all international crimes,
States should consider ratifying the amendments on
the crime of aggression so as to allow the Court to
be able to exercise jurisdiction over that supreme
international crime.
I now want to turn to some improvements that could
be made with respect to the institutional mechanisms
for delivering accountability for international crimes.
In my view, it is important to recognize that for
6/33

02/06/2022

accountability to happen, it will require efforts at
multiple levels in almost all cases. Some crimes will be
prosecuted by international tribunals such as the ICC.
However, the ICC can prosecute only a limited number
of cases. Typically, accountability will also be needed
in the domestic courts of the State where the crimes
have occurred and perhaps also in foreign domestic
courts exercising universal jurisdiction. In that regard,
it should be recalled that the Geneva Conventions not
only provide for the right of States to exercise universal
jurisdiction over grave breaches of those Conventions
but in fact impose an obligation to do so. The ongoing
situation in Ukraine shows how efforts concerning
accountability will often necessarily be multifaceted.
That is not a flaw in the system but an essential feature.
Let me now turn to the particular measures that the
Council could take to strengthen accountability. The
Council has a special role to play, given its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. The Statute of the ICC provides an obvious
vehicle by which the Council can bring about the
investigation of international crimes through referrals
of situations to the Court. The Council has done that
with respect to Darfur and Libya, and should take
similar steps where international crimes have been
committed and the ICC does not otherwise have
jurisdiction. However, referrals of situations of atrocity
to the ICC are not sufficient to discharge the Council’s
responsibility, because the ICC is dependent on States’
cooperation in fulfilling its mandate.
The Council can promote cooperation by States
with the International Criminal Court in various
ways. If the Council refers situations to the ICC,
there are ways in which it can enhance the referrals’
effectiveness, for example by imposing obligations of
cooperation on all States; not barring United Nations
funding for investigations and prosecutions arising
from ICC referrals; and not limiting the persons whom
the ICC may prosecute as a result of the Council’s
referrals. There are also a number of measures that the
Council could take to either promote States’ cooperation
with the ICC or address cases of non-cooperation
when investigations and prosecutions are under way.
For example, the Council could establish a process
to consider whether to impose targeted sanctions
on individuals wanted by the ICC. United Nations
peacekeeping missions operating in States that are also
ICC situations could, and perhaps should, be given an
explicit mandate to cooperate with the Court.
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, even where situations have not been
referred to the ICC, steps can be taken to improve the
prospects for accountability by ensuring that credible
investigations of international crimes are conducted
in a way that provides future opportunities for
prosecution at either the international or the domestic
level. The Council has established the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, and similar investigative mechanisms have
been established by other United Nations bodies with
respect to Syria and Myanmar.
The Human Rights Council regularly establishes
various commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions with a mandate to investigate international
crimes. However, with a view to improving the fulfilment
of the accountability mandates of these investigations,
proposals have recently been made for the creation of
a United Nations investigative support mechanism that
could provide a coordinating role with respect to the
various mandates that have an investigative function
or that could itself be triggered by a competent United
Nations body to carry out investigations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Prime Minister of Albania.
Let me start by thanking Ambassador Linda
Thomas-Greenfield of the United States of America
and her team for the excellent way in which they
conducted the work of the Security Council during the
month of May. I would also like to thank Judge Joan
Donoghue, the President of the International Court of
Justice, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Professor Dapo Akande for the
important information they have provided.
Differences of opinion, disagreements and
divisions are not unusual in the Council or among the
wider United Nations membership. They are a part of
life, including international life. However, they become
magnified if we focus only on the here and now, on
everyday politics and concerns about short-term goals
and narrow interests. But fundamental values still exist
beneath such arguments, and they are what brings
the international community together. They represent
the moral structure that makes the international
community a community, where the whole is always
greater than the sum of its parts. Such values and norms
are enshrined in what we commonly call international
law. They reveal their true meaning and their real power

S/PV.9052

in times of difficulty, crisis, conflict and war. And as
we know, they have not come easily. Tens of billions
of people had to die before we could discover and
accept basic principles of international law. States have
created a vast body of law to regulate their behaviour
and have voluntarily committed to abide by it. Millions
more have been sacrificed so that we could accept our
collective responsibility to abide by the rules and hold
ourselves to account when we are unable or unwilling
to respect them. Yet our basic values, enshrined in
a growing body of international law, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international criminal law, continue to be systematically
and grossly violated.
All serious violations of international law must be
treated with the same level of fairness and determination,
because they are part of the same problem. As expressed
in the wise words of Martin Luther King, Jr., injustice
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. And as
we reiterate that it is important to uphold our shared
values and norms, we are all aware that both are under
enormous stress. We know that when we fail to stand
up firmly and assume our collective responsibility,
when we fail to uphold the right to truth, to justice and
to effective remedy and reparation, our institutions
grow weaker and public trust fades away. We are then
left with frustration and impatience about our lack of
progress and inability to deliver, while the perpetrators
loom large.
War crimes, crimes against humanity and other
gross violations of human rights undermine the fabric
of entire societies. We have seen how they destabilize
States and jeopardize whole regions, threatening
international peace and security. The case of the
11-year-old conflict in Syria is a tragic example. In
failing to hold the Syrian regime accountable for its
crimes against its own people, we may have encouraged
atrocities elsewhere. But failure to address all violations
everywhere should not be a reason to act nowhere. That
brings me to the tragic and ongoing Russian aggression
against Ukraine. That reprehensible act has violated
everything the Council stands for — the values, the
norms, the law and the respect we owe one another
as responsible members of the same community of
nations. An unprovoked, unjustified and totally illegal
war has caused undue pain to the entire Ukrainian
nation. It has challenged European security, shaken the
global economy and is causing undue pain to millions
of people worldwide by exacerbating food insecurity.

22-369437/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

Horrible crimes are being committed and uncovered
every day. That calls for accountability. Crimes should
not and must not remain unpunished. Albania will
continue to be at the forefront of efforts to deliver
justice and deter further and future crimes.
(spoke in French)
We have to show, not just in words but through our
actions, that “more than ever” actually means “never
again”. We owe it to the millions of victims of genocide
in Srebrenica, Rwanda and Darfur. We owe it to all who
have endured atrocities, massacres and crimes against
humanity. We owe it to the countless silent faces who
are usually the invisible victims of unforgivable sexual
crimes, such as the 20,000 women brutally raped during
the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo of 1998 and 1999. We
owe it to the millions children whose lives have been
broken and who have been deprived of their futures
by armed strongmen. That is why it is crucial that we
firmly and continually resist every attempt to deny or
downplay these odious crimes. The glorification of
criminals and the denial of genocide are direct calls to
violence and must be condemned without hesitation.
(spoke in English)
We must do more to strengthen what we have
achieved and build new tools to address new challenges.
We owe it to our children, to the children of the world.
Accountability breeds responsibility. Responsibility
leads to action. Action reinforces justice. Justice
contributes to peace. Without strong and effective
accountability, our shared norms and values will
wither away. We must not let violations become the
norm. Perpetrators should have no place in our world
but only in their own, behind bars, just as happened
with Slobodan Milošević, Charles Taylor and their
like — those who put themselves not merely above the
law but outside the most basic laws of humanity. We
must make impunity history. Justice, that indispensable
companion of truth, must prevail in the name of our
shared humanity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Rajkumar
Ranjan Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs
of India.
Mr. Singh (India): Let me begin by congratulating
Albania on its historic, first-ever presidency of
the Security Council. I would also like to take this
8/33

02/06/2022

opportunity to convey my Prime Minister’s best wishes
and greetings to you, Mr. President, in your role as
Prime Minister of Albania. It is a singular privilege to
represent Mr. Modi at this high-level debate on such
an important topic. I would like to thank Judge Joan
E. Donoghue, President of the International Court of
Justice, and Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for their briefings,
and Professor Dapo Akande of Oxford University for
his insights into the issue.
As the world’s largest democracy and a founding
member of the United Nations, India has consistently
demonstrated its commitment to upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations as set out in its Articles 1 and 2. India follows
the path of dharma, or righteous conduct, whose
tenets are based on the principles of humanity and
humanitarian norms. We firmly believe that the rule of
law is an essential precondition for sustainable peace
and development in any society. Indeed, justice and the
rule of law are preconditions for the maintenance of
peace and security at the international level as well. The
objective of international law is to uphold the age-old
universal value of humanity. Any serious violations of
international law are therefore contrary to the spirit
and aims of the United Nations, whose Member States
have the responsibility and obligation to ensure justice
and accountability for the gravest violations of human
rights, as well as mass atrocities, in line with their
national legislation.
Given its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Council has
acted a number of times in the past to address serious
violations of international law. Alleged violations of
the Genocide Convention have also been referred to the
International Court of Justice. Those instances offer
several key lessons that are pertinent to today’s debate.
In that context, let me offer the following observations.
First, the tools for addressing serious violations of
international law should be used judiciously and without
any selectivity, in line with the principles of the Charter.
The international community should aim to provide
support to Member States’ efforts to ensure justice for
victims through an accountability process that is based
on nationally accepted norms and jurisprudence and
that should also promote national reconciliation and
an inclusive future. The International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra Leone
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9052

contributed to combating impunity while working in
complementarity with national justice systems, and
India provided financial assistance to their work.

community should not be coercive measures imposed
based on Chapter VII of the Charter. Nor should it be
seen as a pretext for humanitarian intervention.

Secondly, the referrals made since 2005 of
situations to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
and especially the haste with which they have been
made, have been the subject of criticism. The ICC’s
acquittals in recent years have also cast a shadow on its
credibility. Such developments appear to substantiate
the view that when cases are referred to the ICC
primarily for political reasons, the mechanism of the
Court may not be able to serve the greater purpose
of justice. Moreover, a number of countries in Africa
and Asia, including India, are not parties to the Rome
Statute. The independence of judicial bodies is a sine
qua non for the impartial dispensation of justice, and
under no circumstances should the discretion of a
judicial body be subordinate to any political organ. The
Rome Statute violates that cardinal principle because of
the authority it gives the Council under its article 16 to
defer ICC investigations and prosecutions.

Fifthly, the issue of accountability should not
be discussed in isolation or viewed from a narrow
perspective that considers only States that are alleged
to have committed criminal acts when in fact foreign
forces are actively involved in those acts, including
when they have physical control and a physical presence.
Those factors must be factored in when we discuss
issues of accountability. We must also refrain from
imposing universal jurisdiction on acts of atrocities
alleged to have been committed on the territory of a
sovereign State.

Thirdly, terrorism is the greatest threat facing
humankind today. It exacerbates social tensions,
pushing societies towards instability and violence.
We are indeed seeing a sad state of affairs with regard
to accountability, given the fact that State sponsors
of terrorism have been allowed to go scot-free. Any
discussion of accountability would therefore be
incomplete without taking into account the carnage
wrought by terrorist forces, particularly those backed by
State actors in the pursuit of political objectives. Having
suffered for decades from the scourge of cross-border
terrorism in which thousands of innocent civilians have
lost their lives, India has always been at the forefront
of global counter-terrorism efforts. The international
community should stand firm in its opposition to
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reject
any attempt to provide any justification for terrorist
acts. India recently provided financial assistance for
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Fourthly, decades of practice have shown that the
responsibility to protect cannot be invoked to address
all violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, but must rather be confined to four major
crimes — genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. Furthermore, practice has
also shown that the default response of the international

Sixthly, as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice has the role
of settling, in accordance with international law, legal
disputes submitted to it by States and issuing advisory
opinions on legal questions referred to it by authorized
United Nations organs and specialized agencies. The
Court plays a crucial role in the interpretation and
clarification of the rules and principles of international
law, as well as in the progressive development and
codification of international law. India has always been
supportive of the International Court of Justice.
Lastly, it goes without saying that an atmosphere
of inclusivity and transparency almost always helps
in strengthening accountability and achieving justice
for serious violations. Strengthening the fabric of
democracy is akin to strengthening guarantees against
serious violations of international law.
In conclusion, accountability for serious violations
of international law is a noble objective that should be
pursued with due respect for the sovereign equality of
States. The international community should always
encourage the States concerned to have in place an
inclusive and transparent process for establishing
accountability for serious violations of international
law committed in its jurisdiction. The pursuit of
accountability and justice cannot be tied to political
expediency. In order to succeed, the process should
be nationally owned and inclusive, with the active
participation of women. It should enable justice,
promote reconciliation and aim at achieving peace in
the long term.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Paul Gallagher, Attorney General
of Ireland.

22-369439/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, Prime Minister Rama, and to
congratulate you on Albania’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council and for organizing this open
debate. I also want to thank our excellent briefers for
their presentations this morning.
I want to begin by offering my deepest condolences
to the family and colleagues of Judge Cançado
Trindade, of the International Court of Justice, on his
passing. His contributions in the field of international
law will always be remembered.
When Ireland’s term on the Security Council began
last year, we outlined three priority issues that we
wanted to promote. One of them was accountability,
and in particular the question of how to ensure more
effective accountability. By accountability, we mean
not just the criminal accountability of individuals for
the commission of atrocity crimes, but also the political
and legal accountability of States for their behaviour,
especially in breaches of their international obligations.
The criminal accountability of individuals is particularly
important. When the perpetrators of atrocities go
unpunished, they are emboldened, and cycles of violence
are perpetuated. Indeed, in recent years we have seen
that failure to ensure criminal accountability leads to
a sense of impunity, and the resulting accountability
gap for atrocity crimes has undoubtedly exacerbated
the ongoing conflicts in Yemen, Syria and Myanmar. I
therefore welcome the fact that in the past three months
we have seen the operationalization of mechanisms
to ensure criminal accountability at the domestic,
regional and international levels in support of the calls
for justice in Ukraine.
Ireland was one of 41 States that quickly referred
the situation in Ukraine to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). National prosecution services were
mobilized across Europe, and the International
Criminal Court has deployed a team of 42 investigators,
forensic experts and support personnel to Ukraine to
investigate crimes and support the relevant Ukrainian
authorities. We are also encouraged by the Human
Rights Council’s establishment of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine.
Those initiatives demonstrate significant, and welcome,
coordination between the relevant authorities. We
encourage the continuation of this comprehensive
approach to the pursuit of accountability. If we are to
achieve justice for victims and survivors, it is essential
that we ensure that this momentum is maintained and
10/33

02/06/2022

that the investigations ultimately result in fair and
impartial criminal prosecutions where there is evidence
to support them.
But we must not shy away from assessing the
gaps that those actions reveal, including the Security
Council’s lack of action. In the past, we have seen what
the Council can achieve in the realm of accountability
through its referral of the situations in Darfur and
Libya to the ICC. That action by the Council has now
led to the opening of the first prosecution at the ICC
arising from the investigation of the situation in Darfur,
against former Janjaweed commander Ali Muhammad
Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, for war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
We must also consider how the Council can ensure
stronger implementation of its own resolutions. For
example, in the case of resolution 2417 (2018), we already
have the tools to ensure accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and the use of starvation
as a weapon of war. We just need the collective political
will to use them. But too often the Council has refused
to act, almost always because of the exercise of a veto
by one of its permanent members. That is why the
Council must be held to account. The use of the veto
to prevent the Council from acting to deal with atrocity
crimes cannot be justified. Ireland was part of the
core group supporting the General Assembly’s recent
successful adoption of a veto initiative (resolution
76/262). It means that any permanent member of the
Security Council using the veto will have to account
for that use to all members of the United Nations in the
General Assembly. We look forward to the Assembly’s
first debate under that resolution next week.
We must also look for other means of strengthening
accountability. That is why Ireland stands firmly
in support of the International Criminal Court in
seeking to ensure that those responsible for the most
serious crimes of international concern cannot act with
impunity. It is why we continue to promote universal
adherence to the Rome Statute. Later this month,
Ireland will host an Arria Formula meeting to mark
the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of
the Rome Statute, and to reflect on the relationship
between the ICC and the Security Council. It is why
we advocate for formulating a convention on crimes
against humanity and believe in the need to strengthen
international cooperation on the most serious crimes,
including through the mutual legal assistance treaty
currently being negotiated.
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ireland shares President Donoghue’s view that
the International Court of Justice is central to the
maintenance and strengthening of an international order
based on the rule of law. Our own Constitution affirms
Ireland’s adherence to the principle of the pacific
settlement of international disputes by international
arbitration or judicial determination, and we therefore
firmly believe in the value of the Court’s role in helping
to prevent conflict between States. We therefore urge
all members of the United Nations, and especially
Council members, to accept the Court’s compulsory
jurisdiction, and we call on the Council to strengthen
its cooperation with the Court.
The various accountability mechanisms I have
mentioned this morning all play an important role
in supporting respect for international law. Without
effective accountability, some will believe that there
are no consequences for violations of international law.
That threatens to undermine respect for international
law. I am sure that no member of the Council wishes
for us to reach that point, and so we can all agree
that effective accountability provides an essential
foundation for a rules-based international order that
guarantees the rights of both individuals and States.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Uzra Zeya, Under Secretary of State
for Civilian Security, Democracy and Human Rights of
the United States of America.
Ms. Zeya (United States of America): I want to
thank you, Prime Minister Rama, for giving me the floor
today. I would also like to welcome Albania on the start
of its Security Council presidency, and thank you, Sir,
more broadly, for the leadership role that Albania has
played in the pursuit of accountability. Let me also join
others today in extending our appreciation to President
Donoghue, High Commissioner Bachelet and Professor
Akande for their briefings. I would also like to express
on behalf of the United States my deepest condolences
on the passing of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado
Trindade, who ably served on the International Court
of Justice since 2009. He will be dearly missed.
The United States will continue to be a strong
supporter of meaningful accountability and justice
for the victims of atrocities through appropriate
mechanisms. Justice, accountability and the rule of law
are values we share, and we continue to believe that
they are best advanced together. Genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, conflict-related sexual

S/PV.9052

violence and other gross violations of human rights law
and serious violations of international humanitarian
law undermine societies, destabilize nations and entire
regions and threaten international peace and security.
For the victims of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, urgency is an essential element in
seeking justice. By holding perpetrators to account for
their crimes, a measure of justice is provided to the
victims and the loved ones they left behind. Holding
perpetrators to account can also deter further atrocities.
Unfortunately, we cannot have a discussion on
accountability without acknowledging that nearly
a hundred have days have now passed since Russia’s
unprovoked attack on Ukraine. In that time, we have
witnessed Russian forces bombing maternity hospitals,
train stations, apartment buildings and homes, and
civilians have been killed even while bicycling down
streets. We have received credible reports of Russian
forces torturing and committing execution-style
killings of people with their hands bound behind their
backs. We have received reports of women and girls
being raped, some publicly, and children taken away
to Russia and put up for adoption. And we know that
Russian forces continue to deny safe passage to civilians
fleeing violence and to humanitarian organizations
trying to reach those in need. Russia also continues
to flagrantly disregard the International Court of
Justice’s order of 16 March, which requires Russia to
immediately suspend its military operations in Ukraine.
That type of unprovoked assault on sovereignty and
the international rules-based order is exactly what the
Security Council was created to prevent. Those who
perpetrated those crimes must be held to account. Our
message to Russia’s military and political leadership
is that the world is watching them, and they will be
held accountable.
The United States is working with our allies to
support a broad range of international investigations
into atrocities in Ukraine. The European Democratic
Resilience Initiative, which President Biden announced
in March, will provide up to $320 million in new funding
to support societal resilience and defend human rights
in Ukraine, with a particular focus on accountability
for war crimes and other atrocities committed by
Russia’s forces in Ukraine. As part of that initiative, we
have created a new Conflict Observatory programme to
provide a platform to document, verify and disseminate
open-source evidence of Russia’s human rights abuses
and war crimes. That information will be collected and

22-3694311/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

preserved consistent with international legal standards
for use in ongoing and future accountability efforts,
including potential civil and criminal legal processes.
The evidence database will be available to others
engaged in documentation efforts, as well as to domestic
and international justice mechanisms, for their use in
making data-based decisions and determinations in
pursuit of justice and accountability.
In addition, on 25 May, the United States, in
partnership with the United Kingdom and the European
Union, announced the Atrocity Crimes Advisory Group
for Ukraine to ensure the efficient coordination of
support for accountability efforts in the country. That is
a demonstration of international support and solidarity
during this crucial moment in Ukraine’s history. As
Secretary of State Blinken said, the initiative will
directly support efforts of the Office of the ProsecutorGeneral of Ukraine to document, preserve and analyse
evidence of war crimes and other atrocities committed
by members of Russia’s forces in Ukraine, with a view
towards criminal prosecutions.
We are also supporting a broad range of
international investigations into atrocities in Ukraine.
Such investigations include those conducted by the
International Criminal Court, the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. That includes supporting the establishment of
the Human Rights Council’s commission of inquiry,
and we look forward to hearing more from High
Commissioner Bachelet about its work.
We know too that while the war in Ukraine rages,
other atrocities have been and still are being perpetrated
around the world, including in Syria, the People’s
Republic of China, Burma, Ethiopia and Afghanistan.
We must not lose sight of them or their victims and
survivors. The United States is supporting investigative
mechanisms such as the Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar, to which we have provided
a new $1 million donation. We have also provided
support to the Sri Lanka accountability project. In
addition to our support for many of the International
Criminal Court’s open investigations, we are funding
capacity-building for the hybrid Special Criminal Court
in the Central African Republic. We are also looking
for ways to support cases being brought to domestic
courts around the world, such as the groundbreaking
prosecution of Anwar Raslan in Germany, which
resulted in his conviction of crimes against humanity.
12/33

02/06/2022

Finally, we recognize the contributions of the
International Court of Justice to the realization of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. Given
the breadth of work we face, we look forward to today’s
discussion to explore ways to develop and strengthen
accountability mechanisms at the State, regional and
international levels. We must also bring necessary focus
to victims and survivors. Establishing the truth about
international crimes is essential to restoring their rights
and dignity and ensuring the same for their relatives,
as well as obtaining remedies for the harm victims
and survivors have suffered. Effective accountability
measures for those who are ordering and committing
atrocities will make clear that those who engage in
brutality will not enjoy impunity. Together with our
allies and partners, we are united in our resolve to bring
perpetrators to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Lana Nusseibeh, Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates to the
United Nations and Assistant Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation for Political
Affairs of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to add my voice to those who have congratulated
Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield and the
delegation of the United States for their very successful
presidency of the Security Council in May. We offer
our full support to Albania for its presidency this month
and welcome your presence, Prime Minister Rama, and
your country’s choice of this important topic for your
first signature debate.
I join others in thanking the Judge Joan Donoghue,
President of the International Court of Justice, for her
detailed briefing and for the critical work of the primary
judicial organ of the United Nations. I also thank the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, for her remarks. Her briefing today reminds
us all of the importance of her mandate and the work
that she and her Office undertake within the United
Nations system to promote and protect human rights. I
would also like to thank Professor Dapo Akande for his
expert briefing, which provided much food for thought.
This year alone, we have met in this Chamber
countless times to hear accounts of horrific crimes
from conflicts from across all regions. And although
those most affected by such crimes may differ in their
geography and circumstances, they are nevertheless
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9052

united in their call for justice — a concept that is
rooted in all cultures and traditions. Indeed, the very
first line of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
recognizes that justice, together with freedom and
peace, are the universal ideals that we seek to achieve
through recognition of the equality, inherent dignity and
inalienable rights of all persons. We therefore commend
Albania for its initiative to focus our attention today on
a matter that not only lies at the heart of the Security
Council’s mandate but is also an inherent feature of the
human condition: the desire — the need — for justice
and accountability so that rights are vindicated, and
wrongs prevented and punished. That is a sensibility so
innate to the human experience that children understand
it and can convey it almost before they can talk.

that we can all subscribe to that moves us forward
together. At the same time, we uphold these norms and
rules most successfully and efficiently through our
national State systems, applying these agreements in
these international bodies in our national contexts. The
United Arab Emirates believes that the development of
international law is therefore an essential part of our
collective evolution as an international system. Much
of the focus today will rightly argue for the evolution
of our institutions and mechanisms, to which we fully
subscribe. But we would like to make the following
observations on how we can strengthen accountability
for international crimes, highlighting three practical
considerations and using powerful local examples
and contexts.

We know the harm caused by serious crimes is
profound and enduring. In addition to the unbearable
pain and trauma that victims and survivors suffer,
these crimes tear apart the social fabric and destroy the
trust that should exist between communities, between
citizens and their Governments, and between States.
The widespread and systematic commission of serious
crimes also undermines trust in the frameworks and
institutions established to maintain peace and security
and to protect those rights.

First and foremost, because deepening trust in
national systems through capacity-building is a more
sustainable and longer-term strategy to upholding
international law, that should be reflected in how we
fund and allocate resources to our respective national
institutions. The last 30 years have provided useful
examples of effective domestic justice mechanisms
that are often best placed to navigate cultural issues
and practical challenges in these environments. These
go from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
in South Africa to, most recently, Colombia’s Truth
Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Those real-life examples demonstrate that national
ownership of accountability efforts allows States the
opportunity to re-establish the confidence of citizens in
their public institutions and reckon with their societies’
collective trauma. Before thinking of imposing outside
initiatives, let us build on the endogenous solutions
developed by local communities.

There is no viable alternative to the Westphalian
nation-State system in which we all coexist, but at
the same time, sovereign State systems do not shield
countries from international law or from responsibility.
Rather, they strengthen international law for the benefit
of States, their people and the international community.
When applied fairly, international law articulates State
sovereignty; it does not undermine it. It is when it is
misapplied or politicized that double standards emerge.
Accountability cannot be looked at solely as an
international mechanism at the expense of a domestic
answer. International and domestic rule of law are the
right and left hands of justice. The key to achieving
an effective global culture of accountability is a
balancing act that upholds universal standards while
serving to strengthen State cohesion and its capacity to
wield justice.
We all subscribe to the idea that international normsetting is beneficial and that there is value in reaching
a shared understanding of rules and best practices. It
is something that we do every day in this building.
We debate an issue, each with our own perspectives,
cultural contexts and interests, and we reach an outcome

Similarly, there is much to be learned from the
Security Council’s approach in establishing the
mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
in close partnership with the Iraqi Government, to
collect, preserve and store evidence in Iraq of atrocities
committed by Da’esh. UNITAD offers a model of
how the Security Council can work in partnership
with impacted States to strengthen domestic laws
and national prosecutions of international crimes.
Crucially, that includes building capacity in relation to
sexual and gender-based crimes that requires particular
capabilities. The United Arab Emirates is proud to
have financially contributed to the investigative efforts

22-3694313/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

of UNITAD’s Sexual and Gender-Based Crimes and
Crimes against Children Unit. In this very Chamber,
Ms. Nadia Murad has told us countless times and
compelled us to fight injustice, protect victims and hold
perpetrators accountable for their crimes. Today I think
we are making that fact a reality.
Secondly, the Security Council should leverage
the full toolkit at its disposal to maximize its impact.
For example, over centuries, sexual violence has been
used, and continues to be used, as a tactic of war, terror
and repression. Today, however, the Security Council
has a broad range of mechanisms that can be deployed
to address this crime. Yet the use of sanctions by the
Council to address sexual violence remains inconsistent
and insufficient. Several sanctions regimes still do not
include sexual violence as a specific and stand-alone
criterion for designation. Individuals listed for such
crimes are too few. What a powerful message it would
send to potential offenders if the Security Council were
to step up and employ to their full extent the tools it
already has at its disposal to advance accountability for
sexual violence. This could include listing individuals
who order, perpetrate or incite sexual violence. The
stigmatization impact of sanctions for sexual violence
would not only be a step forward in accountability but
would serve as a powerful deterrent. Inaction is not an
option when the actions we can take are so clearly in
front of us.
Thirdly, trust in the information we rely on in seeking
accountability has been eroded in our digital age where
misinformation and disinformation are so prevalent.
Our response to allegations of crimes cannot ignore that
reality. At the same time, the rapid development of new
technologies has proven invaluable in investigative and
accountability processes. The deployment of cuttingedge technology can indeed facilitate the collection,
analysis and security of evidence. We need to also
bear in mind the challenges of using only a digital
approach. We welcome UNITAD’s innovative practices
and its development of a digital data factory based on
artificial intelligence and machine learning to process
and enhance evidence collection. Those advances have
also empowered citizens to document crimes through
means that are increasingly admissible in courts. That
is all to the good.
An excessive reliance on technology, however,
could weaken a victim-centred approach to justice.
The United Arab Emirates has previously spoken
about the digital divide in this Chamber with over a
14/33

02/06/2022

third of the world’s population having never used the
Internet. There is a risk of creating a two-tier system
of accountability that privileges victims in areas with
access to Internet and technology while marginalizing
others. We would therefore welcome further discussion
on how we can maximize the use of technology while
mitigating its potential effects and ensuring that such a
two-tier system of access does not emerge.
I would like to conclude where we began. The
concepts of accountability, justice and fairness
are universal and should unite the international
community — not divide us. While the achievement of
a perfectly just society may be unattainable, our search
for accountability should be within reach. Today we
have shared practical examples that get us closer to
that objective, and we will continue to support efforts
to strengthen accountability and justice for these most
serious violations of international law.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor. I also thank you for gracing
us with your presence at this open debate of the
Security Council. I congratulate Albania on its historic
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month.
Kenya also thanks the delegation of the United States
for its responsible and professional leadership of the
Council in May. I thank Judge Joan Donoghue, President
of the International Court of Justice, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Professor Dapo Akande for sharing
their insights.
The sad reality of the world today is most acutely
expressed by the words of Thucydides:
“The strong do what they can, and the weak suffer
what they must.”
He wrote that sentence some 2,450 years ago,
describing a situation where the leaders of Melos were
faced with the choice of whether to submit to Athens,
which was in a rivalry with the powerful Spartans. The
Melians complained that their choice was between war
or slavery. And the Athenian diplomats did not mince
their words, saying,
“[W]e shall not trouble you with specious
pretences […] to make a long speech that would not
be believed”.
The sentiment and reality expressed in those words are
still with us today. Rarely does a day pass in the life of
a diplomat to the United Nations when he or she does
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

not hear calls for accountability for serious violations
of international law, especially when it comes to threats
to peace and security.
Nevertheless, the powerful continue to use armed
force, threats and the manipulation of our multilateral
system to dominate and attack others. Our hope is
that the difference between us and the poor Melians
is the Charter of the United Nations. In the Preamble
to the Charter, accountability takes the pride of place
alongside our determination to save ourselves from
war and affirm the equal rights of every individual and
every nation. Those are noble aspirations, but they are
much easier to proclaim than to practice. We must wake
up to the credibility gap between our aspirations and
the current state of the multilateral system.
Our aspirations for accountability can be realized
only by a global system that is as good for the weaker
Melians as it is for the stronger Athenians. Otherwise,
that system will be little more than a specious pretence.
If the Council is to anchor a system that advances
accountability and is not dominated by the interests of
the powerful, the following changes are required.
First, the world will never believe that the
multilateral system offers real hope for accountability
if there is no reform of the Security Council. At a
minimum, in the immediate future, the system of
penholding must evolve beyond the bygone contours of
colonial empire. The veto must also be wielded by those
who are closer to the Melians than to the Athenians.
Those invoking the veto would also do well to respect
General Assembly resolution 76/262, popularly known
as the veto initiative, to explain that their action is
justified and is not opposed to our common peace.
That is a degree of accountability. In addition, we must
respond to the fact that the Security Council spends
most of its time dealing with conflicts in Africa, with
Africans holding neither vetoes nor pens; as long as that
is the case, there will be severe limits to accountability
in the United Nations.
Secondly, the broad system of international
accountability will be regarded by the world’s citizens
as legitimate only if it holds the powerful to account.
Instead, we have witnessed its use by the powerful to
advance their interests rather than to advance the cause
of justice. International judicial mechanisms must be
impartial and not tipped against those in relatively
weak States or regions. We are all witness to the

S/PV.9052

disproportionate focus on Africa, while the strong do
what they can.
Finally, accountability and justice should go hand
in hand with dialogue and reconciliation. There is a
powerful link between war and national accountability,
and as we have heard this morning, the systems of
national accountability are ultimately the ones on
which we depend to grant accountability and justice to
the people of the world.
War is often pursued with impunity by one or more
of its protagonists. The more protracted it is, the more
it erodes domestic and international mechanisms of
justice and accountability. Waging war accrues power
to the few; democracy and checks on untrammelled
power erode rapidly. Freedom wilts even in nations that
are victorious at war. War economies take root, often
characterized by criminality, to the detriment of law
and order. The military-industrial complex that United
States President Dwight Eisenhower warned us about
grows in power and promotes even more war, with even
greater destructive effects on accountability.
For the foregoing reasons, we believe that protecting
and expanding accountability in Member States and
in the multilateral system requires us to redouble our
efforts to prevent and resolve conflict. Otherwise,
even domestic systems of accountability will
eventually suffer and die. Making peace, dialogue and
diplomacy — those are the shields for accountability at
the national level. In that regard, the Council’s respect
for and use of Chapter VIII of the Charter, particularly
in Africa in the context of its relationship with the
African Union and subregional organizations, will do
the most to advance conflict prevention and resolution.
Successfully resolving conflicts in that way offers
citizens hope that the peace that ensues will deliver
to them the stability that is needed for reconciliation,
accountability and justice.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): First, let me join others
in thanking Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield for
the competent and professional way she and her team led
the Security Council in May. Brazil would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Albanian presidency of the
Security Council, for organizing this important open
debate. We would also like to thank the President of the
International Court of Justice, Judge Joan Donoghue;
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Bachelet; and Professor Dapo Akande, for
their insightful participation in today’s meeting.

22-3694315/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would also like to thank Judge Donoghue,
Mr. Gallagher and Ms. Zeya for their tributes to the
memory of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade.
Their words were particularly moving for me, as
Judge Cançado Trindade was my teacher of public
international law at the Brazilian Diplomatic Academy;
and because he was legal counsel at the Foreign
Ministry when I was there taking my first steps in this
career, and because his son, Vinicius, is a valued and
trusted member of my team here at the Brazil Mission
to the United Nations in New York.
There is no peace without justice and no justice
without the rule of law. For law to prevail, effective
mechanisms of accountability must be in place,
including at local, national and international levels.
History has shown that climates of impunity and
lawlessness are breeding grounds for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other gross violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The path to greater accountability runs through
the intersection between the national and international
levels. At the international level, a number of
institutions, such as the International Criminal Court,
the International Court of Justice, and United Nations
bodies like the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, can, within the limits of their mandates,
either complement the role of State institutions or take
action when the international community needs to
address matters that go beyond national borders.

02/06/2022

The International Court of Justice also plays
a vital role by providing Member States with legal
and preventive means to resolve their differences.
Furthermore, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has been making an
essential contribution to international peace, including
by calling on States to prevent and punish human rights
violations and bring justice and reparation to victims,
their families and relatives. Despite the importance of
international bodies, however, the world cannot rely
solely on them to counter crimes and other acts against
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Our collective humanitarian effort to assist
those in acute need continues to face old and new
challenges, while old and new crises bring us to an
unprecedented situation on the humanitarian front.
More than 100 million people have been forced to
abandon their homes, and more than 303 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance — a 10 per
cent rise compared to December 2021. States still bear
the primary responsibility for providing justice and
protecting people from the effects of armed conflict. In
these tasks, besides prosecuting those responsible for
violations and paying attention to the victims’ needs,
they must address the root causes of violence and
devote sustained efforts to the prevention of conflict.
To that end, they must engage with civil society. That
is necessary not only to build trust, but also to make
governmental action more effective, especially when it
comes to vulnerable groups.

After lessons painfully learned, the international
community developed a legal system to hold individuals
accountable for such crimes. Its cornerstone is the
Rome Statute regime, whose complementarity allows
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to provide
justice in a non-selective manner within its jurisdiction,
when States are unwilling or unable to act through their
judiciaries. We therefore reiterate our call to all States
to recognize the universality of the Rome Statute and
fully cooperate with the ICC, especially among the
permanent members of the Security Council.

States must also abide by the several instruments
the international community enshrined in law to cope
with hostilities when they regrettably break out. As the
Secretary-General concluded in his May report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts (S/2022/381),
compliance with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law significantly contribute
to the prevention and alleviation of human suffering.
The choices we make nationally and as States Member
of the United Nations, particularly when we have a seat
on the Security Council, are decisive in the search for
more accountability in the international sphere.

It is always worth recalling the leading role Article
24 of the United Nations Charter bestowed on the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. There can be no peace and security
where perpetrators of serious violations of international
law feel free to continue carrying out atrocities.

Humanitarian solutions should be able to create
the conditions for increased dialogue on practical
measures to minimize human suffering in the field.
We are convinced there must be no politicization of
humanitarian messages nor the selective application
of international humanitarian law. Ensuring adequate

16/33

22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

support for coordinated efforts that help alleviate the
suffering of millions of civilians worldwide remains
an essential dimension of the struggle to bring about
lasting peaceful solutions to contemporary conflicts.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you
for having convened this open debate on strengthening
accountability and justice for serious violations of
international law, as Albania assumes the presidency
of the Security Council this month. I welcome the highlevel officials that are joining us today, and I thank the
President of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Joan Donoghue, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and Professor Akande
for their briefings. My country laments the passing of
Judge Cançado Trindade and offers its sympathies to
his family.
Over the years, the members of the United Nations
have built an institutional and legal scaffolding around
the purpose contained in Article 1, paragraph 1 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which speaks to the
aspiration of building a just and prosperous global
community. However, this collection of standards is
constantly put to the test. Unfortunately, there are many
serious, and very frequent, violations of international
law. We certainly have many tools to confront these
challenges, but we must, without a doubt, also strengthen
national, regional and international accountability
mechanisms. With a view to advancing our common
goal of strengthening an international order based
in the rule of law, I wish to submit for the Council’s
consideration several proposals as follows.
First, it is essential that all elements of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, act in
accordance with international law. That means that
all decisions of the Security Council must be based
in international law. The legitimacy of the Council
depends on it.
Secondly, interpretations of the fundamental
norms of international law that are not supported by
the jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice
should be avoided. Such interpretations endanger the
integrity of the Charter. Such is the case of the abusive
invocations of Article 51 to justify the use of force. The
misuse and abuse of the right to legitimate defence only
causes violence to escalate. My country has repeatedly
objected to such interpretations in both the Security

S/PV.9052

Council and in the General Assembly, and we will
continue to do so.
Thirdly, the International Court of Justice must
be strengthened, as it is the main judicial organ of the
Organization and a guarantor of accountability in cases
of international responsibility of States. That can be
achieved by submitting to the Court those disputes that
fall within its jurisdiction. However, it is imperative
that more States Members of the United Nations accept
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, without
conditions. Mexico has already joined the Declaration
on the Promotion of the Jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice launched by Romania in November of
last year, and we invite the other States to consider it.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General must continue
to be a key actor in the search for dialogue and the
mediation of situations of tension. It would be useful,
as an additional tool, for the General Assembly to grant
the Secretary-General permanent authorization to
request advisory opinions from the International Court
of Justice. That suggestion was already made by former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
Fifthly, the universalization of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court is imperative for
establishing individual accountability for international
crimes. The Council should also be more proactive in
exercising its power to refer situations to the Court that
are worthy of its consideration as a way to strengthen
collaboration between the two bodies.
Sixthly, Mexico will support the General
Assembly’s efforts this year to launch a process towards
the negotiation and adoption of a convention on the
prevention and punishment of crimes against humanity,
based on the articles adopted by the International Law
Commission (ILC). This Commission has played a key
role in the codification and progressive development
of the international normative framework. We must
therefore maintain its validity and relevance. The
adoption of such a convention would without a doubt
fill a legal vacuum that has existed since 1945.
Seventhly, the Council should fulfil its important
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. However, the power of veto of its five
permanent members is an obstacle to achieving that
objective. That is why we, together with France, will
continue to promote our joint initiative for the permanent
members to commit themselves, on a voluntary basis,
to refraining from the use of veto in situations of mass

22-3694317/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

atrocities. A total of 105 States have already signed on
to that initiative, which is all the more relevant owing
to the current global context.
We once again invite those who have not yet done
so to lift their voices and join the initiative, which
operates under the single premise that the commission
of atrocities will never be admissible or justifiable,
regardless of who the perpetrators or the victims are
or the motivation behind such acts. It is up to us to
determine the effectiveness of the international system
in delivering accountability and justice, and we must
ensure that international law is respected and that
violations do not go unpunished. In other words, it is
our responsibility to realize the project for peace we
began 76 years ago and have since worked towards
every day.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Mr. President, let me begin
by congratulating you and your delegation on Albania’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. I wish you, Sir, the best of success and
assure you of Ghana’s cooperation during the month. I
also acknowledge all the high-level officials who have
joined us in the Council this morning and believe that
their presence has made today’s open debate richer in
terms of helping to deepen a shared commitment for
strengthening accountability and justice for the cause
of international peace and security. We are also grateful
to the briefers for their enriching contributions to our
discussions.
I further take this opportunity to commend
Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield and the
delegation of the United States for their sterling
leadership of the Council over the past month. I also
join other delegations in paying tribute to Judge
Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade, who passed
away on 29 May. We commiserate with his family, the
international courts and the Government and the people
of Brazil.
For nearly three decades, the Council’s progressive
focus on the question of accountability and justice for
serious violations of human rights and international
crimes has resulted in an increased recognition of
that subject’s importance in international peace and
security. However, that focus has often produced uneven
results. It has sometimes been challenging to translate
the Council’s decisions into practice, and its approach
to dealing with questions of accountability and justice
has in some instances appeared to be selective.
18/33

02/06/2022

Yet, the Council has also, in the past, acted in a
unified and clear-sighted manner, even in the absence
of the referral mechanism of article 13 (b) of the
Rome Statute, for example, when it set up the ad hoc
international criminal tribunals for Rwanda and for the
former Yugoslavia, and when it helped to establish the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia. What those
bold acts of the Council show is that when geopolitical
interests are subordinated and our common humanity is
freed to rise to the fore, we can, in the face of despicable
acts underlying egregious violations, take the action
needed to prevent impunity, render justice to victims
and prevent such egregious violations from recurring.
We therefore believe that the Council can do better
to support accountability and justice by making its
actions blind to the actors involved in serious violations
and ensuring that those actions are impervious to
the geopolitical interests of key Member States.
Whether serious violations occur in Mali, Syria, Iraq,
Afghanistan or Ukraine, the response should be the
same. Where States are either unwilling or unable to
ensure justice for systematic and widespread violations
of human rights, genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity, impunity must not be allowed to prevail. That
must also apply to the act of aggression. The complex
and delicate approach often required for resolving
present-day conflict situations should not trample upon
the rights of individuals and their need for justice. At
the very least, measures to ensure transitional justice
should be taken.
Indeed, protecting the rights of individuals and
recognizing their critical role in ensuring the effective
functioning of States and the stability of nations lies
at the heart of the rules-based international order that
has been built over the past seven decades. Therefore,
those who exercise the sovereign authority of the State
should not use Government instruments against the
very individuals they have a universal responsibility
to safeguard. Accordingly, ensuring accountability is
fundamental and now needed more than ever to prevent
a further weakening of the rules-based order. It is
necessary to uphold the rule of law at the international
level and restore confidence in the credibility of
international law and its accompanying international
adjudicative bodies, such as the International Court
of Justice, the International Criminal Court, the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, and the
investigative mechanisms of the Human Rights Council.
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Importantly, it is our duty to secure justice for the
victims whose lives and livelihoods have been adversely
affected by such violations. We are convinced that
accountability and justice for all people are achievable.
We believe that the fight against impunity is a mission to
be pursued by the international community as a whole.
We must together guard against impunity becoming
ingrained into the fabric of our international system and
recommit to ensuring that perpetrators of international
criminal offences and atrocities do not go unpunished.
In acknowledging the primary responsibility of States
to ensure accountability, we reiterate that such a
responsibility extends to preventive and resilience
mechanisms against atrocities. We therefore urge for
relevant support for enhancing national capacities to
prosecute serious violations of international law.
As a State party to the Rome Statue, Ghana
reaffirms its commitment to its tenets and to the
important work of the International Criminal Court,
as an integral part of the international architecture
for upholding international law and ensuring
accountability. Concerted and enhanced coordination
efforts, including the engagement of the media, civil
society organizations and international partners, are
necessary to provide the requisite political support and
resources for effective accountability.
Accountability is also concerned with establishing
the truth. In that regard, all allegations of atrocities must
be subjected to independent, thorough and impartial
investigations by relevant authorities to establish the
facts as a basis for prosecution. We further emphasize
the importance of the timely collection and preservation
of evidence, as well as the identification and protection
of key witnesses.
It is an established fact that women and girls suffer
disproportionately from situations arising from the
violations of international law, including conflict-related
sexual violence. We believe that gender mainstreaming
and the integration of gender-responsive policies into
existing and emerging accountability mechanisms
at national and international levels will increase the
measure of success for the prosecution of such offences,
particularly those committed against women and girls.
We also encourage the grass-roots engagement of
women leaders as key focal points for the collection of
evidence and the provision of psychosocial support to
victims throughout the prosecution processes.

S/PV.9052

In conclusion, we call on Member States to unite
against impunity and stand committed to supporting all
efforts aimed at advancing accountability and justice in
the international system and the strengthening of both
norms and institutions. Our collective commitment in
that regard is fundamental to preserving and upholding
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
our shared values for peace and security.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the President of the International Court of Justice, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and Professor Dapo Akande for their briefings.
I take this opportunity to reiterate France’s support
for the remarkable work and action of the International
Court of Justice and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
In too many countries, serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law are
committed, some of which may constitute war crimes
or crimes against humanity. Their perpetrators must
be held accountable. France’s commitment to the fight
against impunity is unwavering. That commitment is a
priority anchored in its international action, including
in the Security Council.
We are certain that the world will never have peace
without justice. That is why France has created a national
counter-terrorism prosecutor’s office to prosecute war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide, torture
and forced disappearances. For those same reasons,
France has actively participated in the creation of such
international tribunals and mechanisms dedicated
to the fight against impunity as the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Based on that firm conviction, France provides
steadfast support to the International Criminal Court,
the only permanent international criminal court with a
universal vocation, whose action is essential in the fight
against impunity. That support has been demonstrated
once again in the framework of the investigation on the
situation in Ukraine, which was opened on 2 March.
We fully respect the Court’s independence.
In addition to supporting the International
Criminal Court, France is fully mobilized to provide
specific support for the efforts made by the Ukrainian
authorities in the framework of the investigations they

22-3694319/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

have launched. A technical team responsible for helping
the Ukrainian authorities identify and collect evidence
was deployed by France on Ukrainian territory on
11 April. That team is also helping the investigations
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
With regard to the war being waged by Russia in
Ukraine, the important order issued on 16 March by
the International Court of Justice could not be clearer.
It demands that Russia suspend the military operations
that began on 24 February, and Russia is legally bound
to comply. France is firmly committed to working with
Ukraine and with international and regional courts and
mechanisms to ensure that violations of international
law and possible war crimes and crimes against
humanity do not go unpunished.
France also fully supports the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, which is charged with holding Da’esh
accountable for its crimes in Iraq, and assists the United
Nations mechanisms charged with collecting and
preserving the evidence of crimes committed in Syria,
including the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We launched and presided
over the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons, which today comprises
40 States and the European Union.
International criminal justice and the fight against
impunity are neither a fantasy nor an illusion. They
function and achieve results: how can we not commend
the efficiency and speed of Senegalese justice and the
Extraordinary African Chambers in the trial of Hissène
Habré or the progress made by courts and tribunals
for Cambodia, Sierra Leone, Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, to name just a few examples?
Yet many challenges remain. We will continue
to fight against impunity, especially for those who
commit sexual violence, use hunger as a weapon of war
or target journalists. Two days ago, French journalist
Frédéric Leclerc-Imhoff was killed while covering an
evacuation operation near Severodonetsk. His death is
deeply shocking, and France demands that a transparent
investigation be conducted as soon as possible to shed
light on the circumstances surrounding his death.
20/33

02/06/2022

Council members may rest assured that France
will relentlessly pursue its fight against impunity and
in favour of the full respect of international law. The
defence of the Charter of the United Nations and our
values demands that we do so. We owe it to the victims
and their families. In that spirit, France, together
with Mexico, will continue to promote the initiative
on the suspension of the use of the veto in cases of
mass atrocities.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June and for
organizing this very important meeting. We offer our
condolences on the passing of Judge Cançado Trindade.
Norway also joins others in thanking today’s briefers
for clearly underlining the need for accountability for
serious international crimes, including those related to
Ukraine.
We understand accountability to include both State
responsibility under international law and individual
criminal responsibility. The more political type of
accountability, as it is exercised at the United Nations,
is also important. In essence, we are talking about
ensuring much-needed reactions to those who disregard
international law, including international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
criminal law.
Together, as an international community, we have
put in place significant international mechanisms
and initiatives to ensure accountability. We look to
the International Court of Justice to adjudicate cases
between States and to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to prosecute individuals, as well as to the Human
Rights Council to deploy fact-finding and special
procedure mechanisms.
Let me underline the important role of the
International Court of Justice in the peaceful resolution
of disputes. We are appalled by the blatant examples of
the disregard of the Court’s rulings. We in the Security
Council have a special responsibility to do what we
can to ensure that parties faithfully abide by binding
decisions rendered by the Court.
Norway sees the ICC as a beacon of international
criminal law — stepping in if national accountability
mechanisms are not able to. Yet the authority of
the Security Council to refer cases to the ICC is
underutilized. We must be better at following up the
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

cases that we refer. We call on all to facilitate access,
support investigators and hand over wanted individuals
to the Court.
Norway joined 40 other nations in a referral of
the current situation in Ukraine to the Court. We are
pleased that the ICC is investigating possible war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
Successful accountability measures include
representatives from all facets of society. We must insist
on women’s full, equal and meaningful participation,
not merely as an end in itself, but as a prerequisite for
peace and stability. Civil society and the media also
play an ever more crucial role in collecting and sharing
evidence and spreading the message that perpetrators
will be held to account.
Above all, accountability is vital to ensuring
justice for the victims and to deterring and preventing
future violations. We must also be alert to the needs
of victims and survivors, in all their diversity. Those
committing atrocities, such as we have seen in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, Myanmar, Syria, Ukraine and elsewhere,
must face justice.
Let me be clear: international law is not optional,
and violations will not go unchallenged. A culture
of impunity increases the risk of conflict recurring.
Accountability, justice and the protection of civilians
are crucial to long-term international peace and security.
The Security Council and its individual members must
play their role.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me pay
tribute to Albania for choosing this important subject,
Mr. President, for the first day of your historic first
Security Council presidency. We are also grateful to
Judge Donoghue, High Commissioner Bachelet and
Professor Akande for their important briefings. On
behalf of the United Kingdom, I would also like to
extend our condolences to the people of Brazil on the
passing of Judge Trindade, whose life was dedicated to
the topic of today’s debate.
Today those violating international law clearly do
not fear accountability or justice. That needs to change
because the way in which we approach accountability
reflects the state of our world. After the Second World
War, we understood that and established the International
Court of Justice. If we want a multilateralism that
works, we need rules that are respected.

S/PV.9052

Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression
against Ukraine is a flagrant violation of the most
fundamental rules of international law and, as the
Secretary-General said, an attack on the Charter of
the United Nations. Russia and all those that violate
international law must be held accountable. I would
therefore like to stress two points around how we can
address that.
First is the importance of using the full breadth
of forums and instruments available to us. While
the Security Council has been blocked from taking
action in relation to Ukraine, that has not prevented
the international system from taking steps to pursue
justice. As we heard today, and as we heard in the Arria
Formula meeting convened by Albania and France in
April, the International Court of Justice, the Human
Rights Council, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and
the European Court of Human Rights are all engaged
according to their mandates.
The United Kingdom played a leading role in
convening a record number of States in the referral of
the situation to the International Criminal Court. The
breadth of the response is striking and, like the huge
majority votes in the General Assembly, demonstrates
that the world will not let such violations go unanswered.
Moreover, while Russia has shown contempt for
the International Court of Justice and international law
by doing nothing to comply with the Court’s legally
binding order, many other States comply with their
international obligations. That is a source of hope.
Secondly is the importance of evidence collection
that meets the appropriate standard. Once we have the
evidence, prosecutions are ready to strike at the right
time. For example, the evidence collected and preserved
by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism and the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is helping
to bring some of those responsible for the most heinous
crimes in Syria and Iraq to justice. In Ukraine, we have
seen a massive effort to ensure that the evidence is
available for future cases.
Of course, to collect evidence on the ground,
it is necessary to have access. In that context, it is a
matter of deep regret that the Chinese authorities did
not provide the full, unfettered access to Xinjiang for

22-3694321/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

High Commissioner Bachelet that we and international
partners have long called for.
Today’s debate has demonstrated that there are
diverse ways of pursuing those who commit serious
violations of international law. Perpetrators cannot rest
on their ability to block progress in the Security Council
or elsewhere. Accountability and justice will find a way.
That is the principle on which the multilateral system
rests, and we must all step up to defend it.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Judge Joan Donoghue, President
of the International Court of Justice, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Professor Dapo Akande to this
open debate.
Let me take this opportunity to thank the delegation
of the United States for its professional and impartial
presidency of the Security Council in the month of May.
We count on the delegation of Albania to be guided by
the same professional approach in fulfilling its duties of
President of the Council.
For several months now, we have been witnessing
Western States demonstrate an excessive degree of
hypocrisy in their statements. Against the backdrop of
Russia’s special military operation, they chose to recall
that there was such a thing as international law.
When NATO was attacking Yugoslavia, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Libya and Syria, international law was
perceived only as an annoying impediment. In vain
attempts to justify its aggression against sovereign
States, the collective West had to come up with exotic
concepts, such as a humanitarian intervention, the war
on terror or preventive strikes. Of course, none of those
had anything to do with international law. That is why
the military adventures of the United States and their
NATO allies were nothing but aggressive, unprovoked
wars of choice. NATO countries systematically and
cynically ignored international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations. At the highest political
level, the United States claimed to be exceptional,
meaning that it was above international law. Thereafter,
with manic tenacity, the collective West started to
promote the idea of replacing traditional international
law with some rules-based order. That new set of norms
meant that a small group of States made their own rules
and claimed that they were universal.
22/33

02/06/2022

That is the logic that we see behind the current
activity that Western States started around international
criminal justice bodies, saying that they want to punish
our country.
Please note that when there is the risk that NATO
soldiers may be prosecuted for war crimes and crimes
against humanity, we see a completely different kind
of activity. Western States do their best to protect their
troops. They employ both financial and administrative
leverage against international criminal justice
mechanisms and direct threats. Quite indicatively
in that respect, the United States imposed individual
sanctions against the former Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). As is well known,
the new Prosecutor deprioritized ICC cases regarding
the crimes of British and American military in Iraq
and Afghanistan. In other words, the investigations
into those cases stopped. It turns out that when it
comes to the responsibility of military personnel from
Western countries, there is no longer any need to
combat impunity.
In an attempt to justify themselves, Western
countries usually claim that their legal systems are
perfectly capable of holding the perpetrators to
account, saying that they do not need the ICC to do
that. Somehow, we do not know of any convictions of
United States, British and other military personnel for
war crimes in Iraq, Afghanistan and Syria.
Incidentally, we would never have found out
about most of those crimes or the horrific torture in
Guantánamo Bay and the Central Intelligence Agency’s
secret prisons in Europe had it not been for the sensational
material published by Julian Assange. But what did the
countries that are now so eloquently advocating for
the fight against impunity do once that information
became available to the general public? Did they rush
to investigate and bring the perpetrators — their own
citizens — to justice? No. The only one who was hunted
and attacked was Assange himself.
The United Kingdom is about to hand over this
brave journalist to the United States, where the plan is
to try him on charges of espionage. The United States
state-run police system leaves no doubt that he will
spend the rest of his life behind bars, if he lives long
enough to see a trial at all.
That is all there is to know about the collective
West’s approach to fighting impunity when it comes to
themselves. What, then, is the take-away regarding the
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

atrocities committed by NATO troops? The scenario is
always the same — civilians have died by their hands,
but there is no one to be punished for that even in
disciplinary terms, let alone criminal ones.
We took note of the vague excuses given on 17 May
by the Pentagon representative, John Kirby. He called
the American air strike that killed many civilians near
the Syrian town of Baghouz a tragic mistake. At the
same time, he made it clear that no one in the United
States military has been or will be held accountable.
That is not the first such case in Syria, and it may not
be the last. After all, the United States, together with
its colleagues in the so-called strictly defensive alliance
that is NATO, continues the illegal occupation of part
of the territory of that sovereign country following
military aggression against it.
Another example of the hypocrisy of the West and
the self-proclaimed champions of international criminal
justice comes in the form of news from the Netherlands.
It was recently announced that the Netherlands was to
send an entire team of investigators and forensic experts
to Ukraine to work in the interests of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Almost at the same time, we were informed about
the suspension by national law enforcement officers
of an investigation of an attack by Dutch soldiers on
residential buildings in the Afghan village of Uruzgan
in 2007, where there were no military targets. Again, it
is the same scenario, in which civilians are killed but
the perpetrators of war crimes are non-existent.
Why do the countries of the West even need the
ICC? After all, their national courts seem to be doing
an excellent job of running out and sweeping under the
rug the cases against their troops and imitating the fight
against impunity. The West needs the ICC as a purely
political instrument, and no one hides that fact. Hence
the campaign to allocate unprecedented financial,
human and organizational resources to the Office of the
Prosecutor by the same countries that not long ago had
been doing everything they could to protect their own
soldiers from it.
The concept of double standards does not begin to
cover that — it is simply bare-faced cynicism. Justice
has become a farce whereby the culprit is appointed in
advance and the West-funded Court hands down the
sentences the West has paid for.

S/PV.9052

Neither the ICC nor the West care about the many
crimes committed by the Kyiv regime, which came
to power in a bloody coup d’état in 2014. The case
of unidentified snipers who methodically shot both
Maidan protesters and law enforcement agents has been
consigned to oblivion. We have seen similar scenarios
in the context of many other colour revolutions.
It is unlikely that our colleagues will recall today
the civilians of Donbas killed by the Ukrainian military
during eight years of shelling and bombing, which
continue today. No one demands that Kyiv be held
accountable for the nationalists burning people alive in
the House of Trade Unions in Odesa.
It has reached the point that the criminals from the
Azov Battalion, promoting a misanthropic and hateful
Nazi ideology, are praised by the collective West as
heroes, not only for Ukraine but also for themselves.
The swastikas and other Nazi paraphernalia that
can be seen not only on their uniforms but on their
bodies do not faze the self-proclaimed champions of
democratic values, who continue to repeat the mantra
that there is no Nazism in Ukraine, and it is simply
Russian propaganda.
A number of Council members today raised the
issue of the order on provisional measures of 16 March
issued by the International Court of Justice with respect
to Ukraine’s claim in reference to the 1948 Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. The statements delivered by the American
and British delegations are the latest example of the
policy of double standards. We clearly remember
how the United States, after losing the case brought
to the International Court of Justice by Nicaragua,
not only flatly refused to comply with the Court’s
final decision — I stress that it was a final decision,
rather than an order on provisional measures — but
also twice vetoed the corresponding Security Council
draft resolution.
The United Kingdom also revealed its attitude
towards the International Court of Justice — not in its
words but in its actions — when it refused to complete
the decolonization process to finally return the Chagos
Archipelago to Mauritius. In its advisory opinion of
25 February 2019, the Court stated unequivocally that
the United Kingdom had an obligation to bring to an
end its administration of the Chagos Archipelago as
soon as possible. The Court’s position was supported
by the General Assembly in its resolution 73/295, which

22-3694323/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

was opposed by the votes of only the United Kingdom,
the United States and four other delegations.
Those circumstances certainly did not embarrass
London at all, which even today continues its colonial
occupation of the archipelago and hosts a United States
military base there. During the land-clearing necessary
to establish the American military facility, the local
population was forcibly displaced. When considering
General Assembly resolution 73/295, the United
Kingdom was called upon to pay fair compensation
to its victims of crimes against humanity. Those calls
were categorically rejected.
All of that brings us to a very simple conclusion,
namely, that Western countries are willing to make
pompous statements about implementing the orders
of the International Court of Justice, the fight against
impunity and providing compensation for victims of
violence, but only as long as it does not concern them.
I will also say a few words about the 16 March order
on provisional measures of the International Court of
Justice. The order was issued in response to a claim by
Ukraine, which requested to not be subjected to the use
of force on account of false claims that the provisions
of the Convention had been violated. I cannot help but
draw members’ attention to the similarity with the
situation in 1999. At that time, Yugoslavia, referring
to the Genocide Convention, also sought an order on
provisional measures. Its request was completely
rejected by the International Court of Justice because it
was opposed by NATO.
With regard to the order on provisional measures
concerning Ukraine, the situation is entirely the
opposite. Behind the detailed legal argument, a simple
thesis begins to appear — under strong political
pressure, the Court may make inconsistent decisions.
Western countries sense that. On 20 May, 41
Western States and the European Union, with the
support of the Marshall Islands and Micronesia, sent
the Court a so-called joint statement, which was an
unprecedented attempt to influence the position of the
Court in favour of Ukraine. In any case, the order to
suspend military operations was issued by the Court
solely in the context of a claim under the Genocide
Convention. Accordingly, it does not and cannot apply
to the stated aims, objectives and grounds of the special
military operation.
24/33

02/06/2022

In that regard, we would like to remind the Council
that our special military operation was launched on the
basis of Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
On 24 February, we submitted to the Security Council
a corresponding notification in writing in the manner
prescribed by Article 51. The issue of abolishing
certain provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
including its Article 51, or depriving a Member State of
the right to exercise its inalienable right to collective or
individual self-defence has not, as far as we know, been
considered by the International Court of Justice.
We now hear on an almost daily basis about
initiatives to create more and more investigative
mechanisms or quasi-tribunals. The most interesting
thing, however, is how exactly those tribunals for
Russia are being planned. Authors of those initiatives
propose to do it on the basis of an agreement among the
countries concerned.
But let us reflect further on that: a group of
countries is seriously discussing the possibility of
jointly convicting a third State. The mechanisms of
international criminal justice are of course far from
ideal, but when they were established there at least
appeared to be some form impartiality and geographical
balance in the mix. Now that the masks have been taken
off completely, the collective West considers itself
entitled to administer justice alone.
By flooding Ukraine with weapons, allegedly to
strengthen its potential and ability to fight back against
Russia, the West is committing another war crime.
With Western assistance, Ukrainian raiders continue to
shell the peaceful residential areas of Donbas, killing
women, children and the elderly, as they have been
doing for eight years now.
By way of another example, the United States has
supplied Ukraine with British-made long-range M-777
howitzers, and, on the eve of International Children’s
Day, shells fired from those guns killed five people
in Makiivka in Donetsk, including a 5-year-old girl.
The United States has also announced plans to supply
Ukraine with multiple-launch rocket systems, which
will lead only to a further escalation of the conflict that
Washington hypocritically asserts it wants to end as
soon as possible. The ICC should also be aware of that,
if the Court is concerned about the cause of justice.
The list of crimes committed by the most vocal
advocates of international justice is long. Today we
have touched on only a negligible number of them. No
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

statement would be long enough to cover them all. I
have one recommendation for the collective West.
If it wants to condemn aggression, it should start by
condemning itself. It should set an example to the world
by condemning its military adventures, illegal economic
restrictions, bloody colonial and neocolonial wars and
genocide and plunder of indigenous peoples. It should
begin paying reparations to the affected countries and
peoples. Such a step could indeed bring closer the
advent of a more just world order, in which there would
be no place for any self-proclaimed exceptionalism.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security
Council, the functioning of which you will ensure for
the month of June. I also thank you taking the initiative
to convene this important debate on a subject of concern
that is at the heart of the international agenda. I thank the
President of the International Court of Justice, Ms. Joan
Donoghue; the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet; and Professor
Dapo Akande for their informative briefings.
Justice plays a critical role in maintaining peace
in the world. Clearly, the issue of international
accountability, the goal of which is to seek justice for
serious crimes and atrocities, has profound ramifications
for achieving peace. The international community has
the tools at its disposal today to prosecute perpetrators
of serious crimes or extradite them to countries that can
prosecute them.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is one
such tool, the mandate of which is to investigate and
prosecute war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. In the same vein, there are also international
criminal tribunals and their residual mechanisms, as
well as national courts exercising universal jurisdiction.
All those legal mechanisms clearly indicate the strong
resolve of the international community to reject
impunity and the most serious human rights violations.

S/PV.9052

sometimes relegated to the background. Its dividends,
however, are of the utmost importance in deterring
repressive leaders from committing further crimes. At
the same time, fair trials help restore victims’ dignity
by acknowledging their suffering and establishing a
historical record of events so as to prevent the possibility
of revisionism or negationism by those who might seek
to deny the atrocities committed.
Despite the efforts of the international community,
it must be noted that international criminal justice
remains a weak deterrent, and its scope continues to
be based on variable geometry — or rather variable
geography. Indeed, the determination of international
jurisdictions to seek out a warlord in Africa often
contrasts with their sluggishness with regard to other
regions of the world. That double standard is difficult
to understand insofar as justice and accountability
must not reflect power relations among nations at the
risk of being seen as a validation of injustice to the
detriment of those that are less prosperous. Wherever
serious crimes under international law are committed,
peace and justice must both be goals in negotiations to
end conflicts.
In Africa, we do not need to look back to the time
of the slave trade or colonization to highlight areas
in which accountability is required. Today in many
battlefields on the continent, it is important to demand
and impose accountability along the entire chain
of horror, from the warlords to the sponsors of war.
Support for accountability efforts in Ukraine should
become the model for the international community’s
response to crises and conflicts throughout the world.
In Ukraine, as everywhere else in the world, the fight
against impunity must not be allowed to slacken.

“Impunity … can be an even more dangerous
recipe for sliding back into conflict” (S/2004/431,
para. 55).

Without justice, peace cannot be sustained. The
belief that people will simply forget with time is a
terrible mistake, since even after centuries unpunished
crimes continue to represent huge stumbling blocks
in terms of preserving peace. It is therefore our hope
that the momentum of national and international
investigative mechanisms, together with the struggle
on the ground, will become the yardstick by which all
wars in the world will be measured.

The failure to demand accountability for crimes
against humanity or genocide could seem like an
encouragement for committing such serious crimes and
erode the foundations for peace. Undoubtedly, under
the pressure of peace negotiation efforts, justice is

Realizing international justice often takes a long
time. For the cases involving Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
and Dominic Ongwen, the ICC required 10 years and 16
years respectively, from the time of their crimes to the
verdicts. Such delays, which are predicated on the time

As the late Secretary-General Kofi Annan noted,

22-3694325/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

needed to conduct investigations, are hardly compatible
with the urgent need to provide meaningful relief for
the victims. However, during that time, attempts to
sensationalize or revert to the media for justice should
be prevented.
The Council must play its role as a cornerstone in
the emerging system of international criminal justice
and must assume it by taking every opportunity
for constructive action at its disposal, including the
systematic activation of the legal instruments and
mechanisms at its disposal.
Moreover, strengthening accountability and
justice in cases of serious violations of international
law, like the maintenance of international peace and
security, will remain difficult goals to achieve without
incorporating the prevention dimension.
Optimizing the use of all tools aimed at preventing
crimes against humanity, criminal acts and all human
rights violations therefore remains imperative. We know
that such crimes are not committed spontaneously but
are often the product of a long process during which
mediation, good offices, early-warning systems and
regional and subregional organizations can play a
decisive role in preventing escalation and the loss of
human lives.
It is therefore critical that the Council accord
particular attention to preventative diplomacy as an
effective instrument to achieve peace and security,
by working to narrow the gap between the critical
importance of prevention and the limited resources
allocated to it. It is far less costly to prevent crimes
than to intervene to stop them. For several decades,
Gabon has been steadfastly committed to promoting
preventive diplomacy, including in the Central African
Republic, through continued engagement in peace
missions, mediation and good offices.
Effective justice is justice that condemns, on
the one hand, and that makes amends on the other.
In that regard, accountability must always be part of
the global objectives to be considered, not only from
the perspective of ending wars but also from the
perspective of building lasting peace. In that context, the
establishment of monitoring mechanisms, such as the
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect, must be strengthened to ensure the followup of potentially at-risk areas.
In conclusion, my country reaffirms its
commitment to accountability and equitable justice that
26/33

02/06/2022

is neither politicized, selective or variable. We share the
conviction of the late Archbishop Desmond Tutu that
no matter ow painful and unsettling justice may be, not
demanding accountability is always worse.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Albania for its initiative to hold this meeting and
welcomes the briefings by Judge Donoghue, President
of the International Court of Justice; Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and Professor Dapo Akande of the
University of Oxford.
Peace and justice are what humankind as a whole
strives to uphold and are the primary responsibility of the
Security Council. The process of maintaining peace and
achieving justice is an intersectional, interdisciplinary
enterprise. Accountability is an important means
of serving justice. The role it plays in restoring and
maintaining peace defies oversimplification, as it
hinges on specific circumstances and conditions.
The issue of accountability and its implications
for the maintenance of peace and security should
be examined with a multidimensional focus and
a judicious approach. In that vein, I would like to
underscore the following points. First, peace and
justice are mutually reinforcing and complementary.
Without justice, peace is unsustainable. Without peace,
there is no justice of which to speak. We are informed
by history that in the absence of a systemic solution
that addresses fundamental and long-term issues, such
as peace and development, the kind of justice achieved
through accountability in isolation would be fragile and
unsustainable.
The pursuit of justice is as much about bringing
perpetrators to justice and ending impunity as it is about
facilitating reconciliation and achieving lasting peace.
Any accountability exercise should be forward-looking,
taking into account the nexus between peace and
justice and ensuring that the very act of accountability
does not lead to heightened or prolonged resentment or
antagonism among the parties concerned that would
leave the general public to face bitter consequences.
Secondly, accountability should aim to maintain
the integrity and unity of international law. In pursuing
accountability for violations of international law, the
first order of business is an objective and impartial
judgment with regard to “violations of international
law” and that requires the equal and uniform application
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9052

of international law, as opposed to the selective
application thereof.

every decision that it makes must be able to withstand
the test of history.

Asserting the will of a minority of countries as a
universally applicable rule for other countries to follow
or applying different rules to different countries on the
same issue does nothing to truly uphold the authority
of international law, nor will it lead to an objective and
fair judgment. Pursuing accountability by such rules
has little chance of bringing about genuine and lasting
justice.

In the aftermath of the Cold War, the Security
Council has authorized the creation of a number of
international accountability mechanisms, which have
played a special role in achieving justice and promoting
reconciliation. However, it should be acknowledged
that not all accountability mechanisms have achieved
their intended objectives within their prescribed time
frames, and some of them have, for a long time, used
considerable resources of the countries concerned and/
or of the United Nations, with very little to show for it.
While we will remain seized of the issue of accountability
for violations of international law, we must also review
the existing international accountability mechanisms,
reflect on and draw lessons from them.

Thirdly, accountability should respect the judicial
sovereignty of the States concerned. States have the
primary responsibility for punishing serious crimes,
ending impunity and achieving justice. Adherence
to the principle of State ownership is not only an
important manifestation of the principles of sovereign
equality and non-interference in internal affairs, but
also a crucial assurance for the smooth advancement
of accountability and the achievement of the desired
results.
The international community should continue to
work with countries concerned and actively support
them in strengthening capacity-building and exercising
effective jurisdiction over serious international crimes.
International judicial institutions should act in strict
accordance with their mandates, abide by such important
principles as the consent of the States concerned and
complementary jurisdiction and maintain judicial
independence, objectivity and impartiality.
Fourthly, the pursuit of accountability must not be
tainted by political manipulation and the presumption
of guilt. Accountability must be consistently guided by
the rule of law, both as philosophy and as logic. It must
be based on facts and governed by the law. Under no
circumstances must accountability become a political
tool for suppressing those who hold different views and
positions or for exerting pressure on them and exacting
retribution or for staging regime change to serve the
geopolitical interests of a handful of countries.
China has always maintained that the exact
circumstances and specific causes of violations of
international humanitarian law in conflict situations
must be established and that any accusations made
should be based on facts. Before drawing conclusions,
all parties should exercise restraint and avoid making
unfounded accusations or interfering in the internal
affairs of States in the name of justice. Given the
crucial importance of the Council’s responsibilities,

I would like to conclude by highlighting that, in
their statements, the representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom brought unfounded
accusations against China, which China firmly rejects.
As the saying goes, to hide a lie, a thousand lies are
needed. Allegations of “genocide” or “forced labour”
in Xinjiang are lies of the century, pure and simple.
The United States and the United Kingdom fear that the
international community will see through their cookedup lies about so-called genocide and forced labour in
Xinjiang, so they come up with more lies to discredit
China, hoping to continue misleading the international
community. However, none of the lies spread by the
United States and the United Kingdom can deny the
fact that Xinjiang enjoys stability and prosperity and
that its people live and work in peace and happiness.
People who have visited Xinjiang, China will not
believe the lies peddled by the United States and the
United Kingdom. What they are doing only further
exposes the nature of their tactics, namely, to politicize
and instrumentalize human rights and their political
agenda of containing China by exaggerating the
Xinjiang issue. We must ask the question — with regard
to countries, such as the United States and United
Kingdom and to the individuals concerned who spread
rumours, tell barefaced lies, confuse and mislead and
attempt to smear and discredit other countries, should
accountability not apply to them as well?
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will

22-3694327/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
would like to thank the delegation of Albania for
organizing today’s timely meeting. We would also like
to thank the briefers for their valuable contributions to
today’s debate.
Accountability is not an option; it is essential. It
remains the only way to end impunity and ensure
justice and reconciliation, and prevent further conflict.
Serious violations of international law such as genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity
and other severe human rights abuses can destabilize
countries and regions, thereby threatening international
peace and security.
At the core of our collective effort to establish
accountability are indispensable and interconnected
rights, namely, the right to truth, justice, remedy and
reparations. Malaysia continues to support efforts
aimed at promoting and strengthening accountability
for violations of human rights and international law,
including through international tribunals. At the same
time, we strongly believe that true accountability can be
achieved only if mechanisms are credible, independent,
impartial and transparent.
Malaysia reiterates its call on all parties to uphold
the Charter of the United Nations, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
All parties must refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State or from any other action that is inconsistent
with the United Nations Charter. That should never be
compromised, regardless of the motive.
But what is equally important is that the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, must
lead by example. All alleged crimes and violations
of international law, including crimes and violations
by those who consistently violate Security Council
resolutions, must be addressed equally and objectively,
no matter where and when they occurred.
One clear example of the Security Council’s
paralysis is its lack of action to enforce accountability for
Israel’s numerous and severe violations of international
law and the Council resolutions. The Council must
rise above its accountability deficit, which puts its
credibility and legitimacy into question.
28/33

02/06/2022

My delegation also stresses the importance of
accountability for the abuse of veto power, especially
with regard to actions aimed at preventing and ending
mass atrocity crimes. For that reason, we supported the
recent adoption of General Assembly resolution 76/262,
which provides a standing mandate for the General
Assembly to hold a debate whenever a veto is cast in
the Security Council.
The Security Council has a crucial role in
defending the Charter of the United Nations, promoting
respect for international law and advancing the rulesbased international order. The Charter of the United
Nations, in Chapter VII, also mandates the Security
Council to take enforcement measures to maintain or
restore international peace and security. To that end,
it is my delegation’s firm belief that enforcing justice
and accountability must be an integral feature of the
Security Council’s work and responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Let me begin by thanking
the Albanian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this open debate on a very important topic
for the entire international community.
It is our view that much of the global architecture
needed to counter impunity is already in place.
Yet, looking around, we face widespread death and
destruction, which persist around the world, including
in Romania’s close vicinity. We firmly believe in the
long arm of justice and are confident that no perpetrator
of atrocities will remain unpunished. In that respect, we
must recommit to a series of actions and principles.
First, no one is above the law, no State is exempt
from responsibility for internationally wrongful acts
and no perpetrator can avoid individual criminal
responsibility. The members of the Security Council in
particular should set a high moral example in terms of
their commitments and actions in the international arena.
Instead, we are witnessing a brutal, unjustified
and unprovoked illegal military aggression directed
by a member of this very organ against Ukraine. The
international community must continue to stand firm
against Russia’s aggression and united in protecting
those who are already suffering or face imminent
threats. The unified and consistent response of the
international community will serve as clear proof of
our commitment to the rule of law and will help deter
such illegal acts in the future.
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, we must abide by the judgments of the
International Court of Justice. The world Court has a
crucial role in the international community’s efforts to
preserve peace, security and stability, and we have a
duty to uphold the institutions that promote and sustain
the rules-based international order.
Romania is playing its part in those efforts, as
one of the States that have accepted the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice as compulsory. In
addition, Romania launched an initiative to promote
the broader recognition of the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. We will continue to
promote that initiative and invite all States to join us.
We recall the order of the International Court of
Justice of 16 March calling on the Russian Federation
to immediately suspend military operations on the
territory of Ukraine. We urge full compliance with
that order.
Romania announced its intention to formulate a
request for intervention in the proceedings initiated
by Ukraine against the Russian Federation at the
International Court of Justice. That decision reflects
my country’s constant position in favour of the use
of international law instruments and institutions in
support of maintaining and restoring international
peace and security.
Thirdly, we must support the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Romania places its full trust in the
independent and impartial ability of the ICC to render
justice in all the situations under its consideration. We
will continue to support its vital role in the fight against
impunity and providing assistance and reparations to
victims of mass atrocities. To that end, the Romanian
Government recently approved two voluntary financial
contributions: one in response to the ICC Prosecutor’s
appeal to States parties and one to benefit the Trust
Fund for Victims.
The Security Council has a particular responsibility
to ensure that the outstanding arrest warrants issued
in the situations that it has referred to the ICC are
executed. Such actions would send a strong signal that
the perpetrators of atrocity crimes must and can be held
accountable if States are unable or unwilling to do so.
In the face of the most heinous acts, it is our
common responsibility to act. That is why Romania
joined other State parties to the Rome Statute in
referring to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court the investigation of any acts that might constitute

S/PV.9052

war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide that
have occurred on the territory of Ukraine.
We must continue to condemn and publicly expose
the attacks against civilians. We also have to support
targeted efforts to investigate human rights and
international humanitarian law violations at the level of
the United Nations and beyond.
Romania stands ready to continue to play its
part in all those efforts, as a responsible actor in
the international arena and a strong supporter of
international law and justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The reason the
Security Council is discussing ways to strengthen its
work on accountability is obvious. There is a strong
link between sustainable peace and justice that we
have agreed on various occasions, including when we
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
There is ample evidence to support that connection,
including too many examples of situations that are on
the Council’s agenda — from Myanmar to the Sudan
and from Syria to Ukraine — in which the pattern of
war crimes and crimes against humanity is a direct
continuation of the manner in which the war in Syria
has been conducted for more than a decade.
Such blatant violations of international law have
been largely met with silence by the Security Council,
which attempted to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in 2014 but was
unable to do so owing to the vetoes cast by China and
the Russian Federation.
Finding the right balance between peace and
justice is not the exclusive responsibility of the Security
Council — far from it. Effective accountability is
typically a long-lasting process, which often requires
both criminal accountability and forms of restorative
justice. On the latter question in particular, there
is great potential for a strong role to be played by
the Peacebuilding Commission, which has yet to be
explored after more than 15 years of its existence.
But the Security Council has the very important
role and responsibility of underlining that justice
matters for the maintenance of peace and security and
should do so consistently.
As we meet today, we are very far from meeting that
standard, and the reality is starkly different. The attempt
to include relevant elements in the decision-making of

22-3694329/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Council is the exception rather than the rule. While
those issues regularly feature in the speaking points
of a number of Council members, there is a silent
understanding that effective accountability work in the
Security Council is not feasible.
We need to see more innovative approaches in
Council consultations and outcomes.
We and many others will of course continue to
ask that situations that are particularly alarming be
referred to the ICC, which has now been attempted
in the Security Council for eight years. We hope that
the fact that the veto is no longer the last word in this
Organization will change the mindset among Council
members in that respect.
But there are other and simpler ways for the Council
to address accountability issues.
First and foremost, the Council has a key role
to play in asking for the full respect of international
humanitarian law by all parties to conflict and
in standing ready to take action when that call is
not heeded.
Secondly, it should remind parties to conflict of
their primary obligation under international law to
investigate and prosecute the most serious crimes,
in line with the principle of complementarity. In that
respect, I join our Chinese colleagues in the comments
that they just provided to the Council.
Thirdly, it should welcome efforts undertaken
to ensure accountability and prevent impunity, for
example, through action by national judiciaries under
the principle of universal jurisdiction.
There is no bigger responsibility for the Security
Council than to enforce the Charter of the United
Nations, at the heart of which is the prohibition of the
use of force — the bedrock of the modern international
order. Since July 2018, the International Criminal Court
has had the competence to investigate and prosecute
the crime of aggression. We join the call made in the
Council this morning on all States to ratify the Kampala
amendments to the Rome Statute.
Since July 2018, the Security Council has also had
the power to refer situations involving the crime of
aggression to the ICC. That tool has the tremendous
potential to deter aggression and support the Council’s
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
The brazen aggression against Ukraine is an obvious
case for the Council to make use of that tool. In the
30/33

02/06/2022

absence of such a referral, the United Nations system
will have to find a different way to ensure that there is
no impunity for that frontal assault on the international
order and the United Nations Charter.
We are committed to engaging with the United
Nations membership to build on General Assembly
resolution ES/11-1, of 2 March, which addressed
the aggression against Ukraine in an overwhelming
fashion. We have the law to do so — the definition of
the crime of aggression codified in the Rome Statute,
reflecting customary international law. We have
strong accountability precedents at the United Nations
on which to draw, and we have a joint responsibility
to protect the international order, as reflected in the
United Nations Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): Let me begin by
congratulating Albania on its first-ever and historic
presidency of the Security Council.
We fully support the statements to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the Aggression against
Ukraine and the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law. This
open debate could be no more timely or more topical, as
we are now witnessing grave breaches of international
law and serious crimes being committed. At the same
time, it is States that are the creators of international
law and it is States that have the primary responsibility
to uphold it. When such instances of the violation of
international law occur, the international community
must act. We therefore appreciate all meaningful
accountability efforts that Member States undertake
to ensure justice. The international community must
never give up on strengthening accountability and
justice for serious violations of international law, even
if sometimes the road to justice is complicated and
seemingly facing a dead end. The existence of judicial
organs, including the International Court of Justice
as the principle United Nations judicial organ, is an
essential pillar of the international system. We call on
all States to comply with its legally binding orders.
When the Security Council, due to the use of the
veto, was unable to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for five long years,
in 2016 the General Assembly then stepped in and
established the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism (IIIM). Although the ICC is still the best22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

suited judicial organ to deal with the complex situation
in Syria, the establishment of the IIIM made a great
contribution to ensuring justice.
The role of States does not end once judicial, or
quasi-judicial, mechanisms are created. As a matter
of fact, it is the cooperation of States that is crucial in
delivering justice. In the case of the ICC, it is the legal
obligation of States parties to cooperate, and it is the
obligation of all to cooperate when there is a Security
Council referral under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations or when a State has concluded an
agreement with the ICC in that regard. The Security
Council must respond to cases of non-cooperation with
the ICC.
We remain deeply concerned about reports and
testimonies of horrific crimes being committed in
Ukraine since the unprecedented, unprovoked and
unjustified Russian military aggression, including
widespread reports of indiscriminate killings of
civilians, as well as deliberate attacks against civilian
infrastructure and sexual and gender-based violence.
The perpetrators of those war crimes must be
held accountable.
We express our deepest solidarity to the victims and
survivors of such horrific crimes. We express our strong
support for the work of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, established by
the United Nations Human Rights Council. We also
appreciate the timely report of experts established
under the Moscow Mechanism of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which describes
clear patterns of violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights by the Russian forces. Part and
parcel of all accountability efforts is the documentation
of crimes. Evidence collection can later be used in
criminal proceedings, and those various mechanisms
therefore play a crucial role as we strive to achieve and
strengthen accountability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this high-level open debate. I also thank the briefers for
their insightful briefings.
Accountability and justice for serious violations
of basic rules of international law, particularly those
accepted and recognized as peremptory norms and
that serve as the foundation of the international legal

S/PV.9052

order, are essential in the maintenance of international
peace and security, while States have the primary
legal obligation to adhere to international law and
prevent the commission of such atrocities, as well as
their prosecution.
Meanwhile, serious violations of international law
continue with impunity, and the Security Council has at
times failed to uphold its responsibilities in that regard.
In that context, a reference can be made to the
Security Council’s silence over the Israeli regime’s
persistent, well-documented and irrefutable atrocities,
including war crimes and crimes against humanity,
committed against the Palestinian people.
Unilateral coercive measures are employed by
certain States as a method of war to starve innocent
civilians. Those international wrongful acts violate the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
believe that countries that impose unilateral coercive
measures, including sanctions, as a State policy should
be held accountable for such crimes.
For decades, Iran has been the target of the most
severe economic and financial sanctions of the United
States, directly endangering the lives of Iran’s most
vulnerable population, including children, the elderly
and patients. Some patients, particularly children
with rare diseases, even died as a result of import
restrictions on medicine and medical supplies — a
heartbreaking reality.
As a result of Iran’s submission to the International
Court of Justice on 3 October 2018, the Court
unanimously issued an order on provisional measures
requiring the United States to remove any sanction
on the importation of humanitarian goods. The Court
also ordered the United States to make sure that all
necessary permits and authorizations are in place and
that payment and other financial activities linked to
humanitarian goods and services are not restricted.
Unfortunately, the United States has not only failed
to comply with the Court’s order, but also defied it by
imposing additional sanctions, particularly during the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
In a statement made during her recent visit to Tehran
on 18 May, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on
the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on
the enjoyment of human rights emphasized the illegality
of such inhumane measures, asserting that States have
an obligation under international human rights law
to ensure that any activity under their jurisdiction or

22-3694331/33

S/PV.9052

Maintenance of international peace and security

control does not result in human rights violations. In that
regard, she called on sanctioning States, particularly
the United States, to observe the principles and norms
of international law and lift all unilateral measures, in
particular in areas that affect the human rights and lives
of all the people in Iran.
Finally, any efforts at the national level made under
the pretence of addressing impunity and maintaining
accountability based on universal jurisdiction remain
a serious concern due to the selective and arbitrary
application of those principles by certain States. It
only undermines the international legal order based
on international law, in particular the fundamental
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, such as the equal sovereignty of States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mrs. Dostert (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg is grateful to Albania for organizing this
open debate on strengthening justice and accountability
for serious violations of international law. I thank the
President of the International Court of Justice, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and Mr. Dapo Akande for their briefings.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statements
to be made by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of the Marshall Islands on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine (see S/PV.9052). Allow me
to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Strengthening justice and accountability is
essential to ensuring and maintaining international
peace and security. Peace and justice go hand in hand
and are mutually reinforcing.
The link between justice and peace becomes even
more evident in the light of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine. Luxembourg condemns, in the strongest terms,
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and the atrocities
perpetrated by the Russian armed forces in the country.
Those atrocities can constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We must do everything in our power
to hold the perpetrators accountable and bring justice to
the victims. In that connection, Luxembourg supports
the crucial work carried out by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in cooperation with
the Ukrainian judicial authorities.
32/33

02/06/2022

The lack of accountability for acts committed in
the past and present only encourages the commission
of other crimes in the future. I will cite three examples
in that regard. In both Myanmar and the Sudan, armed
forces accused of acts of genocide carried out coups
d’état against legitimately elected civilian authorities.
With regard to Syria, we deeply regret the fact that the
Security Council was unable to adopt a draft resolution
referring the situation in Syria to the ICC on 22 May
2014 due to the use of the veto by two permanent
Council members (see S/PV.7180). Eight years later,
such crimes continue.
We encourage the Security Council to use its right
of referral to the ICC when crimes within the Court’s
jurisdiction appear to have been committed. We invite
all Member States to subscribe to the code of conduct by
which more than 120 States have already pledged not to
vote against any draft Security Council resolution that
seeks rapid and resolute action to end genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes or seeks to prevent
such crimes occurring.
When the Council is paralysed, it is important to
support the mechanisms and commissions of inquiry
set up by the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council to document serious violations of international
law in order to fight against impunity, whether in Syria,
Myanmar, Ethiopia or Ukraine.
The role of civil society is also essential. Gathering
evidence and collecting testimonies helps to lay the
foundations in order to ensure that, when the time comes,
the perpetrators of atrocities are held accountable.
Accountability is also the responsibility of States.
We can rely on the International Court of Justice,
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
to render judgments and give impartial advisory
opinions. Like other speakers, I would like to recall the
order on provisional measures issued by the Court on
16 March, including the stipulation that Russia must
immediately suspend the military operations launched
on 24 February on Ukraine’s territory. We urge Russia
to comply with that legally binding order.
Luxembourg remains committed, alongside all
victims, international courts and other partners, to
prevent impunity for the perpetrators of atrocities and
ensure respect for international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
22-36943

02/06/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I wish to express our
appreciation to the Albanian presidency for organizing
this open debate and to all briefers and delegations for
their important contributions on this timely topic. I say
so especially given that Poland is a proud member of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine.
Let us be honest with ourselves. We did not
succeed, as an international community, in preventing
the Russian war against Ukraine. It is therefore not
our duty, as some voices are advocating, to search
for face-saving solutions for the aggressors — rather,
we must do everything we can to save the face of the
international community. That strategy should be based
on assuring justice and accountability for the crimes
and serious violations of international law committed
in Ukraine.
The Security Council should play a significant role
in that process, and a special duty within this organ lies
with its permanent members. While pursuing the main
goal of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security, the Council also has a track record
of strengthening justice and accountability for serious
violations of international law.
It is unacceptable that there have been
instances — including in the context of the Syrian
conflict and the current war in Ukraine — in which
some Council members have acted against the goals
of the United Nations by preventing international
lawbreakers from being brought to justice. In doing so,
they have obstructed accountability for violations of
international law and made it difficult if not impossible
to punish the perpetrators.
In that context, reference should be made to the
principle enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 2, of
the Charter of the United Nations, requiring that all
members fulfil, in good faith, the obligations they have
assumed in accordance with the Charter. That principle
also applies to the veto power exercised by the five
permanent members of the Council. If a permanent
Council member uses a veto to avoid responsibility for
aggression, as Russia recently did, then such behaviour
constitutes an abuse of its veto rights and cannot be
considered to be in accordance with international law.
In cases in which the Security Council’s work
is being obstructed, appropriate actions should be
taken by other United Nations organs. After all, the

S/PV.9052

preservation of international peace and security is not
solely the task of the Security Council and requires an
active and effective search for legal solutions to ensure
that justice is delivered.
In a world in which access to the global network of
communication is rapidly growing, Poland also attaches
great importance to the issue of countering propaganda
and disinformation. The work of independent and
free media constitutes an effective accountability
mechanism used to document gross violations of
international law and serves as a platform for bringing
the necessary attention to victims.
The process of strengthening accountability
and justice for war crimes and serious violations
of international law cannot be completed without
establishing truth, justice and effective remedies for
victims and their families. It is never too late to do
so. Many examples show that victims await justice
for decades.
The Katyn massacre, during which almost 22,000
Polish prisoners of war were executed by the Soviets
in the spring of 1940, is one such example of the most
atrocious crimes and illustrates the repugnant process
of avoiding international responsibility. It is a blatant
example of the denial and distortion of the truth
and concealment of the facts, thereby preventing a
proper investigation.
To date, the families of Katyn victims have not
received any sort of redress due to the fact that the
perpetrators of the massacre disappeared, first because
of the Soviet presence among the Allies and then due
to the fog of the Cold War, when the Allied Powers
chose to turn a blind eye to it. Although the Soviet
responsibility for the massacre was finally confirmed
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the victims’
relatives are still seeking justice 82 years later.
Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past. Assuring
justice and accountability is our common obligation
in the face of every war crime committed, no matter
where in the world.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

22-3694333/33
