S/PV.8334

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8334th meeting

Wednesday, 29 August 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Mr. Hickey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Mediation and settlement of disputes
Letter dated 3 August 2018 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2018/586)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-26970 (E)
*1826970*

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2018/586, which contains
a letter dated 3 August 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Mediation and settlement of disputes
Letter dated 3 August 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/586)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia,
Fiji, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: The Most
Reverend and Right Honourable Justin Welby,
Archbishop of Canterbury; and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem,
Co-founder of PAIMAN Alumni Trust.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires a.i.
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/77

begin

29/08/2018

its

I now wish to warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral His Excellency Mr. António Guterres and give
him the floor.
The Secretary-General: War is becoming
increasingly complex, and so is mediating peace. Today,
internal conflicts frequently take on regional and
transnational dimensions. Many feature a deadly mix of
fragmented armed groups and political interests funded
by criminal activities. Conflicts around the world drag
on for years and decades, holding back development
and stunting opportunities. Comprehensive peace
agreements are becoming more elusive and short-lived.
Political will wanes; international attention drifts. The
Central African Republic, for example, has suffered
overlapping national and local conflicts for decades,
yet some 15 peace agreements have been signed there
since 1997.
As bad as the situation is in many parts of the world,
I am convinced that it is within our power to tackle and
reverse these trends. That is why, since the beginning
of my tenure, one of my key priorities has been a surge
in diplomacy for peace. As I have consistently stressed,
we must make prevention our priority. But prevention
also includes investment in mediation, peacebuilding
and sustainable development. We must be bold and
creative in bringing together the avenues and capacities
that are available for mediation.
The United Nations has a number of mediation
resources that we deploy in various ways. My Special
Envoys and Representatives pursue consultations,
good offices and formal talks, often alongside envoys
and mediators from regional organizations or Member
States. They may lead a political process, as in Libya
or Yemen. They may head a complex peacekeeping
operation, as in Mali, or they may focus on prevention
from a regional office, as in West Africa.
Collaboration with other mediation actors is
key. Allow me to mention two recent examples. In
Madagascar, my Special Adviser has coordinated
closely with the special envoys of the African Union,
the Southern Africa Development Community, the
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie to facilitate Malagasy-led negotiations
to hold peaceful and inclusive negotiations aimed
at ensuring free and fair elections. In the Gambia,
coordinated action by the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the United
Nations and neighbouring countries succeeded in
preventing a major political crisis and supporting a
democratic transition.
Members of the United Nations Standby Team of
Senior Mediation Advisers are providing advice in the
Central African Republic on transitional justice issues,
as part of the peace process there. In Yemen, they are
assisting with the design of the mediation process
led by my Special Envoy. In South Sudan, they have
provided support to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, which is leading the mediation process.
The decisive engagement of the region, particularly
the neighbouring countries — backed by the Security
Council — was a critical element in the agreement
recently reached by the South Sudanese leaders to end
the conflict.
Discreet engagement also plays a role. Continuing
talks with the Taliban, despite years of war and
continued fighting, and away from the glare of
publicity, allows position to be clarified. Renewed
engagement with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has also benefited from this approach. The
United Nations also works with private mediation
actors, including non-governmental organizations,
which may have greater freedom to establish contacts
and foster dialogue with armed groups, militias and
others. Meanwhile, from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe, an
enormous range of other actors — national bodies and
civil society groups, including women’s organizations,
religious leaders and young activists — play a part in
mediation at the local and community level.
Mediating an end to today’s complex conflicts
means that we must bring all these tracks together in
a coordinated way. We must also find new ways to
pursue the more inclusive approaches that are critical
to successful mediation. That is what we in the United
Nations are trying to do. I continue to offer my good
offices and personal engagement wherever they can add
value, alongside my envoys and special representatives,
drawing on the expertise of the entire United Nations
and those in the broader mediation community.

S/PV. 8334

To complement my efforts and those of my envoys,
I have established the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation. I am pleased to have the Archbishop
of Canterbury with us today, and look forward to
working with him on several concrete initiatives in the
coming months. I am also grateful to former Nigerian
President Olusegun Obasanjo, a member of the Board,
who travelled to Liberia on my behalf to support the
peaceful transfer of power after the 2017 elections.
That is just one example of how we can deploy Board
members in the cause of conflict prevention. The
Board’s members have experience and networks across
the entire spectrum of mediation. I look to them to
provide tailored advice, to find new entry points and to
help train and build capacity among our partners.
Successful mediation and the peaceful settlement
of disputes requires a deep understanding of leaders
and their constituencies and strong political will. The
Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship signed by
the leaders of Ethiopia and Eritrea last month, after
20 years of conflict and stalemate, is an example of
political courage that is already having a positive effect
throughout the region, but we must also continue and
strengthen our efforts to move beyond negotiations
with political and military elites. That means working
at the subnational and local levels to help build peace
from the ground up. Local authorities, civil society and
traditional and religious leaders all have critical roles
to play. The national conference process in Libya, for
example, is a bottom-up, inclusive process that has
provided valuable insights into the aspirations of the
Libyan people. My envoys are supporting local efforts
to address communal conflicts in South Sudan and
engaging with a women’s advisory board and the Civil
Society Support Room on the Syrian process. In the
Central African Republic, we are engaging at the local
level with national authorities and religious leaders in
support of the African Union initiative.
We are also investing in women’s meaningful
participation and leadership in peace processes,
ensuring that women always have a seat at the table
and that their voices are heard. I have emphasized the
importance of inclusive processes to my own special
envoys, and have appointed three women to senior
mediation roles in recent months. The emergence of
regional networks of women mediators is another
important development. The Nordic Women Mediators
network and FemWise, the African Union’s network of
women mediators, are notable in that regard. Members

18-269703/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/08/2018

of my High-level Advisory Board are already in contact
with those groups.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Inclusive mediation requires paying greater
attention to the gender dimensions of conflict, including
conflict-related sexual violence and the gendered
impact of decisions around post-war reconstruction.
For example, the design of a post-conflict constitutional
committee or a federal system will have a significant
impact on women and their participation.

I now warmly welcome The Most Reverend
and Right Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and give him the floor.

We also need to do much more to engage with
young people, who are critical agents of change and
advocates for peace. It is encouraging that six young
refugees took part as observers in the South Sudan
High-Level Revitalization Forum. We must encourage
and support the participation of young men and women
in peace processes. We will hold the first international
conference on that subject in Helsinki early next year.
Finally, we should invest in the mediation and
conciliation opportunities offered by information
technology. We all are aware of the role that social
media can play in exacerbating divisions and provoking
hostility. However, social platforms can also be a tool to
bring communities together, stimulate dialogue, share
information and heal historic wrongs.
Parties to conflict are highly attuned to and play on
divisions in the international community. The Security
Council plays a central role in conflict resolution,
particularly when it signals to warring parties that
they must settle their disputes peacefully. When the
Council is united, we all are more effective, including
in our mediation efforts. When the Council cannot find
unity, our mediation efforts suffer. Council members,
and Member States more broadly, can also support
mediation efforts by ensuring that regions speak with
one voice. Consistent messaging by regional and
subregional organizations, which have the expertise,
experience and capacity to find innovative responses
to the most testing challenges, can be a great support to
the work of the Council.
As the conflict landscape has changed, so has our
understanding of what constitutes an effective mediation
process, Innovative thinking on mediation is no longer
an option; it is a necessity. I urge representatives to
commit to a more effective use of mediation as a tool
to save and to improve the lives of millions of people
around the world.
4/77

Archbishop Welby: Let me put on record my
sincere thanks to the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Her Excellency Dame Karen Pierce,
for her invitation to address this organ during this
open debate on the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is also a great honour to speak under
the presidency of Lord Ahmad. He is an outstanding
representative of the British Government.
I would also like to express my sense of loss after
the death of one of the greatest servants of the United
Nations, and indeed of peace, Mr. Kofi Annan. His life
was lived with a vision of reconciliation and with a
personal integrity that will earn him lasting renown.
It is a privilege to follow the Secretary-General’s
words. We could not have asked for a better opening
briefing to set the context of this debate. I greatly look
forward to hearing from our civil society representative.
I am honoured to be here today, speaking in a dual
capacity as a member of the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation and as a religious leader within a global
Church. Anglicanism is a global Church in which the
average member is poor, a woman or someone living in a
conflict or post-conflict setting who has the aspirations
of all vulnerable people, above all a longing for peace.
The Church and other faith communities are
intimately present where there are conflicts. We cannot
and will not walk away from them. For example, in
South Sudan, Church leaders, including the leader of
the country’s Anglican Church, Archbishop Justin Badi
Arama, play an increasingly important role in moving
the whole peace process beyond the current roadblocks
that representatives know so well.
However, mediation can be effective only when it
is in the context of structures of reconciliation. Where
mediation is about resolving conflict, reconciliation
is the process of transforming violent conflict into
non-violent coexistence where communities have come
to terms with history and are learning to disagree well.
Mediation by itself, however skilled, is like using a
garden hose to put out a forest fire, when what is needed
is rain over the whole area so as to let new life grow and
sustain itself.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We therefore need to complement mediation — in
fact, the whole conflict cycle — within the framework
of reconciliation. The vision of the United Nations
founders was no less than to abolish conflict. Many
of them were responding to the words of Jesus Christ,
applicable to all parts of the Earth, in the Beatitudes:
“Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of God”. The very life of Jesus was given
in the cause of peace with God, with oneself and
with others.
There are and always will be profound differences
among and within nations, but the terms on which
those differences are dealt with look very different
today to 70 years ago. We have avoided global nuclear
war, yet not its continuing menace. However, today
the international rules-based order is struggling.
National interests are still too often allowed, even in
the Chamber, to overcome the wisdom that those who
lived through global war learned. Without dealing with
even passionate disagreement peacefully, no national
interest can prevail. Short-term advantage for one
interest leads to long-term destruction for all through
great wars and small conflicts.
Reconciliation is not an act that comes at the end of
the conflict cycle. It must become the framework that
enables us to sustain peace and to prevent conflict cycles
repeating with an ever-increasing destructive force. A
British football coach, a manager of the Liverpool team,
once famously told his team to get their retaliation in
first. If we are to transform conflict, we need instead to
get our reconciliation in first.
I ask representatives whether the approaches to
reconciliation are currently adequate, especially using
local, religious and traditional sources of peacemaking?
Even in this time of uncertainty and renewed
international rivalry, for the sake of future peace we
must invest in reconciliation and learn how to support
transformation in human relationships.
The role that an institution such as the Church plays
in that regard is significant. Religious institutions are
often the only functioning institutions in a fragile or
pre-conflict situation. They are present before, during
and after conflict. They provide early warnings of signs
of conflict in communities. Working with and through
religious and other institutions to provide pre-emptive
reconciliation frameworks can prevent conflict
becoming violent or returning to violence. It can set it
on a different path. Their work is done by the young and

S/PV. 8334

the elderly, by women and men and by the rich and the
poor. They seek a people’s peace.
If we can learn how to set conflict transformation
in a framework of reconciliation, including at the grassroots level and not only by elites in conferences, we
open ourselves to working together in new and more
effective ways as we strive for peace, as the SecretaryGeneral has just said. We enable mediation to be orders
of magnitude more effective. As I have already said,
the United Nations is the most extraordinary example
of a framework of reconciliation, but that framework
needs to be embedded in current ways of working
and analysis.
A cross-agency and cross-departmental reconciliation
strategy, supported by the necessary resources, will
open up current ways of working to new and innovative
ways of negotiating strategies for peace, offering
more options in an increasingly complex international
system. There is already much good work taking place.
The work of the Mediation Support Unit, which also
provides excellent Secretariat support for the Highlevel Advisory Board, is vital. The Advisory Board
itself is an important and innovative step towards a new
way of approaching conflict transformation.
Partnership between United Nations offices
and groups, such as the Network for Traditional
and Religious Peacemakers, helps to build a shared
understanding. The work of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
particularly the production of the Plan of Action for
Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to
Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes, provides
an important framework for how religious communities
need to contribute to preventing the escalation of
conflicts. I also want to acknowledge the important
work of the United Nations Inter-agency Task Force on
Religion and Development.
However, it is overdue for the United Nations to
move beyond those still fragmented efforts. Enabling
transformative reconciliation must be at the core
when we build United Nations partnerships with
faith communities. Let me pledge my support to the
Secretary-General in that work. I have the privilege of
having assembled a team in my office that is already
learning from past experiences. Many of its members
have worked with the United Nations. Together, we
can reach out to counterparts from other faiths to
encourage their involvement and support, as they are

18-269705/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

already doing. That is our collaborative offer to the
United Nations in this time of global pain.
Large tracts of territory around the world are
violently contested in situations where government
has failed. They are differently governed spaces, where
no official Government rules. Even there, the Church
and other faith groups, sometimes existing precariously,
provide a form of hope and mediation in those
extraordinarily difficult contexts. As we think about
new and innovative approaches to conflict prevention,
this is an example of how the United Nations, Member
States and faith actors can be allies, with the potential
for transformational results.
As the Secretary-General has stated, women’s
and youth participation in mediation and conflict
transformation is especially essential to success. In the
Anglican community, we are developing a programme
called Women on the Front Line, which offers support
and equips women based on their contexts. It has already
been used in several places with severe conflict. It will
need to be complemented by youth on the front line, as the
Council emphasized in the year 2000. Earlier this year,
I hosted an Emerging Peacemakers Forum in London,
bringing together 50 young Christians and Muslims
from around the world in pre-emptive reconciliation
to learn about leadership in peacebuilding. The superb
work done by my colleagues liberated participants to
inspiring visions of peace. They will serve peace for
many years.
In conclusion, I again thank the United Kingdom
for the opportunity to address the Security Council at
today’s open debate. I am grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his leadership on the issue and willingness
to take innovative steps to seek out new ways of
working. At a time when the United Nations is debating
and pointing to the horrors in Myanmar, we are
reminded that conflict destroys dignity, hope and all of
our best dreams and is often intractable. While I would
like to thank all of those who will speak today on behalf
of their States, I urge the Security Council to commit
to the ongoing transformation of violent conflict into
non-violent disagreement and eventually into a truly
inclusive approach to participation in mediation and
reconciliation, now and for future generations.
The President: I thank the Archbishop for his very
insightful and expert briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Qadeem.
6/77

29/08/2018

Ms. Qadeem: It is an honour to be here in the
Security Council today. I thank the United Kingdom
for giving me the opportunity to address this important
topic. I would like to focus my intervention on the role
of women in mediation.
As Council members all know, for 18 years, as
women peace practitioners and strategists working on
the front lines of today’s most complex global conflicts,
we have called for, advocated and demanded recognition
and inclusion in peace processes and at the peace tables
that world Powers sponsor and facilitate. But despite
the rhetoric of support and even the resolutions and
national action plans that States have adopted, we as
women remain largely on the outside. Why is that?
I would like to start by addressing some common
misconceptions. So often we hear that women’s
exclusion is cultural and that they cannot play a
mediation role in a particular conflict because of local
cultural factors. However, if that were the case, surely
there would be vast differences between, for example,
Nepal and Colombia. They hardly share the same
culture. Women’s exclusion is not about culture; it is
about power. Or we hear the integrity or legitimacy of
women’s peace coalitions being questioned. Frankly, as
suggested by the Better Peace Tool, one of the booklets
developed by the International Civil Society Action
Network (ICAN), we should reframe the question. Why
should wielding weapons and threatening violence be
the only ticket to peace talks? If we are serious about
achieving peace, we also need peace actors, such as
civil society and relief workers. Everywhere we look
at the local level, we see women doing the majority of
that work.
Perhaps it is because we think of a mediator as
having power and gravitas — terms that are inherently
masculine — with the ability to knock heads or
press for compromises. If the wars and conflicts we
experience today were similar to those of the nineteenth
or twentieth century, perhaps that form of high-power
mediation would be the only solution. But today’s
conflicts are different. There is a proliferation of actors,
who are often highly localized. So many of the key
players are often hidden and, frankly, unreachable by
United Nations envoys. If the Council is serious about
ending wars, then acknowledging their complexity
is a critical first step bcause it can lead to designing
mediation processes that address that complexity by
drawing on the vast resources we have as local actors,
and especially as women.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Perhaps some are now sceptical and wondering
how women can talk to violent extremism groups,
such as Boko Haram, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE) or the Taliban, who are typical actors
in the wars of our time. Years ago, our sister Visaka
of Sri Lanka took seven other mothers of missing
soldiers, like her, to meet the Tamil Tigers. And after
convincing the LTTE, she successfully mediated a
ceasefire, followed by peace talks between the LTTE
and the Government of Sri Lanka. In Hudaydah,
Yemeni women are saving lives on the front lines of
a devastating war where people are completely under
siege. Food for Humanity, an organization led by a
woman and a partner of our coalition, the Women’s
Alliance for Security Leadership, was able to mediate
and convince conflicting parties to allow people to
leave the area. It also provided humanitarian aid after
the Red Cross pulled out in early June.
Let me share my own experience in Pakistan. In
one of the areas hardest hit by violent extremism and
the military’s responses to it, there, where no one would
dare stand up to the Taliban, out of necessity I had a
dialogue with their leaders. For us working and living
at the local level, there is no other option. I found the
courage, not only to speak with and persuade them to
release my staff members, whom they had captured
because they were carrying out health and education
projects, but also to take the chance to seek support
for the implementation of the same projects. That is
mediation. I have found that in mediation, it is essential
to speak to each person’s core humanity. Believe me,
it breaks down barriers and works miracles. I am not
essentializing women or claiming that all women can
do it. I am speaking specifically about women, such as
the members of the Women’s Alliance, who have the
extraordinary vision, courage and skill to engage in
such deeply dangerous work.
Often the barrier-question posed is: Who are the
right women for the job? Again, ICAN’s Better Peace
Tool provides the answer: women’s organizations
with certain core values; women with the skills and
knowledge relevant to the negotiations and agenda;
women who understand the art of crafting the
storytelling process in order to humanize potential;
women who employ imaginative thinking to create new
possibilities within cultural realities; women with the
ability to draft an effective agreement; women who are
self-assured and persevering; women with leadership
qualities and lack of ego.

S/PV. 8334

Lastly, I would like to set out some lessons I have
drawn from my own experiences of mediation and from
examples of many women mediators and peacebuilders
around the world. In spite of all of the institutional,
cultural and structural barriers, women’s mediatory
roles at the informal levels have often served as
blueprints for negotiations. One reason for that is that
women have a different connection to communities,
families and households that can be particularly helpful
in localized peacebuilding.
Women also place greater relative weight on
interaction-specific aspects of mediation than
men do and often perceive most negotiations to
include a relationship dimension, even in the most
challenging environment. From intervention with
family members who may be fighting with armed
groups, to advocacy for referendums associated
with peace agreements, to serving as a part of early
warning systems for conflict prevention, women
provide a grass-roots underpinning to peacebuilding
processes. In the context of international conflicts,
we all know that emphasis on relational aspects and
fairness in distribution are valuable traits for achieving
lasting peace.
Women should be involved in mediation and peace
processes because, at a basic level, their participation
is a question of equity and equality. It matters
because peace negotiations and the agreements they
generate set the structure and design for post-conflict
reconstruction and politics, as just mentioned by the
Secretary-General, which affect the lives of not only
women but the whole of society. Women mediators
can ensure that processes and agreements are more
gender-sensitive and thus more comprehensive and
legitimate. For example, women can demand language
on violence against women and on women’s citizenship
rights or women’s participation in transitional and
implementation bodies.
Women’s engagement is particularly important in
mediating track-two and track-three processes. Women
effectively use soft power and the humanization of
communication to create more open and flexible
processes. Women’s bridging capabilities and future
orientation can help parties find common cause in
reaching agreement for the civic good.
It is usually assumed that women only represent
women and that they do not bring experience or
expertise on other issues to the table. That has the

18-269707/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

effect of sidelining women and seeking their views
only on soft, social or community issues. That is
not correct. My experience from the platform of the
Women’s Alliance for Security Leadership, while
interacting with women peacemakers, reveals that
women mediators strategically start with the softer
issue — that is, the common societal issues — by seeking
consensus and then take on the hard-core issues, such
as de-weaponization and de-escalation, to completely
transform radical youth and women. Women must be
included in track-one mediation processes to achieve
a greater degree of gender equality in society and its
institutions, and to improve the durability of peace for
everyone — men, women and children, and States and
citizens alike.
I believe that women have skills and experience at
all levels of mediation and peacebuilding, but qualified
women are not being used to engage in mediation work.
I believe that the recently established Commonwealth
Women Mediators Network will provide the muchneeded system of patronage and structural support
to women to provide them with opportunities of
mentoring, advice provision and access to new
practice-based experience that will help them increase
their competitiveness, confidence and capacity to take
on advanced leadership roles and upper-level positions.
We are seeing conflicts become more protracted
and metastasize across borders and continents. I have a
question. How much longer can the world really afford
to exclude those of us who are making peace at the
front lines?
In ideal conditions, peace processes would be
between two major parties — for instance, two nations,
with one mediator. Ceasefire lines could be drawn and
fighters could go home to their own communities. But
we do not live in the realm of fantasy. Our wars are
complex and multifaceted. Our peace processes must be
rooted in that reality. It is time to value, recognize and
seek the advice of women who are already mediating
on the ground and who have access to and the trust
of the parties — whether in Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Yemen or Syria. Only together can we foster just and
sustainable peace.
The President: I thank for Ms. Qadeem for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United
8/77

29/08/2018

Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
In January 2017, the Secretary-General gave the
Security Council a challenge. He asked the question
of how we can use our powers under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations more effectively to
prevent conflict (see S/PV.7857). Although Chapter VI
is about more than mediation, it is an important part
of the answer. The Security Council is often uniquely
placed to support mediation efforts to prevent and
indeed resolve conflict. But the Council is far from
being the only actor.
The complex nature of modern conflict, which the
Secretary-General and others have already referred
to, means that averting or ending violence requires a
concerted approach from a range of actors, both within
the family of the United Nations and outside it. That
includes regional and subregional organizations, civil
society, religious leaders and, as we have just heard,
women’s mediation networks.
I am therefore delighted and pleased that we have
heard from representatives of those groups today. I
would particularly like to thank the Most Reverend
Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem
for their very insightful, expert and thoughtful
briefings to the Council today. As Ms. Qadeem said,
in peacemaking in conflict resolution we must speak to
the core humanity of people and, to echo a phrase used
by the Most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, it is
only then that we will achieve the “people’s peace”.
In the United Kingdom, we have seen the
importance of mediation first-hand. The division and
violence in Northern Ireland took years of sustained
negotiations to resolve, and finally ended with the
signing of the Belfast Agreement, also known as the
Good Friday Agreement, in 1998. It shows the value
of patient and persistent mediation, and the 20 years of
peace that have followed illustrate clearly why we must
give mediation efforts our utmost and full support.
Today, as we look around the world, in Yemen
and Libya Martin Griffiths and Ghassan Salamé are
leading efforts to facilitate peaceful resolutions to
some of the most complex and long-running conflicts,
with great human cost. But we should not make the
mistake of thinking that mediation works only at the
national level. In countries like the Central African
Republic and Mali, we have seen the importance of
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

community-level mediation conducted or facilitated by
peacekeeping missions.
In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
has successfully facilitated mediation between armed
groups in several areas of the country, such as the
agreement signed in the town Bouar in December 2017.
MINUSCA is also involved in strengthening local
capacity to resolve conflicts, building trust between
communities and advocating the participation of
women and young people.
In Mali, the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali recognizes the importance of community
engagement and local mediation. It is essential in
protecting civilians and in stabilizing communities
and the country. It has facilitated the training of 703
mediators, including 225 women, who have served on
community-based mediation panels.
More broadly, the United Nations has made good
progress in the past decade to professionalize and
strengthen its mediation role with the establishment
of the Mediation Support Unit in 2006, the Standby
Team of Senior Mediation Advisers in 2008 and the
High-level Advisory Board for Mediation in 2017. The
United Nations special political missions play quite a
unique role in fostering and supporting dialogue and
preventing conflict.
If we cast our minds back to last December,
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, former President of Nigeria
and a member of the High-level Advisory Board, as we
heard from the Secretary-General, travelled to Liberia
on the Secretary-General’s behalf to support the first
peaceful transfer of power in Liberia’s history. Thus,
there is much we can already be proud of in terms of
what has been achieved. But equally, on reflecting on
what has been achieved, it is important to recognize
there is much more to do.
We now need to look forward towards the coming
decade and address the changing nature of conflicts,
their complexity and the increasing number of
mediation actors. The United Kingdom believes that
the Security Council has a pivotal and important role
to play in that respect. We must include mediation in
the toolkit that the Council uses to prevent and resolve
conflicts. That includes working effectively with
mediators from regional and subregional organizations.

S/PV. 8334

We therefore welcome the United Nations work to
strengthen capacity in that particular area. It also
means considering conflict resolution and mediation
when we mandate peacekeeping and special political
missions. We should learn and build on the examples of
Mali and the Central African Republic, and ensure that
mediation support is properly resourced.
Lastly but most importantly, as we have heard
already, and as set out in resolution 1325 (2000), we must
ensure without question the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in conflict resolution as leaders
and decision-makers at both the national and the local
levels. Women’s participation should not be an option.
It is a central and pivotal part of conflict resolution. It
is key to ensuring conflict resolution and lasting peace.
It is a matter of ensuring respect for human rights and
ensuring gender equality. As we all know — and we
should reflect on this — the evidence points to that.
When one considers the research, it also confirms
that, where women are involved in peacekeeping, it
increases the probability of peace lasting much longer.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts
to promote gender parity in the United Nations, but
also recognize that it is incumbent upon all of us — the
United Nations system, Member States, civil society
and religious leaders — to do more to promote women’s
participation in conflict prevention and resolution at all
levels, including the appointment of women mediators.
Let me assure the Council that the United Kingdom
is taking its responsibility very seriously, and we are
therefore committing £1.6 million to the development
of the Women Mediators across the Commonwealth
network, to which Ms. Mossarat Qadeem alluded.
Of course, the voice of young people must also be
included. What is clear is the fact that the nature of
conflict evolves, and as it evolves mediation will be
needed more than ever. The United Nations must
stand ready to ensure that it is equal to the task. Let
me assure all colleagues and Member States across the
United Nations and beyond that the United Kingdom
will remain committed to supporting the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts and focus to both professionalize
and enhance the United Nations approach to mediation,
with women rightfully playing a full, pivotal and
equal part.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

18-269709/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Let me begin by thanking the United
Kingdom for organizing this important open debate
under the theme “Maintenance of international peace
and security — mediation and settlement of disputes”.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing on this topic. In addition, we are very
grateful to be joined by The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their briefings.
I am delivering this statement on behalf of the
three non-permanent African members of the Security
Council: Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea.
Although mediation is one of the most-used methods
for conflict resolution by the international community,
it has been almost a decade since the Security
Council formally discussed it as part of its agenda
(see S/PV.6108). Today’s debate on mediation and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts is very timely. It is also
extremely fitting, given the increasing importance of
mediation to respond to some of the perennial and longterm conflicts facing the world.
As the main organ responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council
has a special role to play in promoting the effective use of
peaceful resolutions to disputes in addressing security
threats and challenges. Even more important is its role
today in ensuring that mediation efforts — whether
led by the United Nations, regional organizations or
States Members — receive the necessary political
support. That is particularly obvious at a time when
the primacy of politics is becoming a guiding principle
in the formulation and implementation of peace
operation mandates.
Undoubtedly, the Secretary-General’s call for a
surge in diplomacy for peace and the priority that he
has given to conflict prevention have gained momentum
since he assumed the highest office of the United
Nations. In view of the enormous peace and security
challenges that we are facing today, prioritizing
mediation is hardly an option. In that regard, we were
encouraged by the General Assembly’s adoption of the
Secretary-General’s reform process, which prioritizes
prevention and the maintenance of peace as its overall
goals. We also acknowledge the importance of the
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, established
10/77

29/08/2018

by the Secretary-General, and the role of its members
in complementing the work of his good offices,
including Special Envoys, regional offices and political
field missions.
Likewise, we especially welcome the great
importance that the Secretary-General attaches to
the mediation role of regional organizations. Clearly,
the current global security challenges facing us are
so complex and interconnected that they cannot be
addressed only by the United Nations and the Security
Council. Those challenges are not limited to a single
place or geographic area and transcend the borders
of individual nations and continents. Therefore,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, as set out
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
remains indispensable, perhaps now more than ever,.
That is particularly true today when multilateralism
has been increasingly challenged and a renewed global
commitment to collective security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, including through mediation,
is more than ever necessary. As an example, we
highlight the important and consistent role that the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of Central African States
and other organizations have played in the areas of
mediation and conflict resolution, which was well
illustrated recently by the regional interventions in the
crises of The Gambia, Guinea Bissau, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic, among others. Article 4
(e) of the Constitutive Act of the African Union calls
for the peaceful resolution of conflicts among States
members of the Union, which is also detailed in article
3 of the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
In that context, the African Union has improved its
mediation role and activities in recent years.
There are approximately 20 African Union special
envoys, representatives and mediators deployed in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
throughout the continent. A mediation support unit was
also established to provide capacity support to African
Union mediators. We believe that the United Nations
must continue its multifaceted support to strengthen
the mediation role of the African Union and ensure
greater cooperation and coherence by working closely
with African Union special envoys, representatives and
mediators on the ground. It is also important to continue
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

to encourage and step up the Council’s practice of
inviting special envoys, representatives and mediators
of the African Union to public briefings, open debates
and interactive informal discussions.
Considering the important role that women can play
in mediation and raising awareness among other women,
as acknowledged in resolution 1325 (2000), it is timely
and essential to strengthen regional and international
structures by including women, who bring to the table
the qualities necessary to carry out the important task
of mediation. The African Women Leaders Network is
a good example of the great potential of this approach
when applied to mediation.
In conclusion, the mediation efforts of the African
Union seeking the lofty goal of silencing the guns in
Africa complement the United Nations prevention
agenda. That is why it makes a great deal of sense
to work with the African Union to reach that noble
objective. Important debates have already taken place
during the twelfth annual joint consultative meeting
between members of the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council on this issue and, as one of the three African
countries on the Security Council, we intend to continue
that discussion in coming months in order to continue
to explore avenues of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in that regard.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing this important informative
meeting. We would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his briefing and take
this opportunity to reiterate our strongest support for
the conflict prevention agenda he is implementing.
Finally, we thank The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their inspiring briefings.
The alarming number of armed conflicts affecting
the world, the number of victims, forcibly displaced
persons and the threats of famine due to those conflicts
are sufficient reasons for the international community to
join forces to find solutions to those situations. Bolivia,
in its commitment to respecting international law and
as a State that promotes a culture of peace, always
favours the pacific settlement of disputes, including
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and resort to regional

S/PV. 8334

agencies or arrangements, in accordance with Chapter
VI, Article 33, of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we appreciate and highlight the
efforts and determination of the Secretary-General
to prioritize conflict prevention as a guide for the
work of the entire United Nations system and to place
emphasis on mediation as a key tool for that purpose.
The Secretary-General’s report on United Nations
activities to promote mediation is an important element
for understanding the progress made by the Secretariat,
its activities and, above all, its challenges in the task
of supporting mediation as a tool for both conflict
prevention and resolution.
Mediation must be a process that promotes
commitment and knowledge of the historical, cultural
and political specificities of a conflict and of the parties
to the conflict. For such a process to be successful and
sustainable over time, the participation and political
will of the parties to the conflict is essential. The
participation of all segments of society, especially
women and young people, is also essential to the
success of any mediation process. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General’s efforts to increase
the participation of women mediators as his special or
personal envoys.
Only mediation that does not resort to the threat
or use of force or to the imposition of conditions, but
rather harmonizes the positions of the parties and seeks
common ground and mutually acceptable solutions has
a chance of success. That is why the role of mediators
must be one of total neutrality and impartiality.
Likewise, national ownership and the generation of
confidence-building measures between the parties are
elements that strengthen mediation processes.
To be effective, mediation efforts require a
stable and consistent operational, logistical, security,
administrative and financial environment. We are
convinced that the various United Nations entities can
support mediation efforts, each according to its thematic
strengths and expertise or its regional location. In that
sense, such efforts need to be coordinated in order to
avoid duplication of work.
The United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and the international community, in
general, should focus their efforts on building and
strengthening the capacities and mediation initiatives
of Member States, including through the training of

18-2697011/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/08/2018

local mediators and the establishment of networks of
mediators and local infrastructure for mediation.

S/PV.6108). It is high time for the Council to take stock
of recent developments in this arena.

Furthermore, the Security Council should
promote, within the framework of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, cooperation
between our Organization and regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention and resolution
through mediation.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Mediation Support Unit for their efforts in promoting
mediation as the most costeffective method of conflict
resolution. Conflict prevention and crisis management
through mediation are one of the founding principles
of the United Nations, and we cannot underemphasize
its significance to our work in the Council. We need to
take all possible steps to further enhance the mediation
capacity of the Organization.

It is important to recall the essential role that
regional and subregional organizations play in
facilitating mediation mechanisms through their
specific approaches derived from their geographical,
cultural and historical proximity to particular local
conflict situations, as well as through the information
they can provide on them within their mandates. It is
critical to include those entities in the prevention and
resolution of such conflicts before opting for unilateral
actions by actors outside the region that, instead of
facilitating the resolution of disputes, only undermine
or adversely affect efforts to reach a peaceful solution.
In that regard, we welcome regional initiatives for
the establishment of so-called groups of friends that,
being familiar with the reality of the conflict and the
parties concerned, enable dialogue and create windows
of opportunity to prevent the escalation of conflicts
or to promote the easing of violence through their
good offices.
Finally, we encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his work on mediation and good offices, in
accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations. His active participation in
mediation processes, as well as in the appointment of
United Nations envoys and special representatives,
should always be seen as an opportunity to bring the
parties to the negotiating table and to dialogue. In that
regard, we welcome the establishment of the High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation. We believe that space
should be representative of the Organization and should
incorporate a gender perspective.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the Secretary General, as well as The Most Reverend
and Right Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem, for their
valuable briefings. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the presidency for choosing the topic of
today’s debate, as the last formal debate on mediation
in the Security Council took place in April 2009 (see
12/77

We live in a world of multifaceted challenges to
peace and stability that involve a countless number of
actors. The United Nations cannot always be expected
to fulfil its role in safeguarding international peace and
security by itself. Regional organizations, individual
Member States and even non-governmental entities
have important and, at times, essential contributions to
make, depending on the specific features of the conflict
in question.
Mediation is based on the concept of restorative
justice. It is worth mentioning that one of precursors
and pioneers of that concept was Polish lawyer and
sociologist Leon Petrazycki, whose work dates back to
the 1930s. The founding fathers of the United Nations
had high hopes for mediation as a method for resolving
conflicts — they resonate in Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we would like to
highlight once again the great job that the Department
of Political Affairs (DPA) is doing by, among other
things, holding annual conflict prevention dialogues
with the European Union.
We recognize that the United Nations has the right
tools to advance mediation, such as the Mediation
Support Unit, the Standby Team of Senior Mediation
Advisers and the recently established High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation. We have already seen
the first results of successfully conducted negotiations
by a member of the Advisory Board in the case of
Liberia’s presidential election.
The Security Council in its configuration has
already adopted numerous documents mentioning
mediation. Let me draw the Council’s attention to one
particular presidential statement on conflict prevention,
adopted in January (S/PRST/2018/1), where we recalled
that a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy
should include early warning, preventive deployment
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8334

and mediation, and recognized that those components
are interdependent and complementary.

unique and substantive contributions that improve the
effectiveness of peace operations.

During the most recent Security Council debate
on mediation (see S/PV.6108), Council members
mentioned, among others, the successful examples of
Togo and Somalia. Today we are pleased to refer also to
the case of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and its efforts to peacefully resolve the name issue
with the Republic of Greece. Agreements signed by the
leaders from both sides would not have been possible
without vast mediation efforts.

We should also respond to the calls to establish
a system to enhance the financing of mediation and
prevention efforts. Poland supports those efforts with
donations to DPA’s multi-year appeal, and we would
encourage others to do so as well. Those resources
are vital for the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, for example, which helps to monitor the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace.

One excellent example of civil society mediation
efforts are the activities of the Community of
Sant’Egidio, a highly regarded Christian membership
organization based in Rome, which has been focusing
on conflict prevention and resolution, primarily in
Africa, for the past 30 years. DPA has been working
with Sant’Egidio since its first success — brokering
peace in the Mozambique civil war in 1992. Its
work is the definition of model mediation efforts:
independent, neutral, confidential and focused mostly
on poor countries.

Today, we need more effective mediation that gives
the parties to the conflict a sense of satisfaction. What
makes mediation effective? An essential condition for
successful mediation is the establishment of relations
with the parties to the conflict. To gain their trust and
confidence, the rapport must be genuine and partners
must feel that their interests are fully understood.
No party should ever expect to walk away from a
mediation process with everything they wanted. By
making sure partners understand the pros and cons of
the mediation process, sides can often gain a greater
sense of satisfaction and both sides can win.

It is crucial to involve civil society, including
women’s groups, in the design, implementation and
monitoring of any peace agreement. The protection
of women leaders at risk of targeted political violence
should also remain high among peace supporters’
priorities. They are ready to support the mediators and
facilitators following standards of inclusive mediation.
Women-led prevention initiatives have helped to
prevent and mitigate the escalation of violence many
times by engaging in constructive dialogue and peace
advocacy. Evidence shows that security efforts are more
successful and sustainable when women contribute to
prevention and early warning, post-conflict resolution
and rebuilding. It is unfortunate that women’s
representation in mediation and conflict-prevention
efforts has grown only marginally in the 18 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Women’s central roles in many families and
communities afford them a unique vantage point for
recognizing unusual patterns of behaviour and signs
of impending conflict, such as arms mobilization and
weapons caching. Women are often best positioned
to detect early signs of radicalization because their
rights and physical integrity are often the first targets
of fundamentalists. Evidence shows that women make

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French):
Mediation is a clear demonstration of the increased
power of diplomacy for peace, as the Secretary-General
has said. That is a cornerstone our Organization and
a key part of the Security Council’s duty to maintain
international peace and security.
The United Nations is the forum for great mediators.
Therefore, I would like to pay tribute to Kofi Annan
for his work as Secretary-General and as mediator in
several crises — notably, in Kenya, Syria and Burma.
He was the embodiment of a good listener, impartiality
and personal authority, which are indispensable for a
mediator. He knew how to achieve the key to successful
mediation: establishing unity where there are divisions
and a common framework that expands stakeholders’
outlook in order to overcome conflicts and free them
from the prison of binary win-lose logic and zerosum games.
Mediation is one of the essential tools provided
by Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations for
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The Gambia and
Colombia are recent success stories that underscore
the usefulness of that tool in conflict prevention,
management and resolution.

18-2697013/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

In that context, France fully endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s vision, according to which we must be
collectively more effective in preventing the emergence
and deterioration of crisis situations. France therefore
welcomes the efforts the Secretary-General has made
to strengthen the mediation capacities of the United
Nations, namely, through the establishment of the Highlevel Advisory Board on Mediation in September 2017.
France also welcomes the other measures that have
been taken in recent years, such as the establishment
of the Mediation Support Unit and the Standby Team
of Senior Mediation Advisers and the development of
United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation.
The United Nations plays a key mediation role
in many crisis situations today. I have in mind in
particular the cases of Syria, Yemen and Libya, where
United Nations representatives are directly responsible
for conflict resolution processes. I would also mention
Mali, the Central African Republic, Iraq, Colombia and
West Africa, where the special representatives of the
Secretary-General and regional offices are playing a
crucial role through their good offices.
Despite that progress and the indispensable role
played by the United Nations, the increased number of
conflicts in the world and the increasing complexity and
global nature of conflicts make mediation efforts much
more complex. In Mali, for example, the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
with the support of international mediation, is facing
both obstruction by criminal and terrorist groups
and difficulties encountered by the various parties in
joining their efforts to develop solutions to the crisis.
Elsewhere, mediation efforts are too often
hampered by political or ideological positions that limit
mediators’ room for manoeuvre. The lack of political
will and ownership by stakeholders is also a major
challenge for mediation processes.
Finally, global challenges are now a potential
source of increased conflict that cannot be ignored. I
would mention climate change, which is exacerbating
traditional sources of conflict, as evidenced, for
example, by the tensions between breeders and farmers
in West and Central Africa.
Against that backdrop, the Security Council must,
more than ever, redouble its efforts to support ongoing
mediation efforts. As I mentioned earlier, the Security
Council itself has entrusted the United Nations with
the responsibility for managing the political processes
14/77

29/08/2018

in Syria, Yemen and Libya. However, those political
processes can succeed only if the Security Council is
united in supporting the United Nations mediators and
if its members remove certain political or ideological
obstacles that undermine such processes.
In that context, France reiterates its full support
to the United Nations mediators. In Syria, after years
of bloody conflict, today hope lies in the political
process launched by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
in Geneva, the only forum in a position to achieve a
negotiated political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015). In Yemen, France also fully supports
the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the
holding on 6 September of the Geneva conference with
all the parties. Lastly, in Libya, France reiterates its full
support to Special Representative Ghassan Salamé and
his appeal to the parties to meet the commitments made
in Paris last June.
Apart from the unity of the Security Council, other
elements seem essential to the success of mediation
initiatives. In particular, it concerns their inclusiveness,
especially the effective participation of women in all
stages of the political process, which is an essential
prerequisite for ensuring the emergence of lasting
peace. It is also a matter of working with civil society
and all those that support non-violence in society in
order to fully benefit from the tremendous momentum
in serving peace that they represent, be they young
people, professional organizations or religious leaders.
The effectiveness of mediation efforts can also be
enhanced by strengthening the links and coordination
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. The latter bring the United
Nations close to the field and an in-depth knowledge of
the local environment.
Finally, today it seems to be necessary to
further increase our ability to anticipate crises by
strengthening early-warning mechanisms, but also
by using preventive diplomacy. Preventing a conflict
rather than having to resolve it must be a priority, and
the case of the Gambia is an example to follow. The
joint efforts of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
made it possible to prevent the post-electoral crisis
from turning into a conflict, whose main victim would
have been the people.
I will conclude my statement by emphasizing
that, while mediation is an essential element of
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

crisis prevention and resolution, it must of course be
supported by the promotion of respect for international
law, in particular human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and recourse to international justice
and arbitration. International law remains an enduring
linchpin of the multilateral order and an essential
instrument for preventing or resolving crises and for
restoring peace.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to thank the Secretary-General, The Most Reverend
and Right Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Ms. Qadeem for their impressive and
inspiring briefings. Let me also thank you personally,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over this
important debate.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
The
Secretary-General
emphasized
the
responsibility of all Member States to seize
opportunities for mediation in order to prevent or
manage conflict and to build and sustain peace. In
that light, today I will focus on three specific points:
first, the role of the Security Council in that context;
secondly, the importance of inclusivity in mediation;
and, thirdly, the relevance of mediation in all phases of
the conflict cycle.
On my first point, the role of the Security
Council under the Charter of the United Nations,
as set out in Article 33 of the Charter, on the pacific
settlement of disputes, the Security Council has a
responsibility to resolve and to prevent conflicts. An
important instrument in that context is mediation,
and we commend the Secretary-General for making
that his priority. As the nature of conflicts changes,
the Security Council and the United Nations need to
find new approaches to address new challenges. Let
me highlight examples such as Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, especially, Syria, where
civil wars rage and non-State actors play decisive
roles. Those examples demonstrate that we require an
adaptation of the existing instruments.
The international community is struggling to
meet such challenges. That often results in a wide
array of mediation initiatives by States and by
non-governmental organizations. What is lacking is
coordination. In many cases, the United Nations is well
placed to provide that coordination with an ambition
to build sustainable peace. The Council has its own

S/PV. 8334

role to play in supporting the efforts of the United
Nations. However, the Council needs early warning to
take early action, and we appreciate the Secretariat’s
ongoing efforts for more proactive reporting. While it
is the Council’s role to support the use of mediation
and other tools mentioned in the Charter, we encourage
the use of such tools before situations become a threat
to international peace and security. That may benefit
situations such as those in Cameroon and Nicaragua.
On my second point, the importance of inclusive
mediation strategies, an inclusive approach ensures
the involvement of all stakeholders, allowing civil
society representatives, for example, to reach out to
communities and to convey grievances. A good example
of that is the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation,
which pulled the Central African Republic back from
the brink of conflict.
As other speakers have done, let me also focus on
the specific role of women. Resolution 1325 (2000) not
only recognizes the effects of conflict on women but
also refers particularly to the essential contribution
of women in peacebuilding. Women must be equal
partners in peace processes, particularly in mediation
efforts. Examples of effective efforts include the
Mediterranean Women Mediation Network, FemWise
and the Nordic Women Mediator’s Network, and we pay
tribute to those initiatives. We encourage the United
Nations to seek active cooperation with networks such
as those, as well as to appoint more women as envoys.
On my third point, let me emphasize the importance
of using mediation throughout the conflict cycle and of
integrating it in the sustaining peace agenda. Successful
mediation prevents the escalation of violence and helps
to avert mass atrocity crimes. In addition, mediation
efforts must go further than finding compromise among
the parties. They must lead to solutions that are in line
with international law, accountability and transitional
justice. In our view, the involvement of relevant
actors such as the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, religious leaders and organizations is key. The
mediation in the Gambia in 2016 and 2017 as part of
the joint effort of ECOWAS, the AU and the United
Nations is a good example of successful collaboration
for mediation.
As has been said, mediation is key to prevention.
To quote the Secretary-General, the television cameras

18-2697015/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

are not there when a crisis is avoided. Prevention takes
place under the radar and is discreet. Unfortunately, it
is therefore often forgotten. Because it is forgotten, it is
underfunded. Prevention is at the core of the work of the
United Nations, and currently it is funded by voluntary
contributions. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a
long-term donor in that field and will continue to be so.
However, what we need is assessed contributions for
sustainable prevention action by the Secretary-General.
Moving forward, we must live up to the
commitments stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations. We must ensure that mediation processes are
inclusive. We must prioritize prevention and use tools
such as mediation, address root causes and fund the
mediation efforts of the Secretary-General properly.
In conclusion, there are no quick fixes to the
conflicts that define our generation. We must continue
to support the Secretary-General and the High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation in the efforts to expand
mediation work in the context of prevention and of
sustaining peace. Enhancing the capacity of the United
Nations is key to the prevention agenda. It is our joint
responsibility to help the Secretary-General to realize
his priority.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to welcome the initiative of the United
Kingdom to convene this open debate, and especially
your participation, Mr. Minister. We appreciate the
important briefings by the Secretary-General, The
Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin Welby,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem.
Given the increasing complexity of global challenges,
Peru believes that it is of the utmost importance to
strengthen multilateralism and to revitalize the United
Nations in order to make it more coherent, effective and
efficient in supporting the efforts of Member States to
achieve a sustainable peace. We therefore support the
leadership and reforms promoted by the SecretaryGeneral. We encourage him to continue to do so in line
with the functions conferred upon him by the Charter
of the United Nations and the principle of the peaceful
dispute settlement. In particular, among the provisions
listed in Chapter VI, we underscore the validity
and relevance of mediation for effective preventive
diplomacy, at all levels of human interaction, before,
during and after conflict.
From a legal perspective, we would like to
recall that, in its original codification, in The Hague
16/77

29/08/2018

Conventions of 1899 and 1907, international mediation,
together with so-called good offices, transcends the
establishment of contact between the parties and the
organizational aspects of facilitating a negotiation.
Mediators are called upon to guide a negotiation to its
conclusion, which implies respect for the sensitivities
of the parties, including those related to the sovereignty
of States, since it requires their consent at all times.
Mediation is mandated by the parties, which,
in turn, must be in accordance with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, as well as
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. Special Envoys of the Secretary-General
and other United Nations representatives normally
involved in mediation have a special responsibility
to guide the parties to a dispute or conflict towards
solutions consistent with the functioning of a rulesbased international system. In no case can the exercise
of that responsibility be considered unfriendly. On
the contrary, recourse to mediation by a trained
representative of the United Nations or other specialized
agencies is very valuable to any legal entity interested
in peacefully resolving a dispute.
We highlight the establishment of the SecretaryGeneral’s High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
and the important role played by former President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, one of its members,
in supporting the political process in Liberia during
the presidential elections held last December. In that
regard, Peru encourages the Council to play a more
active role in its work, by promoting and supporting
the use of mediation and other peaceful means of
dispute settlement provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that it is vital for achieving
peaceful solutions to major conflicts, such as those
in Syria and Yemen. The respective Special Envoys
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. Martin Griffiths, have the unanimous support of
the Council in their efforts to bring the relevant parties
together. We also believe that the changing nature of
contemporary conflicts calls for the strengthening and
deployment of regional, subregional, national and local
capacities to resolve them peacefully in an inclusive
manner, including specific mediation capacities.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the
important role that the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations continue to play in
coordination with the United Nations system, and with
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Council in particular. For example, we recognize
the important mediating role of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in the conflict in South Sudan.
However, we underscore the need for the international
community, in cooperation with such organizations
and civil society, to promote more actively the building
and strengthening of mediation capacities. We also
stress the importance of a comprehensive approach to
conflict, under which mediation can, as appropriate,
be complemented by other tools and capacities, in
particular for early warning and prevention.
Peacekeeping operations and, in general, peace
missions deployed under the mandate of the Council,
in line with peacebuilding efforts in conflict-affected
countries, should be receive adequate training to enable
them to mediate and promote national capacities as part
of their exit strategies.
In conclusion, I emphasize the importance of
promoting, at all levels, greater women’s leadership
and participation in mediation processes. That means,
inter alia, increased resources for training, in line
with resolution 2242 (2015), on women and peace
and security.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, the
delegation of Kazakhstan would like to thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for convening today’s
timely debate, which provides a good opportunity
to discuss how to strengthen the role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in mediation and
the settlement of disputes. We express appreciation to
Secretary-General Guterres for his insightful briefing
and commend his determined efforts to enhance the
mediation capabilities of the United Nations. We
would also like to thank The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and civil-society briefer Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their
enlightening interventions.
As one of the most representative and authoritative
international organizations in the world, the United
Nations has every right to play a central role in
mediation and dispute settlement. As the highest United
Nations organ entrusted with the primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
the Security Council has a vital role in promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes, including and
especially by means of mediation.
A regional United Nations presence is an effective
tool for mediating disputes at the disposal of the

S/PV. 8334

Security Council. In that regard, my delegation would
like to recognize the important and valuable role of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA). UNRCCA’s
activities certainly contribute to the goal of stability
by implementing measures to prevent destabilization in
Central Asia, which can be caused by various factors,
including the situation in Afghanistan. Likewise,
Kazakhstan has witnessed the successful mediation
efforts of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
Sahel (UNOWAS), led by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas, in the Gambia, during the
critical moment of transition in January 2017. Together
with regional leaders and subregional organizations,
namely the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations was able to
ensure the peaceful and orderly transfer of power to
President Adama Barrow. We commend the efforts of
UNOWAS and all other partners that supported the
mediation efforts.
Regional organizations are particularly important
actors in mediation, as indicated in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Kazakhstan founded the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia as an intergovernmental forum to
promote peace, security and stability in Asia, and,
through that, in other continents. Other regional and
subregional organizations, such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the African Union, ECOWAS,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, have
accumulated significant mediation experience. In that
regard, it is of the utmost importance to promote close
collaboration and partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in order to seek
timely and successful resolutions of conflicts. Given
the limitations of the United Nations, cooperation with
regional organizations should be further strengthened.
We are convinced that the regional approach in which
challenges are addressed in a more focused and
coordinated manner is a very useful tool for enhancing
the capabilities of the United Nations and regional
organizations in mediation and dispute settlement. We
must also work on enhancing the national and local
mediation capacities of the various stakeholders.
As very eloquently stated earlier today by the
Secretary-General and our briefers, mediation and
peace processes should seek to increase the meaningful

18-2697017/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

participation of women, especially at decision-making
levels, as well as religious groups and youth, as
they could bring fresh ideas and push for peace and
effective dialogue.
Kazakhstan has always been in favour of peaceful
dispute-settlement processes. We are of the view
that the main tool for resolving all disputes between
States should be peaceful dialogue and constructive
negotiations, on the basis of equal responsibility for
peace and security, mutual respect and non-interference
in domestic affairs. With that in mind, Kazakhstan
has been hosting peace talks on Syria and the Iran
nuclear deal, acting as an honest broker and unbiased
bridge-builder.
My delegation can only agree with the words and
vision of the Archbishop of Canterbury when he spoke
so clearly about the role of religious organizations in
mediation and pre-emptive reconciliation. For that
reason, Kazakhstan, for the last 15 years since 2003,
has hosted a congress of religious leaders of world
and traditional religions, with wide participation
by representatives of different faiths. This year in
particular, on 10 and 11 October, we will hold the
next forum in Astana under the theme “Religious
leaders for a safe world”, devoted to the very subject
we are discussing today, as the Archbishop referred to.
Religious delegations from 74 countries have already
confirmed their participation in the forum, and we are
ready to join hands with everyone else, any organization
or stakeholder, to step up our collective efforts in
mediation and reconciliation.
During its presidency of the Security Council in
January, Kazakhstan, based on its own experience
and record, focused on preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and mediation as important tools to deal
with the complex issues on our agenda. We consistently
stressed the importance of political will and trustbuilding in achieving peace and stability in the world. In
that vein, as outlined in the concept note for this debate
(S/2018/586, annex), the Security Council adopted
a presidential statement (PRST/2018/1) during our
presidency. The document highlighted the importance
of mediation as a tool for conflict prevention and
encouraged the Secretary-General to enhance the
use of his good offices, dispatching representatives,
Special Envoys and mediators to help facilitate durable,
inclusive and comprehensive settlements. Kazakhstan
continues to be engaged in that work and in endeavouring
to find further ways whereby the Security Council and
18/77

29/08/2018

the United Nations can effectively tackle the issues
of mediation, reconciliation and dispute settlement
of conflicts.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation and
thanks to the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting and for the good preparation of the concept
note (S/2018/586, annex). I would like also to thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
briefing, and I welcome The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Qadeem and thank them for participating in
this meeting and for their extensive briefings on the
role of mediation and settlement of disputes.
I would like to quote the Holy Qur’an on the
role of mediation, which emphasizes the importance
of mediation and urges to undertake it since 1,400
years ago.
“If two parties among the believers fall into a
fight, make ye peace between them. But if one of
them transgresses beyond bounds against the other,
then fight ye against the one that transgresses until
he complies with the command of Allah. But if
he complies, then make peace between them with
justice and be fair, for Allah loves those who are
fair and just.” (The Holy Qur’an, XLIX:9)
It is unfortunate that we are currently grappling
with a great number of wars and conflicts even after
the creation of the United Nations, which was founded
in the first place to prevent the recurrence of conflicts.
However, we are unfortunately seeing an increase in
the number of conflicts with a difference in nature
and severity.
There is no doubt that the settlement of disputes
through mediation is a civilized means to settle
international conflicts through targeted and constructive
dialogue sponsored by the mediators. If the parties
agree to participate in such a beneficial and constructive
dialogue, it is a sign of their civilized nature.
Considering the history of international mediation,
we can notice that mediation has gone through different
stages and was institutionalized in the twentieth
century through The Hague Convention of 1907. With
the creation of the United Nations, Chapter VI, Article
33, of the Charter has enabled the United Nations to set
a clear definition of mediation, especially through the
mediation guidelines issued in 2012. The Council must
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

focus more on the issue of mediation. It is unfortunate
that the Council is yet to give more attention to one of
the best means for the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
especially that the last time the Council discussed
mediation, its successes, failures and shortcomings was
in 2009 (see S/PV.6108). The only outcome back then
was a single presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/8).
Kuwait welcomes the call by the Secretary-General
for the Council to use and resort to Chapter VI of
the Charter in a better way. Since coming to office
in January 2017, the Secretary-General has focused
on preventive diplomacy through good offices and
building mediation capacity. He has underscored the
importance of mediation and its promotion in order to
reach the ultimate goal, namely, either to contain and
end conflicts or to settle conflicts before they break out.
The Secretary-General translated his words into
action by creating the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation to employ good offices and to reach
peaceful settlement of disputes. We agree with what
the Secretary-General said in his briefing today that
prevention must be a priority. That is in line with a
famous and common proverb that holds that an ounce
of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
It is unacceptable for the United Nations to spend
billions of dollars on containing and managing conflicts
by deploying peacekeeping operations, while spending
too little on mediation and prevention means. Logic and
the Charter call on us to focus on Chapter VI before
resorting to Chapter VII. Therefore, we welcome the
good offices of the Secretary-General and the efforts of
the United Nations Secretariat.
We call on the Secretary-General to pursue his
good offices in line with the Charter and the Council’s
resolutions, and to provide support as appropriate to
his special envoys and representatives in the field of
mediation as well as to Member States and regional
and subregional organizations upon their request, with
emphasis on the content of the Secretary-General’s
reports on the prevention of armed conflict.
Conflict prevention and strengthening mediation
are dependent on a number of factors, including building
the capacity of regional partners, promoting national
capacity in the field of mediation and dialogue, women’s
participation and ensuring funds and resources.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the
Security Council paying more attention to mediation

S/PV. 8334

in the area of conflict settlement, while also giving
regional and subregional organizations a greater role
in mediation, in line with their mandate and according
to Chapter VIII of the Charter. That can be done by
strengthening strategic partnerships and ensuring
synergy, coordination and complementarity in
mediation. In order to ensure successful and effective
mediation, a number of elements have to be in place,
most important of which is admitting that mediation
requires concerted efforts and coordination so as to
be effective.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for this important
opportunity to discuss how to strengthen the role of
mediation. I also want to thank the briefers for their
insightful and very useful input to this discussion today.
In January 2017, the Secretary-General presented
his vision for a surge in diplomacy to the Council in an
open debate organized under the Swedish presidency
(see S/PV.7857). That vision is well on its way to
being realized and should be actively supported by all
Member States. We commend the diplomatic efforts
of the Secretary-General and his envoys and special
representatives in actively using his good offices to
defuse tensions and resolve conflicts, often behind the
scenes, with quiet diplomacy. The Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
and the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation are
also making important contributions to those efforts.
Recently, we saw the crafting of an agreement between
Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and the successful role of the Advisory Board on
Mediation in the holding of Liberian elections through
the deployment of President Obasanjo, as the SecretaryGeneral mentioned earlier. We continue to encourage a
flexible and proactive use of the Advisory Board.
United Nations diplomatic work concerning the
peaceful settlement of disputes and international peace
and security must have the full support of the Council,
as well as adequate and predictable funding under the
regular budget. International law provides a common
basis for addressing the root causes of conflicts, such
as the violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law, justice and inequalities. Although
significant progress has been made to strengthen the
capacity for mediation, allow me to highlight three
areas where we believe that further efforts are needed.

18-2697019/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, there is the matter of gender mainstreaming
and women’s participation in mediation. I am happy
to note that, regarding that issue, there appears to be
a resounding consensus at today’s meeting. In that
regard, let me thank Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for her
thoughtful contribution to today’s open debate. It is
not a women’s issue, but a peace and security issue.
Women’s participation is not a box that can be checked
off by adding one or two women to negotiation teams,
or by creating a separate mechanism in which women
have only an advisory role. Women and men must
participate on equal terms at all levels of political and
peace processes. More women should be appointed as
United Nations Special Envoys and senior members
of mediation teams. Member States must make that
possible by nominating more women candidates. The
Swedish Women’s Mediation Network was launched
in 2015 for that purpose, and there are now several
women’s mediation networks, as the Secretary-General
mentioned. Mediation support teams must also have
adequate gender expertise to understand how women’s
rights are part of the issues under discussion.
Secondly, concerning inclusivity and multitrack
diplomacy, as the Archbishop stressed earlier,
mediation should be inclusive so as to consider the
needs of all segments of society. The participation of
local communities and civil society, including youth
organizations, in peace and mediation processes is
essential for solutions to take root and must be given
higher priority. Therefore, mediation capacity must
also be strengthened at the national and local levels.
Regional and subregional organizations play a crucial
role in anticipating conflict risks by responding
quickly, providing robust expertise and establishing
relationships for effective mediation. Examples include
the efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States to ensure the peaceful and democratic transition
in The Gambia last year and the continued efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in South
Sudan. Regional United Nations offices are critical to
support and complement regional efforts.
Thirdly, and perhaps most important, with regard
to international unity, the Council must stand united
in supporting United Nations mediation efforts, while
providing envoys and mediation teams with the leverage
that they need to succeed, especially in situations that
are politically complex. Regrettably, too often divisions
within the Council add to the challenges a United Nations
mediator must overcome to succeed. Furthermore,
20/77

29/08/2018

there are also situations outside of the Council’s regular
agenda that require preventive diplomacy and mediation
support. Cameroon, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea
and Madagascar illustrate such current situations. In
order to be responsive with mediation when needed,
the Security Council requires additional briefings and
reporting on early warning and looming conflicts,
including on human rights violations. The Council also
must follow through on mediation efforts throughout
the conflict cycle and not relent until durable peace
has been achieved. To that end, agreement, not least
among Council members, on the urgency to do better in
preventing conflict is needed.
Sweden will continue supporting mediation
efforts politically and through predictable funding to
funds and programmes, as well as supporting the DPA
through the Folke Bernadotte Academy by providing
training and capacity-building. We will also continue
to work towards achieving unity of purpose in the
Council in support of the Secretary-General and his
representatives in their respective mediation efforts to
manage and prevent conflict. That is the duty of the
Council as set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Sir, to New York to preside over this
open debate. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing. China has listened carefully to the statements
by the Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem.
At present, although the international environment
is stable overall, the landscape is dotted with hotspot
issues that involve complex, historical, territorial,
religious and ethnic factors. Traditional and
non-traditional security threats are interconnected. We
are meeting at a time when the Secretary-General is
actively promoting the reform of the United Nations
peace and security architecture, which prioritizes
preventive diplomacy. Against such a backdrop, it
is of critical importance for the Security Council to
spotlight mediation and the settlement of disputes. The
Charter of the United Nations calls for the peaceful
settlement of disputes through political and diplomatic
means. It is also the best approach to achieve the longterm settlement of hotspot issues. Chapter I of the
Charter clearly states that the purpose of the United
Nations is to maintain international peace and security
and to bring about by peaceful means adjustment
or settlement of international disputes or situations.
Chapter VI states that mediation is one of the tools for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, and that it is also an
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

important means for the prevention and the resolution
of conflict. The international community therefore
should strengthen preventive diplomacy and support
relevant United Nations work in the area of mediation. I
would like to make the following comments.
First, it is necessary to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter. The maintenance of
international peace and security is the central purpose
of the Charter. It is also the primary responsibility of
the Security Council. The United Nations should play a
central role in the prevention of conflict and strengthen
its mediation activities by fully availing itself of Chapter
VI. The relevant mediation work should be based on
respect for national sovereignty and non-interference in
the internal affairs of others. The consent of the parties
concerned must be secured beforehand, and their will
must be fully respected.
Secondly, the goal should be to achieve cooperation
and ensure that every party has something to gain
during the mediation process. Mediators and the parties
to conflict should embrace a vision of a shared future
for humankind and espouse a new security concept that
is shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable.
It is important for the parties to tackle difficult security
issues through dialogue and negotiations, while
working in a manner to achieve mutual benefits and
cooperation. It is essential to accommodate and respect
each party’s security concerns and the right to agree to
disagree so as to find a peaceful settlement to disputes
and jointly build a secure world.
Thirdly, it is necessary to strengthen cooperation
and work in synergy. As the most universal,
representative
and
authoritative
international
organization, it incumbent on the United Nations to
play a vital role in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Security Council, as the core of the international
collective security system, should be actively engaged
in the peaceful settlement of disputes through political
and diplomatic means and provide political support
for, and the guidance to, such work and activities. It
is important for the United Nations to fully use the
unique influence of the Secretary-General and the
highly professional nature of the Secretariat to mediate
disputes through the deployment of the SecretaryGeneral’s special representatives and envoys. Regional
organizations such as the African Union enjoy unique
advantages when mediating disputes in their regions,
and should receive more support for their roles in
this area.

S/PV. 8334

Fourthly, an integrated approach with an eye for
the long term is essential. Rather than focusing merely
on immediate concerns, mediation should include
conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and long-term-development efforts. We must take a
targeted approach to formulating and implementing
plans for mediation by combining various means
and methods. Peace and development complement
each other, so we should implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and establish a vision
for global governance based on shared discussion,
joint efforts and mutual benefits. We must also help
developing countries to enhance their ability to achieve
self-development so that we can achieve development
for all and promote durable peace.
China is a builder and defender of world peace.
We uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and support the Organization
in playing an important role in international affairs,
for example by promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes through dialogue and negotiations and building
new international relationships with cooperation
and a win-win mindset at their core. In the past few
years China has participated actively in mediating
international and regional hotspot issues and in related
political processes. We have offered solutions and
promoted the establishment of various mechanisms,
playing an important role in resolving problems such as
the nuclear issue in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea through political and diplomatic means.
The Chinese Government has appointed special
envoys for East Africa and the Middle East who have
visited relevant crisis areas, participated in international
conferences, taken part in international mediation
efforts and encouraged the parties involved in such
crises to engage in negotiation and consultation with
positive outcomes. Through the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund, we have supported
various mediation mechanisms, including the Highlevel Advisory Board on Mediation. Together with
the rest of the international community, we are ready
to continue to mediate disputes and conflicts in order
to contribute more effectively to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing today’s meeting and would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem for their briefings.

18-2697021/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

The peaceful resolution of conflicts is enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations as both a founding
purpose and a principle of the Organization’s work.
Beyond that, mediation has the potential to be one of
the most effective means we have for preventing the
escalation or resumption of conflicts as well as their
resolution. There can be no question that from an
economic point of view mediation is greatly preferable
to other instruments in the United Nations arsenal
such as peacekeeping or Security Council sanctions,
as it does not create obstacles to development. As the
most authoritative and representative organization in
existence, the United Nations has every opportunity to
play a central role in international mediation efforts,
which should be undertaken in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and take into account the
fundamental principles of national responsibility and
respect for States’ independence, sovereignty and
equality in international relations.
Besides that, it is essential that we take into
account the potential role of regional and subregional
organizations in resolving disputes in their regions. It
is their mediators’ deep knowledge and understanding
of every nuance of a conflict that enables them to
analyse a situation more accurately and therefore to put
forward objective, realistic proposals for bringing the
parties closer together. The use of regional bodies and
agreements for the purpose of the peaceful settlement
of conflicts is an important mechanism provided for
in Article 33 of the Charter. In turn, Chapter VIII of
the Charter encourages Member States to prioritize the
settlement of so-called local disputes with the help of
such bodies and agreements before handing them over
to the Security Council.
There are some regional organizations, such as
the African Union, that have by now accumulated
a good deal of experience in the area of mediation,
which the United Nations should rely on and, where
appropriate, should use to approach mediation issues
based on a sensible division of labour with regional
and subregional entities. In that context, we want to
point to the enormous potential for the United Nations
of cooperation with bodies such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. Russia itself participates in
mediation efforts within the framework of both
international and regional organizations, including the
Commonwealth of Independent States. However, it is
crucial to ensure coordination at the international level
22/77

29/08/2018

in order to avoid any duplication of effort when various
mediation efforts end up competing with one another to
the ultimate detriment of the settlement of a conflict.
As the United Nations organ entrusted with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council is
called on to play a central role in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, including by encouraging the use of good
offices in mediation, which is why it seriously values
and supports the Secretary-General’s efforts, including
by backing his nominations of envoys and mediators.
It is important to understand that, ultimately, the
most effective way of resolving conflicts is through
direct dialogue between the conflicting parties and
the political will needed to find mutually acceptable
solutions. In turn, the effectiveness of mediation
depends entirely on all the parties to a conflict agreeing
to such international efforts and, of course, on the
impartiality of the mediators. Unfortunately, we have
seen plenty of examples of mediation that are simply
not worthy of the name, because they are either attempts
to monopolize the mediation efforts or to pursue one’s
own geopolitical ends in the guise of mediation.
Mediators’ work is not an all-purpose art form
but is rather based on a knowledge of the historical,
cultural and other peculiarities of a specific conflict.
Every unique situation requires patient efforts to find
its individual solution. There are times when we cannot
measure the success of mediation efforts in the short
term. It is vital to allow the parties to come up with their
own solutions, and that can be a lengthy process. In that
regard, it is essential to select United Nations mediators
carefully, based on objective criteria, while being sure
to maintain a strict regional balance. A mediator’s
main task is to encourage the parties to resolve
disputes and to identify the root causes obstructing a
settlement. That is the only approach that can guarantee
a reliable, long-lasting peace. Mediators should never
impose unilateral solutions or give grounds for being
suspected of bias. Artificially imposed recipes are not
only ineffective but can also jeopardize a negotiation
process and a fragile peace. In that regard, it is critical
that United Nations mediators have the ability not just
to be impartial but to maintain neutrality, which means
that references to any principles, whatever they may be,
should not serve as an excuse for indulging one of the
sides to a conflict, or the mediators will not gain the
parties’ trust. Incidentally, we think that a correction
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

to that effect should be made in the United Nations
Guidance for Effective Mediation.
Most crises today are internal ones, and there is
a fine line between mediation efforts, preventive
diplomacy and pressure on internal political processes.
Unfortunately, we in the Security Council often hear
proposals that basically amount to interference in
the internal affairs of States and their constitutional
procedures. It is no secret that people frequently want
to use the Council to openly support a particular
political group. How can that contribute to a settlement?
All it can do is aggravate and prolong a conflict and
undermine trust in the international community and
the United Nations. We are all familiar with examples
of that.
Russia always supports the settlement of disputes
through direct dialogue between the parties. The global
experience of preventing and resolving conflicts has
shown clearly that only impartial mediation, based
on the rapprochement of parties and on efforts to find
areas of agreement and to achieve mutually acceptable
agreements, has any chance of success.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to preside over this meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem for their remarks today.
The United States joins the Archbishop in
honouring the memory of the late Kofi Annan on this
issue. In August 2012, Mr. Annan spoke to the press
about his work as Special Envoy for Syria. Reflecting
on his task, he said:
“I accepted this task, which some called
‘Mission Impossible’, for I believed that it was a
sacred duty to do whatever was in my power to help
the Syrian people find a peaceful solution to this
bloody conflict.”
He made real progress towards developing a peace
plan. Had the parties listened to Mr. Annan at the time,
hundreds of thousands of Syrians could have been
saved. But after five months on the job, Annan came
to a sobering realization. As he said, “You have to
understand: as an envoy, I cannot want peace more than
the protagonists”. He stepped down, paralysed because
the Al-Assad regime did not want peace, and Russia,
sometimes alongside China, blocked the Security
Council from stepping in.

S/PV. 8334

That is the challenge with mediation. All of us
know that it is vastly better to solve conflicts through
talks instead of by force. All of us agree that investing
in mediation and prevention is important. All of us
support the efforts of the Secretary-General to build the
United Nations mediation capacity. But, of course, even
the world’s greatest mediators have no troops at their
command; they cannot impose sanctions and cannot
compel people to do anything. The missing ingredient
when it comes to mediation is often a real desire on the
part of us, the members of the Security Council, to see
those efforts succeed.
Around the world, the Security Council is quick
to send out envoys and proclaim our support for them.
There are United Nations-led dialogues and political
processes in Yemen, Libya, Syria, Iraq, Colombia,
Afghanistan and the Great Lakes, to name just a few.
Those are some of the world’s most daunting conflicts,
and we are looking to the United Nations envoys to
find solutions. But they cannot do it alone. That is why
the United States has pushed the Security Council to
impose real consequences when parties are not willing
to negotiate. Mediators may not be able to compel
people to come to the table, so we have to play that role.
In South Sudan, the Council waited years before
finally imposing an arms embargo. That is a place
where war has raged out of control. Government
troops and other armed groups have slaughtered
civilians, burned down their villages and committed
unspeakable atrocities. The United States repeatedly
sought to impose sanctions as a step towards holding
South Sudan’s leaders accountable for their actions,
but we were told over and over to wait for talks to
come through. Agreements and ceasefires came and
went and the violence continued, but we were still
told to wait to take action. In the end, we adopted an
arms embargo and new sanctions last month. Now, the
parties will have a new incentive to negotiate in earnest
and reach a sustainable agreement that represents the
needs and interests of the South Sudanese people. We
do not know whether those negotiations will ultimately
be successful, but we know that progress will not be
possible without consequences for those who refuse to
compromise for peace.
We must not let mediation blind us to the realities of
what people are doing to each other on the ground. We
want diplomacy to work, but when it does not, we must
have the courage to say it and to pursue a meaningful
response. That is how we help mediators out — by

18-2697023/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

showing the parties that there will be consequences if
they do not commit to talks.
The United States has also made it a priority to
push for political progress in places that have long been
on our agenda. In situations like those in Cyprus and
Western Sahara, we have peacekeeping missions that
have sat on the ground for decades. In theory, those
missions support political solutions, but in reality,
they are perpetuating a status quo. The United States
is going back to those legacy peacekeeping missions
and asking hard questions about what we are achieving.
We are making a renewed push to see whether the
parties are working with the United Nations to make
political progress and, if they are not, we are going to
reassess what those missions are doing. Either way, we
do mediators no favours when we let the status quo be
an end in itself.
The United Nations can never walk away from
mediation. Even in the worst of circumstances, we look
to the United Nations and its mediators to keep trying
to find a way out of conflict. That is the fundamental
purpose of the Organization. For mediators, talk can be
powerful, but for the Security Council, talk is cheap. It
is easy for us to express support for mediation, but it is
only when we actually empower mediators and use the
tools that we have to push parties back to the table that
we can expect to see results.
The President: May I remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

29/08/2018

tThe Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat
Qadeem for their briefings.
It has been too long since the Security Council last
convened an open debate on mediation — a critical part
of our toolbox for conflict prevention and settlement.
While it is true that mediation has been gaining
increased attention at the United Nations, especially as
a component of the surge in diplomacy for peace, called
for by the Secretary-General, there is much more that
the Council could do to support it.
Brazil aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation, in which
we have been proud to participate since its creation.
Brazil has consistently been a supporter and a
practitioner of mediation. Based on the notion of
non-indifference, Brazil has, upon request, assisted
several parties in settling their disputes. Our current
role as guarantors of the negotiations between the
Colombian Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional exemplifies our genuine commitment to
facilitating the peaceful settlement of conflicts. The
Tehran Declaration, brokered by Brazil and Turkey in
2010, on the Iranian nuclear dossier, is another example
of our commitment to diplomacy and dialogue.
I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and to voice my country’s
appreciation for the creation, under his leadership, of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

The Council has already acknowledged that
mediation is an important means for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. While it is useful at all stages of
a dispute, it should be particularly encouraged before
tension escalates into armed conflict. Once violence
flares, peacemaking becomes more challenging and
the human costs rise, often dramatically. In order
to enhance the United Nations readiness to employ
mediation, the Mediation Support Unit must count
on adequate human and financial resources. The
establishment of a special account for special political
missions, separate from the regular budget, could free
resources for mediation support.

Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this open debate. Brazil
highly appreciates the topic chosen for this meeting
of the Security Council. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and also commend

Capacity-building is also instrumental in promoting
early mediation. The United Nations should continue
to support regional and subregional organizations
in reinforcing their own mediation tools, as well as
to assist national and local institutions. Experience

As a reminder, flashing lights on the collars of
the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes. If speakers have
not concluded one minute later, the presidency will
intervene and ask them to conclude. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
text in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a long list of speakers.

24/77

18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

demonstrates that actors other than the United Nations
can be very effective mediators and, in some cases, may
stand higher chances of success. Even in cases where
others may be better placed to mediate a dispute, the
United Nations should still be ready to provide political
and technical assistance, if needed, to those taking
the lead.
Inclusivity and national ownership are key to
effective mediation. More often than not, externally
driven processes fail to account for all interests, lacking
the roots needed to ensure long-term compliance and
stability. On the other hand, bottom-up approaches that
concretely involve all perspectives tend to generate
more solid agreements. It may take longer to reach
inclusive solutions, but they last longer.
We cannot overestimate the constructive role that
women and young people can have in mediation. The
situation in Guinea-Bissau provides a clear example
of how gender-sensitive initiatives tend to be more
successful. Last year, as Guinea-Bissau was facing
a prolonged political stalemate, a group of women
facilitators was able to open up lines of dialogue among
actors who had not spoken to one another directly for
a long time. Comprised of 10 women from different
local organizations, the group proved to be an effective
measure to build confidence and de-escalate tensions.
Brazil’s national action plan on women, peace and
security incorporates that notion, as it includes actions
to promote women’s participation as agents of peace.
Brazil welcomes the fact that the composition of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is genderbalanced. We would welcome more diversity, especially
from a geographic perspective, when it comes to the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers of the
Department of Political Affairs. Establishing longer
periods for the nomination of candidates could be
helpful in that regard.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General, mediation
efforts require a supportive external environment. Due
to its role as the primary guardian of peace and security,
the Council can contribute to creating circumstances
that are conducive to fruitful mediation. For
example, when it firmly supports the work of Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, the Council
strengthens the role of the mediator and encourages the
parties to engage seriously in negotiations.
The Security Council should avoid taking decisions
that could have a negative effect on credible mediation

S/PV. 8334

processes under way. Sanction regimes, for example,
should be designed in close coordination with the
mediators and those in the field. Sanctions are not an
end in themselves; they must always be at the service
of a political strategy aimed at promoting the peaceful
settlement of a crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation
and its two co-Chairs, Finland and Turkey.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this open debate and putting forward several
important questions to guide the discussion. We also
welcome the participation of the Secretary-General, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem
in this meeting.
The Group of Friends of Mediation very much
welcomes this timely debate and underlines the
importance of the Security Council remaining actively
engaged in conflict prevention and the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, including through mediation, as
foreseen in the Charter of the United Nations. That role
can be used most effectively when actors are united.
The Group of Friends of Mediation today consists
of 48 member States, the United Nations, seven regional
organizations and other international organizations. The
Group promotes and advances the use of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, and generates support for the development
of mediation. The Group of Friends has significantly
contributed to increasing awareness of mediation.
The Group has initiated four General Assembly
resolutions to strengthen the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, one of which encourages the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations to continue
to develop their mediation capacities.
The world has changed since the previous open
debate on mediation and the settlement of disputes (see
S/PV.6108), in 2009. Moreover, the United Nations has
changed. We welcome the Secretary-General’s strong
commitment to emphasizing the importance of conflict
prevention and resolution, including mediation. In
that regard, we welcome the establishment of the
Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board on

18-2697025/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mediation, which brings together an unparalleled range
of experience, skills, knowledge and contacts.
In his 2017 report on United Nations activities in
support of mediation (A/72/115), the Secretary-General
points out the multiple activities in which the United
Nations is already involved. The list is impressive, but
more can be done. We need to maintain this momentum
and give a further boost to the mediation agenda at the
United Nations. In that respect, we would like to take
this opportunity to encourage the Security Council,
as well as Member States, to explore further ways to
reinforce the promotion of mediation as an important
means for the pacific settlement of disputes.
Conflicts are becoming more and more complex,
as are their prevention and resolution. In order to
achieve lasting peace, we need a comprehensive,
inclusive and coordinated approach in which different
actors of the international community complement
each other. That includes not only the United Nations,
the Security Council and Member States, but also
regional, subregional and local organizations, as well
as civil society. As conflicts have grown more complex
and multilayered, they need to be approached on
many levels, through cooperation among mediation
support actors.
Inclusivity has proven to be one significant
means of achieving the sustainability of peace. All
members of society should play a meaningful role in
peace processes. Women and young people have an
exceptionally important role in that regard. Both groups
have a lot to offer in building peace and resilience
in their societies. It is up to all of us here to ensure
that the commitments of the relevant resolutions on
women and peace and security and on youth and peace
and security are implemented effectively. The United
Nations Guidance on Gender and Inclusive Mediation
Strategies was issued to provide practical guidance
to mediators and parties to conflict on increasing the
meaningful participation of women and gender experts
in applying gender-sensitive approaches to mediation
during all phases of the peace process.
In addition, the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends
of Mediation decided to dedicate this year’s annual
ministerial meeting of the Group to the theme of the
inclusion of youth in mediation efforts. The meeting
will be organized as a high-level event, open to all
Member States, on Thursday, 27 September.
26/77

29/08/2018

Building and strengthening mediation and the
mediation support capacity of mediators, Member
States and societies is one of the key factors for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, and peacebuilding. It is also important that
the Security Council as well as the entire Organization
strengthen their capacity to undertake prevention and
recalibrate their approach from responding to conflict
towards sustaining peace. Mediation should not be a
closed and competitive field reserved for a few. More
emphasis should be placed on mentoring the next
generation and exchanging experiences with national
and local mediators.
The Group of Friends of Mediation is ready to
support all work and efforts in advancing diplomacy
for peace and the role of mediation in this endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to join other speakers who have spoken
before me and to commend and thank the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s important debate.
The Charter of the United Nations has been the
cornerstone of the global system since the end of the
Second World War. That is why Egypt believes that
the commitment to fully implement the provisions of
the Charter, without any selectivity, is not a luxury;
rather, it is one of the main guarantees of stability and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Any attempt to marginalize the United Nations and to
jeopardize its institutions by giving rise to unilateral
initiatives would be a waste of time and a lack of
respect to the Charter and the values that led to the
creation of the Organization. That also undermines the
international system that was agreed upon, rather than
helping to develop and reform it.
On several occasions, notably during the latest
conflicts that have erupted throughout the world,
especially in the Middle East, history has taught us that
military solutions to crises are ineffective; they have
an immense human cost. The world is today witnessing
a large number of humanitarian crises as a result of
failure to contain conflicts. On the contrary, some
parties have used those conflicts to achieve political
interests or promote narrow ideologies which do not
take into consideration the suffering of civilians. In
that regard, Egypt underscores the pivotal role of the
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations in promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes and applying preventive security policies,
which are considered to be the most effective and
safe means — and the least costly in both human and
material terms — to address threats to international
peace and security.
The Security Council, in line with the mandate
given to it under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, must make all efforts to use, support and activate
such peaceful means as negotiation, investigation,
mediation and judicial settlement, or resort to regional
bodies, organizations and other peaceful means in order
to address such issues. This responsibility compels the
Security Council to take decisions in an integrative
context in order to support international, regional and
national efforts related to the settlement of conflicts.
The Council must avoid taking any measures that could
undermine such efforts and wait before taking any
coercive measures that might impede the solution. It
should be keen to ensure the participation of relevant
parties, including regional stakeholders. The Council
should look into the possibility of mandating mediation
to acceptable parties in order to settle the crisis early
on, while applying comprehensive approaches that take
the specific nature and circumstances of each conflict
into consideration. This would lead to the adoption of
innovative and sustainable solutions that are acceptable
to the relevant parties, with the participation of all
sectors of society, without exception.
On the other hand, strengthening partnership with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the League of Arab States, and within
an institutional framework complementary to that of
the United Nations, as well as bolstering the efforts of
those organizations, is an ensured investment in the
establishment of regional and international stability.
We must therefore guarantee adequate capacitybuilding for these various organizations, which would
be a sound investment on the path to achieving regional
and international stability.
In conclusion, Egypt continuously supports the
efforts of the United Nations in the field of promoting
comprehensive strategies to address conflicts by using
different mechanisms and tools tailored to the specific
nature of each conflict. We must be flexible in order to
take into account changes on the ground and, in turn, to
make optimal use of these tools, such as prevention and
mediation. We must also bear in mind the pivotal role
played by peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations

S/PV. 8334

in order to achieve the ultimate goal of establishing
sustainable peace in conflict areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
convening this open debate on a very important issue
for Colombia as a member of the Group of Friends
of Mediation. I take this opportunity to thank the
Ambassador of Turkey, who spoke on behalf of
the Group.
The contributions of your country, Mr. President,
and of the Security Council to the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which ended a five decade-long conflict in
Colombia, as well as to its implementation through the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, is a
clear demonstration of the value of multilateralism in
conflict resolution. This is a topic of utmost importance
this morning.
I thank the Archbishop of Canterbury for his
comments, as well as Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for hers.
The examples cited have been most valuable in taking
us straight to the heart of the debate.
As several members of the Council and Member
States alike have reiterated, over the past decade
the notion of mediation has been strengthened as a
indispensable mechanism in conflict resolution. That
is certainly reflected in the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral, which has overseen the implementation of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
establishment of the High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation. It has been very important for us to witness
the collective vision embraced by the integration of the
Board on Mediation and the approval by the General
Assembly and Member States of the reform of the
Organization. All these efforts have made it possible to
promote the prevention of conflict as part of diplomacy
for peace.
In the concept note presented (S/2018/586, annex),
the importance of improving mediation capacities is
highlighted not only at the local and national levels, but
of course at the regional level. Here, I would like to
focus on how essential role of regional organizations,
especially in the case of the Colombian conflict. As in
the case of our own agreement, this critical connection to
regional organizations allowed us to retain our national

18-2697027/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

ownership and inclusive approacht. We underscore the
contributions of neighbouring States, observers and
the Organization of American States, in highlighting
the value of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations to mediation efforts and to strengthening
coordinated work between the United Nations and
regional organizations. Such efforts certainly extended
the possibilities for the success we have enjoyed to
date and which will surely continue to be crucial in the
long journey ahead towards the implementation of the
peace agreement.
As many Council members have already highlighted,
we reiterate that the participation of women must be
central to and are key in the resolution of conflicts.
It is not an option; it is a decision. As Ms. Qadeem
mentioned, conflicts are hugely diverse, from Nepal
to Colombia. Regardless of the type of conflict,
women must be present prior to, during and — above
all — after the negotiations in the implementation
phase of an agreement.
No matter the type of conflict, be it in Africa
or America, it has been proven that when women
participate, the likelihood of peace being lasting, stable
and sustainable automatically increases. We are on
the right path, even if it is not an entirely satisfactory
one, and the Council should apply the notion of
mediation in the quest for more holistic approaches to
conflict resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation would like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for holding
this important debate and it is good to see Lord Ahmad
presiding over this debate. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the Archbishop of Canterbury and to
Ms. Mossarat Qadeem, who is from my country, for
their insightful briefings.
The notion and instrument of mediation are as old
as humankind. Much as wars and conquests have filled
the annals of human history, humankind has also sought
to find ways to reconcile divergent interests and seek
common ground to resolve disputes and conflicts. More
recently, our collective faith in the power of dialogue
has been reinforced by the successful mediation efforts
in Colombia and between Greece and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
28/77

29/08/2018

Yet large parts of the world, in desperate need of
peace and conciliation, are denuded of this. We in fact
live in times that are more uncertain than ever. Tensions
and turbulence have re-emerged with greater intensity
in various parts of the world. The world seems to be
afflicted by greater turmoil and persisting conflicts,
instead of living up to the principles of peace and
justice of the Charter of the United Nations.
In the face of these challenges we need to evolve
a comprehensive approach to addressing volatile
situations before they erupt; preventing disputes from
escalating into conflict and to containing and resolving
conflicts when they occur, or indeed when they fester.
The Secretary-General’s call for a surge in diplomacy
for peace is both urgent and important, for it costs far
more to pick up the pieces after a conflict than it does
to prevent one.
The Security Council, with its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a critical role in that prevention-centric agenda. It
must operationalize the full repository of measures set
out in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
as the centrepiece of the global peace and security
architecture. That is all the more relevant given that,
in recent years, there has been growing criticism of the
Council’s tendency to resort to enforcement measures
under Chapter VII. While Chapter VII is the ultimate
instrument for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, its latent efficacy can be greatly enhanced
through a timely and judicious application of Chapter
VI. That complementarity between Chapters VI and
VII must be clearly upheld.
The Security Council should authorize the
Secretary-General to make more frequent use of his
good offices and other possibilities for mediation and
conciliation. We are happy to note that the SecretaryGeneral is working to expand the pool of high-level
envoys and senior mediators, with special emphasis on
women. As much as the establishment of the SecretaryGeneral’s High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is a
welcome step in the right direction, so is gender parity
in the composition of the Board.
While the Council could refer disputes to the
International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion,
if not a legal decision or adjudication, it should also
utilize its mandatory enforcement authority under
Chapter VII of the Charter to refer a dispute to the
Court. The determination of the Court would thereafter
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8334

be binding on the parties, irrespective of whether or not
they had accepted the jurisdiction of the Court.

essential to national honour and self-preservation,
where surrender is never an option.

While the United Nations has had some success
in mediating political settlements, that record — as
we all know — is checkered at best. The Jammu and
Kashmir dispute remains among the oldest issues on
the agenda of the Council. It was also the subject of one
of the earliest applications of Chapter VI of the Charter.
Through its various resolutions, the Security Council
has provided that

But mediation is a wise preliminary choice. Through
mediation, States at odds might arrive at the settlement
of disputes by the exchange of words, not bullets, and
the deployment of arguments, not armour. Anyway,
“ultima ratio regis” is always available — never peace
at any price. There are situations where property is not
worth saving and life not worth living, but speaking
only from the mouths of the most number of cannons
will not always decide the outcome in their favour.

“the final disposition of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir will be made in accordance with the will of
the people expressed through the democratic method
of a free and impartial plebiscite conducted under the
auspices of the United Nations” (resolution 122 (1957),
second preambular paragraph).
The Security Council also instituted several
mechanisms, including the United Nations Commission
on India and Pakistan, the deployment of the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
and the appointment of representatives of the United
Nations, who consulted the parties and submitted
reports on how to resolve the dispute in accordance with
provisions of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Sadly, those resolutions remain thus far unenforced
and unimplemented. The international community
cannot succeed in its efforts to strengthen conflict
prevention and promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes if the Security Council’s own resolutions are
held in abeyance by some. Both the Council’s credibility
as well as the objective of durable peace in my region
are at stake. We must not fail those two important tests.
The United Nations, in the words of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, is a venture in
progress towards an international community living in
peace under the laws of justice. That is still a distant
objective, but a worthy one. An essential prerequisite
towards it is the growing currency of the pacific
settlement of disputes. Few ideals are more worthy or
important for our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The words “ultima ratio
regis” were once inscribed in the bronze on Spanish
royal cannon, meaning, “the sovereign’s last argument”.
Kings in the past, republics in the present. War is the
last argument of sovereignty — to fight for things

What is still the longest war proves it: a lightly armed
people defeated in no uncertain terms, accompanied
by the most graphic photographic images. First the
Europeans, then a super-Power that threw at a tiny
nation of small people like my own every weapon of
mass destruction short only of nuclear weapons. None
are defeated until they say so; no one is victorious until
the enemy leaves in disarray, as when the last chopper
took off from the rooftop of the enemy’s Embassy.
Discreet mediation followed the release of prisoners
of war and remains of the slain for their memorials
back home, but the costs of victory and defeat were
staggering: 3 million killed on one side, 54,000 soldiers
and scores of student protesters on the other. Billions of
dollars in weapons were left rusting in rice fields — the
last ones dumped in the sea — and a great nation came
to doubt its indispensable mission to advance freedom
in the world.
Mediation in Paris came too late, especially for
those who, in good faith, made common cause with
a foreigner and paid the price of abandonment. The
minimum that mediation achieves is that, even when it
fails, a lot is gained. For example, the realization of the
real value in contention and the real price to be paid for
it before the first shot is fired in an intractable conflict
and before the last shot fired in vain. Sometimes the
game is not worth the candle, nor is the price worth the
cost of war.
That said, we take note of Russia’s point: mediation
can be misused to achieve domination on the cheap.
It is much worse today: conflicts are longer and
more intractable, with precision weaponry more
indiscriminate and, from that height, impervious
to compassion. All the more compelling is the case
for mediation.

18-2697029/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Philippines highly appreciate the leadership
of the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland in convening
today’s open debate on mediation and the settlement
of disputes. We reaffirm the Philippines’ commitment
to mediation. The Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes is eponymous
with the Philippines’ desire for peace and its emphatic
abhorrence of settlement by the use or threat of force.
When used in key phases of conflict, mediation
is a game changer, especially in indecisive conflicts.
The Philippine experience attests to this. After 18
years of sustained engagement in the peace process, the
Philippine Government has enacted the Bangsamoro
Organic Law, creating the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region. Signed by President Rodrigo Roa Duterte, it
recognizes the aspirations of those living in Muslim
Mindanao, including indigenous and Christian
peoples, within the framework of one indivisible
democratic republic and one bill of rights. Sovereignty
cannot amputate itself; a republic cannot sponsor a
non-republican solution, nor a democracy a dictatorship.
A caliphate was never in the cards.
With regard to our peace negotiations with the
Communist Party of the Philippines, the presidential
adviser on the peace process announced that the doors
for peace negotiations with the communist rebels are
still open. We thank Norway for its hospitality and
perseverance and, we hope, its continued engagement
in that peace process.
The Philippines continues to co-sponsor the
General Assembly resolution on promoting mediation
and more funding for it. We have contributed mediation
experts and constitution-writing, power-sharing and
gender-inclusion issues to give prominence to women’s
organizations in recognition of the gender that binds
the wounds of war and bears the heaviest burden of its
excesses on their shoulders, as well as those of their
loved ones. While we should put our trust in a common
humanity, we must keep our powder dry.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): Allow me to start by
commending the United Kingdom for convening this
exceptionally important open debate. My delegation
also thanks the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their insightful presentations.
30/77

29/08/2018

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, as
well as the statement delivered by the representative of
Turkey behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation.
Lithuania fully shares and acknowledges the
importance of the conceptual shift from conflict
management to conflict prevention, advocated so
tirelessly by Secretary-General Guterres. We strongly
welcome and support the focus of the SecretaryGeneral on mediation. Alongside other efforts,
mediation is an important tool for defusing conflicts
or, better still, preventing them from happening.
Every mediation success story means fewer conflicts,
less human suffering and more possibilities for
development. In that regard, we believe it is crucially
important to ensure continued and stable funding for
all mediation-related efforts.
Far too often, mediation and peace processes remain
male-dominated. While women are disproportionately
affected by conflict, their critical role in negotiating,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in their communities
is often overlooked. Equal and effective participation
and the full involvement of women at all levels, all
stages and in all aspects of conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes needs to be ensured.
Women should be part of the process as mediators and
as peace negotiators.
We strongly support the Secretary-General in his
efforts to enlarge the pool of high-level envoys and
senior mediators with a focus on women mediators. In
turn, countries should offer more women candidates
for the United Nations mediation roster. We must
also acknowledge that both mediation and dialogue
facilitation need to be approached as a professional
activity requiring specialized knowledge, expertise and
operational guidance.
Faced with the emergence of new crises and the
persistence of protracted conflicts, international
and regional organizations must strengthen their
capabilities for effective mediation and dialogue
facilitation. The Security Council should play its role
in providing political support to such efforts. Visits by
the Council are critical in signalling political support
for a mediation effort.
Regional organizations can be particularly helpful
in the early identification of potential crises and
mediation. The African Union, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the Council of Europe, inter alia, are offering their
mediation and good offices to that effect. Regional
organizations are well placed to develop preventive
capacities. The efforts of subregional organizations
in Africa and elsewhere aimed at conflict prevention
offer a promising alternative for the future. We also
encourage regional and subregional organizations to
continue to appoint women as mediators and members
of mediation teams.
Mediation could play a role in all stages of the
conflict cycle, including conflict resolution. Where
agreements need to be implemented, formal mediation
efforts may need to continue to help resolve possible
disputes that may arise from the implementation itself.
That is critical so as to avoid a breakdown or relapse
into violent conflict. Therefore, we should not forget
to engage local communities in third party-supported
dialogue processes in order to facilitate implementation
processes and peacefully address any additional issues
that may emerge.
Sustained political, financial and administrative
support must be guaranteed for all mediation processes,
and all States parties to a conflict must be engaged
in order to reach a settlement. In the absence of such
political will, the possibilities for meaningful mediation
and dialogue facilitation are very limited.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the United Kingdom, as President of the Security
Council, for organizing this open debate.
I align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the briefers for their valuable inputs.
Mediation, an essential tool in the settlement
of disputes, should be seen in the larger context of
promoting the rule of law at the international level. One
of the pillars of the Organization is that international
relations must be ruled by law instead of power.
Accordingly, under the Charter of the United Nations,
States have two complementary obligations: first, to
refrain from the threat or use of force, and, secondly,
to settle their international disputes by peaceful means.
Despite acceptable progress in both directions, we
have had failures that need to be rectified; There are

S/PV. 8334

instances of uneven implementation of laws that require
adjustment, and there are opportunities that need to
be explored.
For instance, on the eve of this century, a country
was invaded by a permanent seatholder of the Security
Council — occurring in total disregard of the Council
and in blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. Not only is that same Power now pursuing a
policy of withdrawal from international organizations
and agreements — thereby jeopardizing the sanctity of
international treaties — but it also openly invites all
Member States to either disobey a specific resolution
of the Council — I refer to resolution 2231 (2015) — or
face punishment. If left unchecked, that alarming trend
will further tarnish the credibility of the Organization
and of the Council, thereby eroding the rule of law and
leading to disorder.
Among the Charter provisions requiring
proportionate, smart and astute application, one can
refer to the application of Chapter VII on the functions
of the Council. The Security Council has been
increasingly, excessively and expeditiously resorting to
the functions set out in Chapter VII, as if there were
no other provisions in the Charter. As a result, in some
cases, the sovereign rights of States as well as human
rights have been seriously violated. Therefore, Chapter
VII must be invoked as intended — as a measure of last
resort — if necessary.
Mediation is one of the less-explored opportunities
provided by the Charter. Therefore, awareness of its
usefulness in the peaceful settlement of disputes should
increase. In order to be effective, mediation should
be conducted in an objective, transparent and neutral
manner. As an essential element in enhancing trust
among the parties concerned, that is largely dependent
upon the independence, impartiality and integrity of
the mediators. The exclusive purpose of the mediator
should be to facilitate a process towards a just and
comprehensive conclusion and help the parties to arrive
at a solution themselves.
In conclusion, I pay tribute to the former SecretaryGeneral, the late Kofi Annan, who held roles as
mediator. He, as Foreign Minister Zarif of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has said, was an unwavering champion
for peace, justice and therule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.

18-2697031/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We welcome this
timely debate on mediation and the settlement of
disputes. Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
defines mediation as a central function of the United
Nations in the maintenance of peace and security.
In 2009, the Security Council recognized the
importance of mediation, to be launched at the earliest
possible phases of conflicts, reflecting a widespread
understanding of the core functions of the United
Nations. We are grateful that the Secretary-General
has chosen to prioritize conflict prevention, including
through his High-level Advisory Board on Mediation.
We thank Archbishop Welby, one of its members,
for joining us today. We also extend our support for
the activities of the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department for Political Affairs, as well as the Standby
Team of Mediation Experts.
I wish to focus my comments today on the need to
build sustainable peace through inclusion, preventing
impunity for grave abuses of international law and
addressing the proliferation of intra-State conflicts
over issues of self-governance.
Successful mediation is not only about preventing
or ending conflict, but about building the foundations
for a sustainable and durable peace. Peace requires the
inclusion of participants and perspectives beyond the
parties to armed conflicts themselves. In particular, both
participation and outcomes in mediation processes must
be gender-sensitive. Women must have a meaningful
role in negotiations, and there must be adequate gender
expertise around the table. A 2015 study of 156 peace
agreements showed that when women are included
in peace processes there is a 20 per cent increase in
the probability of an agreement lasting at least two
years, and a 35 per cent increase in the probability
of an agreement lasting at least 15 years. In addition,
in ensuring the participation of often-marginalized
groups such as youth, refugees and indigenous peoples,
the designers and facilitators of mediation processes
can give an agreement the best opportunity to build a
broad constituency for peace and prevent a situation in
which only the powerful are its beneficiaries.
Sustainable peace cannot allow for de facto or
de jure impunity for the most serious crimes under
international law. Making sure that those responsible
for atrocity crimes face justice removes the most
likely spoilers of a peace agreement from post-conflict
society. The promise of justice will also deter them and
32/77

29/08/2018

others from committing similar crimes in the future.
On the other hand, when mediation processes do not
address serious crimes and ignore victims’ calls for
justice, they deny those victims the opportunity to heal
and to collectively rebuild the fabric of society. When
agreements do not seek out and remove the root causes
of atrocities, there can be no deterrence for such crimes.
Instead, they allow the seeds of conflict to grow again.
Therefore, we support the position of the United Nations
that the peace agreements it endorses can never promise
amnesties for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity or gross violations of human rights.Mediation
efforts must give the necessary space to accountability
work in situations where the most serious crimes under
international law have been committed.
In order to continue to facilitate the mediation of
sustainable peace settlements, we must examine the
changing nature of conflict itself. We have witnessed
a significant growth in intra-State conflicts, in
particular the proliferation of those that originate
in claims by communities within a State to a greater
measure of governance over their own affairs. We
believe that finding peaceful means to address such
self-governance situations should be a focus area of
the conflict prevention and resolution architecture of
the Organization. United Nations field missions may
be able to effectively support early local mediation
in those situations by offering to facilitate a goodfaith dialogue on self-governance between the State
and affected communities where both parties have
consented. Overall, we believe that sustainable peace
is most achievable when all communities have a
stake in how they are governed and can contribute to
arrangements that consider different identities within
the State. We will continue to work on this issue in
partnership with the Liechtenstein Institute on SelfDetermination in Princeton.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. Blais (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to start by thanking the United Kingdom for
convening this important debate. Let me also thank
the Secretary-General, The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem from the PAIMAN Alumni
Trust for their thought-provoking briefing today.
I also want to extend my heartfelt gratitude to civil
society actors and human rights defenders around the
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

world for their courage in pursuing peaceful solutions
to conflict. I am referring to people like Chantal Bilulu,
a Congolese human rights defender who was recently
in Ottawa to launch Women of Courage, a project to
empower women peacebuilders at the grass-roots levels
in Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Philippines, South Sudan and the West Bank.
The briefers today have spoken eloquently about
the vital role that mediation processes play in conflict
resolution and prevention. I would like to pick up on
the issue of including women and youth, and express
Canada’s full agreement with the call by the United
Kingdom and others for an increase in the number of
women mediators. A growing body of research provides
evidence that, when women’s groups strongly influence
peace negotiations, an agreement is much more likely to
be reached, while when women’s groups are not involved
or have minimal influence, the chance of parties
reaching a peace agreement diminishes considerably.
The involvement of women’s groups is also associated
with much higher rates of implementation once an
agreement is reached.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society are already doing
excellent work to involve women in mediation at the
local level. Canada is proud to be supporting three such
initiatives
The first is in Burundi, where women have
historically played an important role as agents of
peace. Canada is a donor to the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, which has done exemplary work
in mediation and peaceful dispute settlement. In
partnership with UN-Women, the Fund established a
nationwide network of women mediators who organize
local-level dialogues, work with provincial and local
authorities and organize community dialogues. In only
two years, the Fund has enabled hundreds of women
mediators to mediate thousands of local conflicts, often
preventing disputes from erupting into armed hostilities.
In the second initiative, Canada has been funding
efforts to intense the engagement of women, youth and
churches in support of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD)-led peace process in South
Sudan. We are also sponsoring a gender advisor within
IGAD whose task is to ensure that women’s views
are shared and incorporated in the peace talks. The
constructive role of women, youth and churches has

S/PV. 8334

made an important contribution to the peace agreement
that was signed in June. Incidentally, this was one of
the topics discussed last month by young people from
across Canada who gathered in Edmonton, Alberta, for
the South Sudan Youth of Canada Conference.
In the third instance, the extraordinary work
that Peace Ambassadors are doing in Mali is another
example of youth- and women-led initiatives that are
driving peaceful change in conflict-affected areas.
Peace campaigns, such as those organized by the
non-governmental organization Search for Common
Ground, are using radio as a tool to ensure the
transmission of accurate, constructive and conflictsensitive information about women’s needs and rights
to the general public and local authorities.
Those initiatives illustrate what effective conflict
mediation looks like on the ground, day to day. It takes
the form of community peace dialogues, early-warning
monitoring, information dissemination and dispelling
false rumours, and active political engagement. From
Colombia to Yemen, from Afghanistan to Guinea-Bissau,
mediation and dialogue efforts that include women and
youth have succeeded in reaching breakthroughs that
would not have otherwise been possible.
The United Nations has made major strides in
strengthening inclusive mediation, such as through
the establishment of a gender-balanced High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation, the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé to ensure greater participation by women in
Libya’s national dialogue process, and the efforts of
Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, to ensure
that the perspectives of women of all political stripes
are incorporated into the Geneva process.
However, despite this wealth of examples, prejudice
and intimidation too often deter women and youth from
participating in peace processes. If we want to achieve
meaningful and sustainable conflict resolution, we
must continue to work together — with United Nations
agencies, regional organizations and civil society
partners — to systematically and meaningfully engage
and empower women and youth so that they can be the
architects of lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to welcome the Minister of State for the

18-2697033/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

Commonwealth and the United Nations, Lord Ahmed,
as President at this meeting. I convey our gratitude
and appreciation to your country, Sir, and for your able
efforts during your presidency of the Security Council
to underscore the purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as for your positive role in maintaining
international peace and security. You have been keen
to revive the discussion within the Council on the role
of mediation as a tool to settle conflicts in today’s
world. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their valuable briefings.
I would like to express my sincere condolences
to the international community for the passing of the
previous Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Annan. His death is a great loss for peace
and for humanity. He was a role model in the art of
mediation, and his sincere efforts and commitment to
the maintenance of international peace and security
serve as an example of wise leadership. May his soul
rest in peace.
Jordan believes that cooperation, tolerance and the
rejection of hatred in our world are highly important.
Differences among people are a reason for coexistence
rather than divergence. Humankind finds its essence in
the multiplicity of its colours, races, cultures, languages
and religions. Unfortunately, we are witnessing at
this time multiple complicated conflicts that focus
on differences rather than points of commonality,
rapprochement and coexistence. That is why we need an
honest mediator who reconciles differences and builds
trust, hope and a horizon, who focuses on common
interests in order to resolve conflicts and achieve
understanding and peace.
In that regard, I would like to commend the United
Nations for playing a central role as an honest mediator
in managing, resolving or preventing conflicts through
different means, including the Mediation Support Unit
and the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation,
which was recently established by the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the commitment of the United
Nations to pursuing its endeavours through different
means, including United Nations missions in conflict
zones and the envoys of the Secretary-General.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan underscores its
support for all means of strengthening United Nations
mediation efforts in all conflict zones, based on our
34/77

29/08/2018

belief that the peaceful settlement of disputes is the
only way to achieve lasting peace. We also commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General to prevent and
resolve conflicts and support diplomacy for peace. We
stress the importance of implementing the agenda of the
Secretary-General for building and sustaining peace,
which places prevention at the heart of the United
Nations activities to prevent conflicts. We emphasize
the importance of his efforts to strengthen and support
United Nations peace operations so that they are able
to confront emerging challenges to international peace
and security.
Mediation is an effective tool that can be used
throughout the stages of conflicts, not only to settle them
but also to prevent them or address their root causes
and contain their effects. The longer the conflict goes
on, the more the solutions become complicated and the
more difficult the mediation becomes. The ones who
suffer the most in such situations are innocent people,
including women, children, the elderly and young
people. That is clear in the current bloody conflicts in
the Middle East, most important the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Jordan has sought, through different means
and with all parties, to reach a comprehensive, lasting
and just solution to that crisis — a solution that meets
the aspirations of the Palestinian people to freedom,
dignity and their own State along the 4 June 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
From here within the Chamber, we call on the
international community to step up its mediation
efforts in the Middle East as a peaceful means of
settling disputes, reconciling differences and stopping
bloodshed, so as to ensure the stability of the region
and the world. It is important to find individuals and
parties that can build on sustainable solutions in that
violence-affected region to achieve a more promising
future that meets the aspirations of all the peoples in
the region to security, peace and prosperity.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein, has adopted a moderate approach in its foreign
policy. Jordan has always been the voice of wisdom and
moderation and at the forefront of States calling for
the primacy of reason and dialogue over violence and
extremism. That is reflected in our position on a number
of regional and international conflicts and crises and in
our principled position on the Syrian crisis. We have
always stated that there is no military solution to the
crisis; the only solution is a political one that meets the
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people and preserves
the unity and territorial integrity of Syria with security
and stability. Jordanian diplomacy has also played an
important role in establishing a de-escalation zone in
southern Syria by reconciling differences and building
trust among the parties.
Jordan is a contributor to international
peacekeeping operations. It contributes more than
100,000 troops, including Jordanian women. Jordan
stresses the important role of those peacekeeping
operations. We also underscore the special role
that women play in peacekeeping operations and
in building and sustaining peace. It is therefore
important to increase the participation of women in all
institutions and mechanisms that seek to prevent and
resolve conflicts, as well as in mediation processes,
especially in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000),
which recognizes women’s active role in establishing
peace and security. I call for all obstacles that prevent
women from playing their important and critical role to
be eliminated.
Jordan has sought to link the women agenda with
the youth agenda in its national plans to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in accordance
with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015). In
that connection, Jordan commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General to strengthen gender equality within
the United Nations.
In order for mediation to be successful it must
address the root causes of problems before they
escalate. Mediation must also take into consideration
the suffering of people and the different dimensions
of conflicts, including humanitarian, economic, social
and geopolitical factors. It should also seek to promote
tolerance, justice and coexistence as the ultimate goals
for all humankind.
All forms of discrimination and injustice must
be eliminated in order to sustain peace and combat
exclusion and poverty. It is also necessary to implement
the 2030 Agenda, as that would contribute to preventing
conflicts, developing social peace and alleviating
humanitarian suffering, which can lead, in many cases,
to violence, extremism and conflict. I also note the
important role that can be played by local institutions,
civil society and regional organizations, and the need to
increase their capacities and skills to that end.
In conclusion, unified support by the Security
Council for all mediation efforts is essential to

S/PV. 8334

their success through providing political and moral
support to mediators, who contribute to efforts aimed
at preventing and resolving conflicts and reaching
comprehensive and lasting solutions. We hope that this
debate will be the beginning of a path on which we
will walk together towards a future we want in a world
that focuses on understanding rather than violence, on
cooperation rather than repulsion and on dialogue to
reach solutions rather than imposing them.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
First, we wish to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this open debate. With an increase in the
number of conflicts and their negative impact on
international peace, security and development, it is
more important than ever that we be successful in
preventing and resolving conflicts through mediation.
Solving disputes by peaceful means remains the
primary responsibility of Member States. At the same
time, the Security Council has an important role. We
welcome the fact that, last year, a united Security
Council, working in concert with other stakeholders,
contributed to the prevention of a potential outbreak of
violence in The Gambia.
In line with the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council may call upon parties to disputes to
settle them by peaceful means and may recommend
appropriate procedures for such settlements. The
Nordic countries encourage the Council to make full
use of its mandate to engage in, support and promote
mediation efforts, as it did by providing united and
clear support for the Colombian peace process. In the
Colombian case, we also see the crucial role that a
United Nations mission, supported by a strong Security
Council mandate, can play once a peace agreement has
been signed and the parties embark on the difficult
phase of implementing what was agreed.
The sustaining peace agenda highlights the
importance of engagement throughout the conflict
cycle. At the same time, the increasing complexity of
today’s conflicts poses challenges to United Nations
peacemaking efforts. There is a complex relationship

18-2697035/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

between sanctions and peace processes. The involvement
of the Security Council brings with it the responsibility
to provide active support for peace efforts and to help
to consolidate peace. We hope that the Council will pay
closer attention to that dimension in situations where
there have been positive developments, for example,
in the relationships between Eritrea and Ethiopia and
between Eritrea and Somalia.
The Nordic countries recognize that regional
organizations are often best placed to take the lead
in mediation efforts. We welcome and will support
in every way possible the strengthened relationships
between the African Union and the United Nations and
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council.
The Nordic countries are concerned about the low
number of women participating in mediation processes.
We support the Secretary-General in his efforts to
rectify that, and we hope that the emerging cooperation
between the regional networks of women mediators
and the United Nations will lead to more inclusive
peace processes, thereby increasing the likelihood
of sustainable peace. The Nordic Women Mediators
Network was established in 2015.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s call for
a surge in peace diplomacy. We welcome, and have
contributed to, the increase in funding for mediation
and early preventive efforts by the Department of
Political Affairs in recent years. At the same time,
sustained and predictable funding is required, not only
on a voluntary basis.
As the report (S/2015/682) of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations”
underscores, the Council’s efforts to manage conflicts
should be tailored to support political solutions to
conflicts. We support the United Nations reform agenda
and look forward to seeing how the whole-of-pillar
approach by the United Nations peace and security
secretariat will lead to an enhanced role for mediation
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
However, mediation is not a quick fix or a
one-size-fits-all approach. Social and economic
development remains crucial if we are to address the
root causes. While supporting the United Nations
mediation capabilities, the Nordic countries will remain
major partners in long-term development.
36/77

29/08/2018

The President: I now give the floor to thte
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala): My
delegation thanks you wholeheartedly, Mr. President,
for having convened this crucial debate on mediation
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. This open
debate is a distinct opportunity to exchange views on
how Member States can best support mediation as a
means for attaining the peaceful settlement of disputes.
We also want to thank the United Kingdom delegation,
of course, for the concept note prepared as a basis
for our deliberations (S/2018/586, annex), as well as
the briefers.
Guatemala recognizes the critical importance
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
regarding the pacific settlement of disputes, along
with the provisions set forth in Chapter VII to
prevent conflict.
Although mediation is one of the most important
tools, it is rarely implemented at an early stage in the
development of any potential source of struggle. If
violence is the dominant characteristic of a controversy,
mediation ought to play a very important dissuading
role at the onset in order to prevent the escalation
of hostilities, and not, as is usually the case, when
violence is already rampant. Indeed, when international
law recognizes mediation as one of the most important
means to prevent or to resolve disputes or conflicts,
it does so on the basis that any effort predicated on
mediation must take into account the root causes and
the dynamics of the conflict, along with the interests,
needs, traditions and sociopolitical idiosyncrasies of
the population concerned. Effective mediation produces
good results when the those circumstances are properly
considered so that the efforts are not either misdirected
or wasted, as improvisation is of course not advisable.
There is no silver bullet in mediation methods,
and certainly there is no conventional practice that
may be imposed from abroad unless there is a keen
and conversant mediator with a deep knowledge and
an awareness of the root causes and the nature of the
conflict, as well as the composition and the expectations
of the conflicting parties. However, ideally, a mediator
must also possess an acumen of good practices and
confidence-building measures. Notwithstanding what
I have just said, we add that an able mediator must
also have a sense of belonging and identify with the
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

population concerned and its plight. Indeed, this
morning, the Secretary-General said:
“Successful mediation and the peaceful settlement
of disputes requires a deep understanding of leaders
and their constituencies and strong political will.”
On the other hand, sustaining peace means the
engagement of people of goodwill, including mediators,
so that the social discontent of a population is not
exacerbated into conflict. Furthermore, sustaining
peace proposes a preventive scheme to ameliorate the
conditions that beset the development and the welfare
of the people — a state of affairs that, if it is not
addressed, may be conducive to conflict. I again cite
the Secretary-General this morning, saying that a call
for diplomacy for peace is a call for sustaining peace.
(spoke in Spanish)
This Organization, the United Nations, continues to
be the best reference for peace and represents the hope
that the world has of achieving it. No other organization
has that mandate or the moral or political authority to
fulfil it. That is why we firmly believe that the concepts
of sustainable peace and prevention pre-emptively
resolve the unmet needs of the population, which, when
not met, can degenerate into conflict, including the
violation of human rights, the denial of opportunities,
and social exclusion. Therefore, it is also crucial to
provide sufficient resources to any peacekeeping
operation agreed by the Security Council, which must
be free of foreign interference not authorized by the
Council. Likewise, peace missions must have a clear,
viable and realistic mandate that includes mediation
with a defined time frame among its objectives.
In conclusion, we can only highlight the importance
of resolution 1325 (2000), which points out that women
are essential actors in the resolution of any conflict.
Women are agents of positive change and are efficient
and knowledgeable administrators of the reality of
their environment. As such, their participation in
peace processes as mediators is essential. We are
pleased to note that in recent years their contribution to
peacekeeping operations has been highly valued.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I will also make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

S/PV. 8334

Allow me to begin by congratulating the delegation
of the United Kingdom on fulfilling the duties of
the presidency of the Security Council in a highly
professional manner and efficient manner. I would
also like to express our appreciation for your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene today’s discussion on
mediation, which is a subject of particular importance
for my delegation.
As a country countering military aggression from
its eastern neighbour, Ukraine firmly believes in the
need to strengthen United Nations capacities in the
sphere of mediation, as well as to increase the efficiency
of the Organization’s respective efforts at all stages of
the conflict cycle.
In the light of the Security Council’s primary task
to maintain international peace and security, we share
the view that mediation activities can and should greatly
contribute to reducing and to eliminating threats to
global peace and security. They are an important tool in
preventing conflicts, building up trust and confidence
between the parties to a conflict, reaching peaceful
solutions and consolidating peace agreements.
There is no doubt that, as a universal body enjoying
a unique level of legitimacy, the United Nations must
play as effective a role as possible in preventing
potential conflicts and in addressing ongoing ones. Yet,
as rightly observed by a number of speakers before me,
the potential of the United Nations is not being used to its
fullest in that regard. There are always justifications for
why the United Nations does or does not do something.
However, those reasons do not in any way absolve the
United Nations from its responsibilities.
People all over the world, including in Ukraine,
therefore continue to look up to the United Nations in
the hope and expectation that it will step up its efforts
to prevent armed conflicts between States and to ensure
universal compliance with international law.
We note with regret the inability of the United
Nations and the Council to take proper and robust
action in response to the blatant violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As a result, the
Russian Federation’s aggression against Ukraine
continues unabated for the fifth year. Exactly four
years ago today, Russian armed forces launched a
direct attack on Ukrainian military units near Ilovaisk,
which is deep in Ukrainian sovereign territory. That act
of aggression resulted in a treacherous massacre of 366
unarmed Ukrainian soldiers — I repeat 366 unarmed

18-2697037/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ukrainian soldiers — despite a safe passage agreement
negotiated with the Russian Federation.
On the anniversary of that tragic occasion and
with your indulgence, Mr. President, I would like to
commemorate Ukrainians who sacrificed their lives in
Ilovaisk and other battlefields in defence of their land
and democratic values. As Ukraine mourns its heroes
today, we would like the tragedy to serve as another
reminder and warning to the Council and others that
deals and compromises with Moscow are worthless.
Still, Ukraine remains committed to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. We proceed from the fact
that Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
envisages an obligation to settle any international
disputes peacefully and provides a toolkit to do so. In
particular, we initiated proceedings at the International
Court of Justice concerning the application of the
International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism and of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. We lodged the declaration pursuant
to article 12 (3) of the Rome Statute to enable the
International Criminal Court to exercise its jurisdiction
over war crimes committed since the beginning of the
military aggression against Ukraine.
Earlier this year we filed a memorial in arbitration
proceedings against the Russian Federation under the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
since Russia continues to violate Ukraine’s sovereign
rights in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch
Strait. Together with other members of the Joint
Investigation Team, we continue working to ensure
accountability for the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17. All in all, we consider negotiations to be
the go-to method of dispute settlement. Before lodging
the cases mentioned at the various international judicial
organs, we exhausted all avenues of negotiation at
all levels.
In conclusion, my delegation strongly believes that
empowering and strengthening existing international
legal tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States should be one of the international
community’s priorities. In that context, a more proactive
approach to mediation on the part of the United Nations
is needed. By shying away from the issues considered
to be too hot or sensitive, the United Nations is doing
nothing less than undermining its own standing. As it
pertains to our region, we are encouraged by the fact
38/77

29/08/2018

that the Secretary-General has identified the settlement
of conflicts in Europe as one of his priorities for 2018.
We now look forward to a concrete follow-through, with
Article 99 of the Charter being used by the SecretaryGeneral to the fullest, in particular in relation to the
Russian-Ukrainian armed conflict.
Lastly, contributing to conflict resolution requires
total commitment, combined with a conscious decision
to uncompromisingly persevere in pursuit of a
peaceful settlement, which will further strengthen the
moral authority of the United Nations and make the
Organization more resilient.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to congratulate the presidency
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland for convening today’s debate and welcome
this morning’s participation by Lord Tariq Mahmood
Ahmad, Minister of State for the Commonwealth and
the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their briefings.
The Republic of Argentina is committed to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Our foreign policy is therefore guided by
the conviction that multilateralism is essential for
international peace and security. In that regard, we
would like to reaffirm our commitment to the principle
of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. We
believe that every method of peaceful dispute settlement
is equally valid for conflict resolution; only through
such methods can just and lasting solutions be reached.
We underscore the obligation of all Member States
to agree to peaceably settle their disputes, as stipulated
by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the
particular role the Charter entrusts to the SecretaryGeneral in the area of good offices and mediation.
Mediation and mediation support are very important
to the broader objectives of conflict prevention and
resolution. That is why we support the SecretaryGeneral’s strategy to place preventive diplomacy at
the centre of his management efforts. In that regard, I
would like to underscore the support provided by the
Secretariat both through advice on specific technical
issues and in enhancing the capacities of regional
partners and national and local actors.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The complexity of contemporary conflicts
requires multidisciplinary approaches that allow for
broad and inclusive agreements that can withstand
the post-conflict test. Mediators should always take
into account the unique features of each case without
attempting to determine pre-established formulas or
exploit possible positive synergies with other equally
useful dispute-resolution mechanisms. We would like
to highlight in particular the contribution of regional
and subregional organizations to mediation processes
and stress the importance of women’s participation in
all stages of the conflict resolution cycle, including in
mediation processes.
The possibility that mediation, a mission of good
offices or any other means of peaceful settlement
could achieve its objective and purpose depends on the
fulfilment in good faith of the obligations of the parties
involved. When the organs of the United Nations call
upon parties to a dispute to negotiate, they should do
so in good faith and refrain from actions that could
obstruct the obligation of both parties to resolve the
dispute by peaceful means. States not party to a dispute
must also contribute to its peaceful resolution and
refrain from engaging in behaviour that could hamper
the settlement of the dispute.
The use of the various dispute-resolution
mechanisms is subject to the requisite consent of the
parties to engage in a peaceful dispute-settlement
process. Nonetheless, it is clear that the higher
obligation of all Member States to settle disputes by
peaceful means can never be subject only to the consent
of the parties. Nor does it seem appropriate to make the
validity of a mandate granted to the Secretary-General
by the international community contingent upon the
consent of the parties to a dispute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for convening today’s very important
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General and
The Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, as a member of the
Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation, for their briefings.
As the Security Council knows, in April 2009,
under the presidency of Mexico, the Council considered
today’s subject and adopted a presidential statement

S/PV. 8334

(S/PRST/2009/8). Since then, considerable progress has
been made in strengthening United Nations capabilities
in mediation and peaceful dispute settlement. I would
like to underscore in particular that one of the three
pillars of the Secretary-General’s action plan, borne out
of the review of peace operations, is placing conflict
prevention and mediation at the core of the work of the
United Nations. We therefore commend the fact that
the strengthening of mediation is part and parcel of the
Secretary-General’s reform proposal under the peace
and security pillar.
The plethora of examples of successful mediation
amid recent tensions demonstrates the invaluable
contribution of that tool — the very essence of
preventive diplomacy — to reducing the potential
for the deterioration and resumption of conflict,
alleviating human suffering and creating conditions
for sustainable peace. The role of Member States
and international organizations in mediation must
respond to the new challenges posed by contemporary
conflicts and crises. Beyond traditional patterns in the
field of mediation, comprehensive, multidimensional,
innovative and timely approaches are needed today to
create conditions that are conducive to sustainable peace.
Mexico has historically spoken in favour of the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes, and
remains convinced that the genuine strengthening of
the United Nations role depends, to a large extent, on
the efficient use of the tools provided for in Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mediation and other mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes have been key to the prevention
and resolution of political, ideological, natural,
territorial and border disputes in Latin America. Mexico
has played an important role in some of those efforts.
For example, together with Colombia, Panama and
Venezuela, we created a mediation mechanism called
the Contadora Group to achieve the easing of tensions,
political understanding and cooperation in Central
American. The consensus achieved through the Group
is a clear example that in a changing reality political
dialogue must be an essential tool for understanding
between States.
In the case of El Salvador, Mexico’s participation
with the so-called Group of Four — Colombia, Spain,
Venezuela and Mexico — formed the so-called Group
of Friends of the Secretary-General, which offered
ongoing support to and facilitated the negotiation

18-2697039/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

efforts of the United Nations. There are many examples
in our region, but I would especially like to mention
that, within the Organization of American States,
Mexico has contributed, together with other countries,
to the regional mediation and cooperation efforts to
resolve the current crises in Venezuela and Nicaragua.
The Security Council should continue to encourage
and support the inclusion of mediation efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
To that end, the Council may wish to consider the
following measures.
First, the Council should adapt its approach
to mediation in the light of the changing nature of
conflicts and the increase in the number and diversity
of actors in the field, including through a focus on the
gender perspective.
Secondly, it should encourage the SecretaryGeneral to proactively engage in the prevention of
conflicts by providing his good offices to the parties
and drawing the attention of the Council to situations
that endanger international peace and security, in
accordance with Articles 98 and 99 of the Charter.
Thirdly, it should build prevention and mediation
capacities at local, national, subregional, regional and
international levels. That is particularly important,
considering that the peaceful settlement of disputes is a
primary responsibility of Member States.
Fourthly, the Council should include in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions activities that contribute to local, national and
regional mediation efforts to ensure conflict resolution,
avoid polarization and underpin sustainable peace.
Fifthly, the number of women who participated as
mediators in peace processes between 1990 and 2017
make up only two per cent of all mediators, which is
why it is still necessary for the United Nations Highlevel Advisory Board on Mediation to address that
under-representation and expand the list of potential
high-level envoys and mediators. The Council should
continue to promote the gender perspective and
systematically integrate the Board’s recommendations.
In conclusion, the international situation is beset
by a series of crises and conflicts that are intertwined
and converge with voices that incite the exacerbation
of hostilities, hatred, racism and xenophobia. We must
continue to value the role of mediation and preventive
40/77

29/08/2018

diplomacy, because it is up to us to make the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations a reality.
Mexico considers it irresponsible and contrary to
the principles that guide the Organization to call for the
stigmatization of nationalities, religions or ethnicities.
That should not have a place within the Member States
of our Organization. It is not in line with the highest
values of the United Nations, and constitutes acts that
we all must condemn.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: We commend you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely open debate.
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
Promoting international peace and security is part
of the European Union’s (EU) raison d’être, and is at the
core of our international engagement. The Treaty of the
EU guides the EU structures to “preserve peace, prevent
conflicts and strengthen international security”.
While the EU has a long history in promoting and
exercising peace, the EU Global Strategy recently set
conflict prevention as our top priority, thereby further
enhancing our engagement for a more integrated
approach to preventing and resolving conflicts. In
the 2009 Concept on Strengthening EU Capacities,
our member States have given a strong mandate to
promote, leverage, support and fund mediation and
dialogue efforts.
The EU is today engaged in some 40 mediation
or dialogue processes worldwide. Sometimes, the EU
is in a leading and visible role, such as facilitating
the Belgrade and Pristina dialogue, and sometimes
discretely, such as in reaching the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action with Iran. The EU is ready to do more.
We are currently further strengthening our capacities
and structures for mediation and dialogue support.
We look forward to increasing joint initiatives with
our partners, including enhancing dialogues with the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).
In this Chamber, the Secretary-General stated that
prevention is not a priority, but the priority. He also
launched several initiatives and introduced innovations
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8334

in the field of mediation. We strongly agree with his
vision and commend his commitment. The High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation is, for example, an
important addition to the United Nations toolbox.

is not an option, but an imperative. We cannot reach
sustainable agreements when only half the population
is involved. The EU has worked to make a difference on
the ground, such as in Syria, for example.

Over the past years, there has been important
progress in professionalizing mediation support. That is
in part thanks to the Groups of Friends, led by Finland
and Turkey. At their initiative, the Secretary-General
issued his Guidance for Effective Mediation, which
provides principles for managing peace processes.
That is a concrete achievement that sets a standard for
mediation engagements.

The inclusion of youth is another precondition for
achieving sustainable results in peace processes. EU
High Representative Mogherini has identified creating
open spaces for young people and promoting funding
for youth work at all levels as important steps in order
to harness the positive potential of youth-led peace
initiatives, while also reaching out to marginalized
young people.

The United Nations has been at the forefront
of those efforts. I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Secretariat and the establishment of
the Mediation Support Unit 10 years ago, providing
discreet yet crucial policy and operational support.
The EU is a proud supporter of the Mediation Support
Unit. We command its work and we hope it will be
further strengthened. Our Service for Foreign Policy
Instruments has provided approximately €15 million
for United Nations mediation projects worldwide over
the past few years.

Together with the United Nations, EU will be soon
organizing a retreat on mediation structures in regional
and international organizations to further improve our
engagement. Working together has practical benefits.
In the Central African Republic, we supported a
capacity-building and strategy retreat of the African
Initiative Panel involving not only the Government
of the Central African Republic, but also the AU, the
United Nations, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and countries of the region, as well
as non-governmental agencies, such as the Community
of Sant’Egidio, the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue
and the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes. By bringing those actors together, we made
progress towards achieving a common vision for the
peace process. Such coordinated support is essential for
bringing about peace in the Central African Republic,
and we invite all actors to join those efforts.

With the number of conflicts on the rise, their nature
changing and tensions in our societies increasing, it is
necessary to redouble our commitment to mediation
and conflict prevention. As we look at the Council’s
agenda and beyond, we should collectively do more,
better and earlier. The recent joint report between the
United Nations and the World Bank, Pathways for
Peace, made a convincing business case for conflict
prevention. Scaling up preventive action could save up
to $70 billion a year.
We need to take the next step in conflict prevention
and mediation. Early warning needs to be matched
with early action. The earlier we make use of mediation
and mediation support, as the Secretary-General has
encouraged in his report (A/72/115) to the General
Assembly, the better. The Council can be a powerful
force to resort to mediation early on, and should place
preventive mediation at its heart.
From the highest levels to the local actors, peace
processes are more than reaching an agreement with
those who hold apparent power or guns. To sustain an
agreement, we have to involve elites and local levels
alike. Together with the United Nations, we have
worked on insider mediators supporting local-level
initiatives. Also, the inclusion of women and youth

Today, we have the technical means to better
support mediation. The missing ingredient, which we
now need, is political support. That is where the Council
can play a crucial role. It is our collective responsibility.
The EU is ready to play its part. When the EU engages
in a peace process, it is a sustainable, long-term, and
comprehensive commitment that stands together
with and respects United Nations values. The EU can
mobilize a number of tools, from peace operations to
development assistance. Yet political purpose and the
building of effective and lasting peace should always
remain the main objective.
Lastly, it is also a way to respect the legacy of those
who have dedicated their lives to defending peace and
human rights. Among them, Kofi Annan was a prime
figure, whose legacy should inspire us all. As he once
stated, we have the means and the capacity to deal with

18-2697041/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/08/2018

our problems, if only we can find the political will. The
Council’s mandate is to maintain peace and security.
Enhancing our action in conflict prevention and
mediation is not an option for peace, it is a necessity.

regional organizations to promote mediation as a tool
for the peaceful settlement of disputes — a task at
the core of the United Nations mission. I will cite the
following examples.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

Today, in Yemen, we are facing the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis, and the situation on the ground is
rapidly deteriorating. What is needed most is obviously
a political solution. We therefore support the United
Nations efforts towards a political process that involves
all Yemeni groups. Germany continues to finance and
facilitate track-two dialogues, local mediation and
reconciliation, and, whenever possible, small-scale
stabilization measures. As another example, in Darfur
and the Sudan, we are also supporting the ongoing
mediation efforts of the Joint Special Representative
and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to reach a lasting political
agreement between the Sudanese Government and
armed rebel groups, as set out in the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. In our mediation efforts in Yemen,
Darfur and elsewhere, we are focusing intensely on
strengthening civil society and fostering inclusiveness
by working on various tracks and ensuring that all
views are heard.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank
the President of the Security Council for initiating
today’s open debate. I thank the briefers for their
informative statements.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and the Chair of
the Group of Friends of Mediation.
Germany very much welcomes the President’s
emphasis on the importance of mediation. Germany
believes that mediation is a key instrument during
all phases of conflict, from conflict prevention to
stabilization and peacebuilding. It is an integral part of
the Secretary-General’s reform agenda, which focuses
on prevention and sustaining peace, and enjoys our full
support. As pressure on our global order intensifies,
the need to resolve conflicts peacefully is becoming
increasingly urgent. We need more dialogue instead
of more confrontation, and more prevention instead
of more intervention. Mediation is important to those
ends, and the Security Council has a decisive role to
play, not least in accordance with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Germany therefore fully
subscribes to presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/1)
issued in January, and we encourage the SecretaryGeneral to continue those efforts in that regard.
When the Council decides to entrust the SecretaryGeneral, or another actor, with mediating a dispute, it
is important that it provides political support, while
providing the parties with adequate space to pursue
conflict resolution. Adherence to certain standards and
principles is critical when designing and conducting
mediation processes. The Secretariat, the Mediation
Support Unit and the Group of Friends have contributed
greatly to the promotion of such standards and
professional approaches in the area of mediation, which
we fully support. For Germany, mediation also plays
a key role in its national efforts to support peaceful
crisis resolution. That is why we have expanded our
engagement in mediation, for instance, by establishing
a mediation unit in the Federal Foreign Office and
increasing our mediation support significantly. We
are keen to work with other Member States and
42/77

Experience has shown that the most successful
peace processes are supported by the population
and benefit from the buy-in of all groups concerned.
Crucially, that includes women as agents of change
within mediation and reconciliation processes. Crisis
prevention and stabilization can succeed only if women
have an active role in peace processes and their views
are respected. What makes a difference is not only
increasing the number of women in mediation processes,
but ensuring their influence on their structure and
outcome. Germany is an active supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda, and will continue to be
as a non-permanent member on the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate, which is especially
important for Spain.
Over the past several years, we have devoted
time, effort and resources to promoting preventive
diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including mediation. The Charter of the United Nations
obligates States Members to settle their international
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

disputes by peaceful means so as to avoid jeopardizing
international peace and security and justice. Among
the various methods for the resolution of disputes,
mediation is perhaps the oldest and undoubtedly one
of the most effective with regard to resolving conflicts.
The United Nations has carried out important work
in that area, and it would be unfair to forget the many
crises that it has successfully defused quietly through
complex and often long-term efforts. Nevertheless,
conflicts continue. Moreover, the situation today
differs substantially from the one in 1945 when the San
Francisco Charter was drafted.
We are faced with inter-State conflicts of a
territorial nature and internal armed conflicts, as
well as those concerning political transitions and
ethnic-territorial and religious issues. There is also an
increasing number of conflicts and risk factors, known
as the new threats, which are regional in dimension,
such as terrorism and organized crime, including the
illicit trafficking in human beings, drugs and weapons,
environmental crimes and breaches in cybersecurity.
Lastly, we face conflicts resulting from the struggle for
natural resources, in general involving water and fossil
fuels. That reality reflects the need to adapt mediation
and other dispute resolution mechanisms to the
changing nature of conflicts and revise the guidelines
developed by the United Nations for mediators, States
and other actors that support mediation work in order
for the process to be viable and its outcome lasting.
The main prerequisite for mediation to be successful
is the consent of all parties to a conflict, without which
good-faith negotiations or commitment to the process
is impossible. It is also essential that the process be
inclusive, thereby lending heightened legitimacy to any
agreement and decreasing the possibility of it being
undermined by excluded parties.
For his or her part, the mediator must also meet
a series of requirements. The work of the mediator
must be agreed by the parties in conflict, impartial
and carried out in respect of national sovereignty and
with a comprehensive knowledge of the conflict, while
enjoying the material and human resources allowing
him or her to travel, meet with the parties in conflict,
organize meetings, write reports and conduct other
activities the process may require. At the same time,
however, it is also essential that mediators know that
mediation is not always necessarily the best response
to a given conflict. They must be able to determine
whether the time is right to mediate it, whether the

S/PV. 8334

type of conflict at hand actually requires mediation or
whether the mechanism could ultimately cause more
harm than good.
Practically since its founding, the United Nations
has participated in mediation processes either through
the direct involvement of the Secretary-General
or through his Special Representatives, gradually
establishing the structures needed to develop that
function. However, considerable room for improvement
remains in this area, which does not necessarily require
developing new structures or adopting new resolutions,
but rather involves certain aspects that can increase
the effectiveness of mediation processes. It is also
imperative that the United Nations provide a joint,
rather than a fragmented, response and that all efforts
be aligned to achieve a resolution to the conflict.
It is also important that the United Nations carry
out joint mediation activities with other regional or
subregional organizations. Another key element is the
creation of national and local mechanisms to redress
grievances and reduce tensions through mediation,
facilitation and dialogue. That means devoting
resources and efforts to the training of mediators at the
regional and local levels, who can play an important
role in preventing conflicts in their initial stages.
It is also essential to continue to encourage the
participation of women in mediation processes, not
because they have are more skilled at those tasks but
because although conflicts affect the whole community,
they are harder on women and girls, who have higher
dropout rates and are victims of gender-based violence.
For that reason, their contributions, needs and solutions
are particularly important.
Religious leaders may also have a critical role to
play in mediation for conflict prevention and resolution
in contexts. Spain supports the creation of platforms
of religious leaders for peace, especially in the most
conflict areas where the need is most urgent, and the
establishment of networks of local religious leaders,
for which our country has already organized several
meetings since 2015.
Spain places a particular emphasis on young people
and on the need to train them in mediation, incorporate
them into negotiation processes and empower them to
act as agents to resolve disputes by peaceful and never
violent means, thereby also preventing them from
falling into radicalism.

18-2697043/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

The participation of Spain in the meetings on
mediation held at the United Nations, the sponsorship
of the various General Assembly resolutions, the
significant contributions made to the Mediation
Support Unit and the Department of Political Affairs
in general, the contributions of Spain to the creation
of the guidelines for effective mediation, its status as a
founding partner and its participation in the activities
of the Group of Friends of Mediation and, above all,
the implementation of the Spanish-Moroccan Initiative
on Mediation in the Mediterranean Region, which has
enabled, among other things, the training of dozens of
women mediators in the region, are tangible proof that
mediation is one of our foreign policy priorities.
Finally, I thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts to promote preventive diplomacy and mediation.
We agree with him that prevention is not merely a
priority but the priority, and that mediation is its
preferred vehicle.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan supports the
Secretary-General’s mediation initiatives, which
are deeply interlinked with conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and the sustaining peace agenda. We
welcomed the establishment of the Secretary-General’s
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation last year, and
we are encouraged by his field visits and continued
work on mediation activities.
Japan has for many years played a positive role in
aiding the peaceful settlement of disputes. Regarding
our support for the resolution of the Mindanao conflict
in the Philippines, for example, Japan contributed to a
peace agreement between the Government and a former
anti-Government armed group, the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front, by hosting a meeting of the parties. We
also deployed experts to the International Monitoring
Team to monitor the ceasefire and the socioeconomic
situation, and to provide community development and
other support to help sustain peace in the conflict areas.
Today, as an active player of mediation, Japan
wishes to highlight three points: inclusivity, capacitybuilding and partnerships.
First, to achieve sustaining peace, mediation should
involve not only the combatants, but all the relevant
actors, including women, young people, civil society,
local communities and others as part of an inclusive
44/77

29/08/2018

process. In that regard, Japan welcomes greater gender
balance among the members of the High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation, as well as the Secretary-General’s
commitment to increasing the number of women
mediators. Japan also promotes women’s participation
in conflict resolution and prevention based on its
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security.
Japan contributed $1 million dollars to UN-Women to
promote women’s leadership so as to prevent emerging
violent extremism in the Sahel region.
Secondly, sustaining peace will not be achieved
without respecting national ownership. Here, capacitybuilding is crucial. One of Japan’s main pillars of
peacebuilding is an emphasis on people in the field.
In Mindanao, after the ceasefire agreement, we
supported capacity-building for students, teachers,
local Government officers and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front on peace education and conflict
resolution to ensure lasting peace and prevent a relapse
into conflict. Our support is provided under the banner
of Japan Bangsamoro Initiatives for Reconstruction and
Development, without excluding any religion. We will
continue to make such efforts.
Thirdly, peace does not happen alone. Partnerships
with relevant actors — including international, regional,
subregional and local organizations — must be enhanced
and continued. It is encouraging to see the efforts of
African regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU), the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and others that engage actively in
negotiations or dialogue among all relevant actors in
order to resolve conflicts regarding the continent.
Strengthening the Organization’s partnership with the
AU Peace and Security Council, such as by convening
joint annual meetings with the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, is one way that Member
States can further contribute.
The power of mediation is widely understood,
yet challenges remain. It is essential to have proper
conflict analysis and to share information with
everyone. In that connection, the three points I
highlighted earlier — inclusivity, capacity-building
and partnerships — must be interlinked and enhanced.
Mediation is by nature rarely a public affair, but this
open debate reaffirms its importance and helps to
continue discussions both inside and outside of the
United Nations system on how it can best serve to
advance the cause of sustaining peace.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I particularly thank the
representative of Japan for adhering to the four-minute
time limit.
I now give the floor to the representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): Let me express my sincere
gratitude to the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today’s important debate.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I will now add
a few remarks in my national capacity.
Since the last Security Council debate on this
issue (see S/PV.6108), we have witnessed several major
developments in support of the surge in diplomacy,
such as the steadfast commitment of the SecretaryGeneral to prioritizing prevention, the strengthening of
the mediation capacity of the United Nations, and the
commitment to creating the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation. Despite all those efforts, there has been
a ten-fold increase in the number of internationalized
conflicts in recent decades.
At this juncture, it is critical that we take stock
of ongoing mediation processes and reflect on our
challenges and achievements. Let me share our national
experience with regard to conflict settlement, where the
United Nations, along with the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
has a special leadership role as one of the co-chairs of
the Geneva international discussions, which is a unique
and inclusive international mediation platform.
Ten years after the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, we
still face a fully operational illegal Russian military
presence in both occupied regions of Georgia. The
continuous fortification of the occupation lines has
had a heavy toll on the humanitarian and human rights
situation on the ground. Against that backdrop, the
peaceful dialogue formats — the Geneva international
discussions and the incident prevention and response
mechanisms under its umbrella — have a special
role to play. While those formats have proved to be
indispensable in preventing the wide-scale escalation of
the conflict, we must also admit that they have failed to
produce tangible, substantial results. Our main lessons
from 44 rounds held thus far are the following.
First and foremost, neutral and good-faith
mediation is key to a credible process. We now enjoy
an impartial co-chairmanship within the Geneva
international discussions. However, in the 1990s, for

S/PV. 8334

more than a decade conflict in Georgia was mediated
by a party with vested interests in prolongating and
escalating the conflict, which resulted in its full-scale
military intervention and occupation. It is therefore
critical that the Security Council give due attention to
conflicts of interest in its deliberations on the conflict
resolution process. In that context, the unilateral
discontinuation of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia through the veto cast by the Russian
Federation also comes to mind.
Secondly, we could not agree more with the
Secretary-General in stating that getting the mediation
process right can be as important as the substance of
the talks. That becomes essential when we speak about
issues such as the agenda and conduct during the talks.
For almost a decade, we have witnessed permanent
disregard of ground rules of the Geneva international
discussions by Russia and other participants who use
the tactics of so called walk-outs during the discussion
on vital agenda items and blackmailing the peace
formats with the threat of disrupting the negotiations if
issues they dislike are raised. We therefore believe that
the elaboration of concrete measures that prevent such
procedural misuse of the mediation platforms should be
a priority of the mediators.
At the same time, the mediation should not be
confined solely to the facilitation of an environment
suitable for negotiations. The mediators should further
strive to take on the role of defenders of the basic
principles of international law and create incentives
for the parties to be constructive and fair players
in the negotiation. Therefore, misconduct and the
blackmailing of the process need to be dully assessed
and discouraged.
Of course, even perfect mediators would not be
able to achieve progress if the political will of the
parties does not allow it. That has been the case on
fundamental issues of the international discussions,
such as the non-use of force, international security
arrangements and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. For instance, we have many times
unilaterally reaffirmed the commitment to the non-use
of force and firmly respected that principle. We are still
awaiting reciprocity from the Russian side.
Finally, let me join others in stressing the importance
of engaging more women in conflict resolution.
We warmly welcome the appointment of Ms. Cihan
Sultanoğlu as the United Nations Representative to the

18-2697045/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/08/2018

Geneva international discussions and express hope that,
as the first woman co-Chair, she will bring positive
impetus to the negotiations.

actions in transition processes during post-conflict
periods are of significant relevance to the consolidation
and support of peace.

In conclusion, let me note that Georgia has
intensified its efforts for reconciliation among the
war-torn population so as to share the benefits of the
country’s development and European integration with
the people residing in the occupied territories. A new
peace initiative, entitled A Step to a Better Future,
seeks to improve the humanitarian, social and economic
conditions of the populations and to encourage contacts,
movement and relations based on mutual interests along
and across the dividing lines.

To better implement mediation efforts, it is important
to enhance national capabilities to better support special
envoys. Also, greater international coordination and
complementarity in mediation and conflict resolution
actions are required in order to optimize resources and
avoid overlapping. Partnerships, civil society at local
and national levels, and the role of women and young
people are key to successful mediation efforts.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal is
fully aligned with the statement delivered by the
European Union.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
United Kingdom on having chosen this topic for an
open debate at the Security Council. This reflection on
how to better seek peaceful settlement of disputes is
of paramount importance for international peace and
security and for the success of the United Nations.
The duty of States to settle their differences by
peaceful means is clearly set forth in Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations and enshrined in countless
international instruments, such as the Charter of the
Organization of American States, the Constitutive Act
of the African Union and the treaties establishing the
European communities and the subsequent treaties and
acts modifying and supplementing them to name just
a few.
We commend the Secretary-General’s efforts to
strengthen the mediation capacity of the United Nations,
calling for a surge in diplomacy for peace. The creation
of the High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation is
already a tangible result. The ongoing United Nations
reform in the areas of management, peace and security,
and development will certainly help to strengthen the
holistic approach to conflict resolution. We reiterate
the importance of strengthening conflict prevention
through the development of early warning systems and
the increase in capabilities for situations that require
immediate action by the international community.
Non-proliferation, the legal accountability of those
responsible for mass atrocity crimes, and follow-up
46/77

Mediation has an interdisciplinary character.
It involves a political and diplomatic approach;
specialized expertise, for example, in conflicts over
natural resources; and a legal dimension in support of
transitional justice.
Finally, I would like to recall the interdependence
between security and development, and reiterate
that lasting peace will be achieved only if the causes
of conflicts are tackled and addressed. Therefore,
mediation and development must happen in parallel
and in complementarity. Portugal is ready to continue
to play an active role in those two parallel and
complementary efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important meeting. I thank the Secretary-General,
The Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat
Qadeem, Co-founder of PAIMAN Alumni Trust, for
their valuable briefings. I also thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for its concept note (S/2018/586,
annex).
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to former Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan. He was
a pillar of mediation efforts for the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
My country’s delegation hopes that today’s
deliberations will allow us to establish an objective and
binding approach that places an absolute priority on the
peaceful, mediation-based settlement of disputes and
comprehensive political settlements that are strongly
supported by the Security Council and the international
community, in particular international and regional
relevant partners. The Security Council should also
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

play its role in maintaining international peace and
security, achieving sustainable stability and security in
accordance with the Council’s mandate and Article 2,
paragraph 3, and Articles 33 and 36 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
We underscore the importance of the Council’s
presence in promoting efforts to settle disputes
peacefully, because even if mediators are objective and
impartial, the support of stakeholders, in particular
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, is needed. Needless to say, the objective
and impartial positions of the Security Council towards
the parties to a conflict remain the cornerstone of its role
in settling conflicts. We also believe that the Security
Council should remain united and condemn parties that
prolong conflicts, in particular non-State actors.
The Sudan welcomes regional and international
initiatives to settle disputes peacefully and, in particular,
those of the African Union (AU), which continue to be
developed. Those initiatives have achieved tangible
results in finding African solutions to African problems
within Africa. We must support such initiatives aimed
at maintaining peace and security pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter, which attaches a central and key
role to regional organizations in maintaining regional
peace and security.
Furthermore,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as well as neighbouring countries, are
always the best placed and the most capable of acting
as mediators. That is particularly true when internal
conflicts become increasingly complex and when they
spill over national borders and include other actors
at the regional and international levels. The fact that
regional and subregional organizations are also aware of
the geopolitical, social, cultural and natural dimensions
of such conflicts further highlights the importance of
their role.
In that context, the Sudan welcomes the Joint
United Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, established in
April 2017. The Framework aims at developing the AU
capacity and promoting mediation mechanisms and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, while emphasizing the
role of women and the 2030 Sustainable Agenda for
Development, as well as the AU Agenda 2063.
The role of regional and subregional organizations
is effective. I would highlight the role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)

S/PV. 8334

in the mediation for a peaceful resolution of the conflict
in South Sudan. Recently, it led to an agreement
between the parties to the conflict, in particular with
regard to governance and security measures, following
the agreement on a comprehensive ceasefire. There
remain some outstanding details, and there are ongoing
attempts to achieve an understanding on those issues.
The initiative of President Al-Bashir of the Sudan,
delegated by the leaders of IGAD countries, has
played a decisive role in achieving that agreement,
which was signed on 5 August in the presence of the
Presidents of the States members of IGAD, as well as
the representatives of the Secretary-General and of the
African Union.
My country’s delegation hopes that regional and
international efforts to promote the role of mediation
in the peaceful settlement of disputes and in the
exchange of best practices to that end will be stepped
up in the future. We need to build the capacity of
developing countries for mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as that of regional and
subregional organizations. It is also necessary for the
reform process within the United Nations today, which
prioritizes prevention, to pave the way for increased
international cooperation in that regard. I also wish to
underline the complementarity of the efforts of regional
organizations, on the one hand, and of the Security
Council, on the other. All parties should work in the
same direction so as to achieve the desired objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate and for
providing an opportunity to address mediation, which
is an important tool of diplomacy. I also thank the
briefers for their interesting perspectives.
The notion of mediation reflects a long-standing
principle of international law. However, it was only in
article 3 of the 1907 Hague Convention for the Pacific
Settlement of International Disputes that such an
approach was first formally affirmed. Following that
initiative, both in the Covenant of the League of Nations
and under the Charter of the United Nations, Members
assumed a larger obligation than heretofore to settle
disputes in a peaceful manner. Hence, opportunities for
mediation were afforded greater scope.
Mediation, on the face of it, is based on the interest
in and consent and commitment to a peaceful settlement

18-2697047/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

by all parties. In its very essence, mediation is premised
on faith in the key principles of independence,
sovereignty and freedom of choice, which all actors
involved in disputes so zealously desire. The issue is
therefore not whether mediation is a useful tool for
peaceful settlement. Where acceptable to all parties, it
is, in a manner of speaking, settled international law.
For us, as practitioners of multilateral diplomacy,
the questions to be addressed are whether the apparatus
of the United Nations, as currently constituted, can
perform many of the basic functions required for
effective mediation or, more acutely, is it more than
a structural issue and one of functionality? Are there
inherent characteristics that place limitations on the
abilities of the United Nations? Are the mechanisms at
the disposal of the United Nations sufficiently coherent
and flexible to guide dynamic negotiations with an
effective strategy? Can improving them help?
The United Nations does not come to mediation
unencumbered. The problems of the United Nations
apparatus as a mediator are ingrained in the nature
of intergovernmental organizations. Add to that the
specificities of the Charter of the United Nations,
which is premised on cooperation among the permanent
members. That cooperation is clearly not visibly
evident these days. Where it is manifest, it invariably
takes the form of the lowest common denominator. In
the practice of day-to-day diplomacy, mediators need
to be fully backed by Member States. However, States
members of intergovernmental bodies inevitably tend
to speak with different voices.
Policymaking within an international organization
adds another layer of bargaining and trade-offs. That
tortuous decision-making process, imbued with
political trade-offs, saps the energy of the United
Nations and its flexibility in pursuing mediation.
Once the United Nations-authorized entities agree on
a mediating proposal or framework, it cannot easily be
modified in response to changing circumstances. Will
pursuing Secretariat reforms change those inherent
inadequacies? Limitations that are embedded in the
very nature of intergovernmental organizations are
not resolved by the revamping of the Secretariat. Since
the problems are functional, it may be more realistic to
look at functional solutions rather than structural ones.
Rather than try and throw intractable issues into the lap
of the United Nations, a more pragmatic approach is
perhaps required.
48/77

29/08/2018

As the Charter of the United Nations itself
recognizes, disputes can be settled peacefully through
a variety of mechanisms. Today, there are numerous
actors and many forms of pacific settlement that may
be better suited to addressing the different issues.
Instead of putting the United Nations at the centre
of mediation efforts and exhorting States to support
them, the international community should perhaps give
encouragement to those most motivated and having the
capacity to do so to settle such issues, as appropriate.
Of course, there could be many forms of division
of the tasks of pacific settlement of disputes between
the United Nations and other concerned actors that can
undoubtedly be devised. However, it is important not
to charge the United Nations with responsibilities that
it may be ill-suited to perform. Mediation, in every
circumstance, is one such task that it is not geared
to fulfil.
In line with that approach, allow me to take this
opportunity to remind Pakistan — whose representative
is the only speaker who has made unwarranted references
to an integral part of India — that pacific settlement
requires pacific intent in thinking and pacific content
in action. Regurgitating a failed approach that has long
been rejected by the international community is neither
reflective of pacific intent nor a display of pacific content.
We hope that, rather than indulge in polemics, the new
Government of Pakistan will work constructively to
build a safe, stable, secure and developed South Asian
region free of terror and violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Necula (Romania): I would like to commend
the United Kingdom for convening this timely meeting
on mediation and the settlement of disputes. Allow me
also to express my deep appreciation for the informative
briefing by Secretary-General António Guterres.
Romania aligns itself with the statements of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Mediation.
I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity.
Since 2009, the year when this topic was last
discussed in the Security Council (see S/PV.6108), the
achievements made in promoting mediation have been
remarkable. As a member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, Romania appreciates the successful work
conducted by the Group at the United Nations, including
through the promotion of resolutions in the General
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Assembly on strengthening the role of mediation.
We also commend the creation in the Secretariat
of the Mediation Support Unit. We must keep that
momentum, consolidate its normative and operational
basis and reinforce support for mediation activities at
the institutional level.
Mediation is an essential tool for conflict
prevention. However, it should not be employed alone,
but only as part of a greater and more structural
approach together with other mechanisms, such as early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment
and comprehensive analysis of the root causes of
conflict, in order to ensure sustainable peace. In that
regard, if mediation is to succeed it is essential to ensure
cooperation and coherence of purpose among the actors
involved. Success requires teamwork, and we know
that much can still be achieved by using the unique
capacities, knowledge and expertise that regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the European
Union (EU) and the Economic Community of West
African States can offer.
We also believe that strengthening partnerships
inside the United Nations is crucial, and we welcome the
enhanced cooperation between United Nations bodies
such as the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). Romania has outlined a set of
priorities for its chairmanship of the PBC, including
implementing peacebuilding and sustaining peace
efforts, partnerships and synergy between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, all of which are directly connected to advancing
mediation efforts. Preventive diplomacy also requires
inclusiveness, and we cannot stress enough the
importance of involving women and young people
in mediation processes. There can be no progress
without them.
A lot has been done but a great deal more can
be achieved. Many international organizations are
stepping up their mediation capabilities. As a member
of the EU, Romania will support its strengthening of its
peace mediation capacities. As a global actor in peace
mediation, the EU has access to effective instruments
of preventive action on the political, bilateral and
multilateral diplomatic, and civilian fronts, as well as
in the areas of trade and development.
Last but not least, we agree that mediation is not
merely the automatic process of bringing parties

S/PV. 8334

together at the negotiation table. It must also be part
of a broader culture of building mutual trust and
understanding among the actors involved, and that is
what we aim for.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I would like to begin by
thanking the presidency of the United Kingdom for
convening this debate on mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Today’s meeting is very timely. Not only are we
witnessing an increase in conflicts, but a number of
peace processes are experiencing setbacks, ceasefire
agreements are not holding and an unprecedented
number of people are being displaced from their homes.
While we may start to doubt our capacity to settle
conflicts in peaceful ways, we must remind ourselves
that we cannot afford to do that. The peaceful resolution
of conflicts is the very purpose of our Organization, and
it is our collective responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to do everything we can by peaceful
means to avert the outbreak of crises.
The aspects of today’s topic that I would like to
focus on are mediation capacity, inclusivity and political
will and leadership. Estonia supports the increasing
focus of the United Nations on mediation as a crucial
means of action in conflict resolution. We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and welcome his
initiatives to enhance mediation capacities in the
United Nations itself as well as nationally and locally.
Improving the ability to anticipate and react quickly
to emerging and existing conflicts and enhancing the
skills of cooperation and partnership-building and the
virtues of care and trust are necessary investments
in effective conflict prevention. The establishment of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is also a
step in the right direction. Besides that, Estonia greatly
values the work of the Department of Political Affairs
in the areas of prevention and mediation and we are
proud to be among its supporters.
As many have already stressed today, we believe that
inclusivity is key to successful conflict prevention. An
awareness of the grievances and perspectives of various
communities and groups — including the young and
old, women, religious groups and minorities — is vital

18-2697049/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

to understanding the challenges around these issues
and achieving lasting and sustainable solutions to
them. We would like to emphasize that the specific
inclusion of women is not only about ensuring their
equal participation in negotiations but also helps
to raise women-specific issues within conflicts. In
that regard, it is important to ensure that women are
included at decision-making levels and appointed as
high-level mediators.
Lastly, let me emphasize how important political
will and engagement are to successful mediation
processes. We appeal to the Security Council to use the
full potential of Chapter VI of the Charter in a united
manner and in the spirit of cooperation. It is also just
as much up to us, as the international community, to
find ways to support and incentivize the political will
for conflict resolution that we need to see from all
individual Member States at all administrative levels.
Estonia has contributed to the peaceful settlement
of disputes by taking part in several United Nationsled peacekeeping operations around the world,
including the missions in Lebanon and Mali and in
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
Peacekeeping, however, normally follows events that
have already caused violence and suffering. In order
to ensure that we do not simply react to conflicts
as they occur, we must step up our efforts to use all
available means to prevent conflicts in the first place.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a central actor in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in the United Nations
system. Estonia had the privilege of being a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission last year, and we
firmly support its broader focus. In addition, Estonia
has supported the Peacebuilding Fund since 2013, as we
believe that it is an effective peacebuilding instrument
for providing catalytic, fast and flexible assistance. We
will continue to promote those ideas throughout our
first-ever bid for a non-permanent seat on the Security
Council for the period from 2020 to 2021.
The President: I thank the representatives of
Romania and Estonia for keeping to the time limits. I
now give the floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you for convening
today’s important debate, Mr. President. At the outset,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem for their
insightful briefings.
50/77

29/08/2018

Ireland also aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
the Group of Friends of Mediation.
While we have collectively taken important steps
to strengthen our capacity since the last debate on
mediation in 2009 (see S/PV.6108), the changing global
context in which we now operate makes mediation
an ever more important tool. Ireland has been a
consistent advocate for the role that mediation can play
throughout the conflict cycle, from prevention to longterm reconciliation. We welcome the strong focus that
the Secretary-General has placed on the importance
of mediation, something that the Council has also
acknowledged. With that in mind, today we will share
some brief reflections and suggestions based on our
own experiences in Ireland.
As others have said, inclusivity is a key element in
successful mediation. However, despite clear evidence
that involving women in negotiations can contribute to
more inclusive and comprehensive peace agreements,
women made up just 2 per cent of mediators in major
peace processes between 1990 and 2017. If we are to be
more effective in our use of mediation, that simply must
change. In June Ireland hosted a Promoting Women
in Peace mediation seminar, followed by a roundtable discussion with international women mediators’
networks. The key discussion points included the
importance of gender mainstreaming and continued
dialogue in peacebuilding, better recognition and
resourcing of women mediators and meaningfully
connecting grassroots-level mediation with national
high-level processes, and the benefits of women
mediators’ networks as support systems that can help
women find an entry point into negotiations.
We would also like to highlight the growing
importance of the youth, peace and security agenda.
Young people can play a positive role in mediation and
their voices must be heard. Ireland provided financial
support to the recently published progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86) and looks
forward to the implementation of its recommendations.
If we want to improve our capacity in mediation,
we must properly resource conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding programmes. Ireland has invested
$19.26 million in the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding
Fund since 2006. We have also contributed €2.2 million
in extrabudgetary support to the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs since its
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

inception in 2008. Meanwhile, as a founding member
of the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund and
one of its core donors, Ireland has seen the impact that
mediation can make on the ground through empowering
and resourcing women civil-society actors.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Good Friday Agreement, the result of a long process
of negotiation, peacebuilding and — as Lord Ahmad
said earlier — mediation in Northern Ireland. In that
context, it is appropriate to recognize the critical work
of the Northern Ireland Women’s Coalition in those
negotiations. The Coalition was particularly crucial
in drafting language on reconciliation and integrated
schooling. In April, addressing the General Assembly
during the high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace (see A/72/PV.83), President Michael
D. Higgins of Ireland said that peace in Ireland could not
have been achieved without the steady and courageous
activism of civic organizations campaigning for a more
just and peaceful society, many of which were led by
the women of Ireland, north and south.
The Council has a particular responsibility to support
the Secretary-General and the wider Organization,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, in enhancing
the use of effective mediation to prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts. We strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a quantum leap in the financing of
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention activities, and
we urge the Council to support activities aimed at
addressing the root causes of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Security Council this month
and on organizing today’s important meeting.
In centuries past, humankind has continued to
suffer the scourge of wars and bloody conflicts that have
wrought death, destruction, poverty and displacement,
truly the cruellest experience that any human being
can undergo. The survivors spend the rest of their lives
recalling those unfading, tragic and vivid memories.
We are here in the Council today to discuss an
extremely important issue, the settlement of conflicts,
and how to use logic and common sense in order to
silence the guns. There are essentially two types of
conflicts. The first is conflict between States, the topic

S/PV. 8334

of our discussion today, and the second is the internal
conflict that results from political differences and leads
to fighting and destruction in the State concerned. That
is the case in my country, Libya. In that regard, we
have to acknowledge that disputes today are different.
They are not simply international disputes; rather they
are internal disputes with regional and international
dimensions. Recent civil wars have been characterized
by unjustified, inhumane violence perpetrated by
militias and warlords to advance their personal
interests. The bloody civil wars that have emerged in
recent years are the result of the collapse of totalitarian
regimes, leaving States facing numerous challenges
and therefore incapable of maintaining control over
their situation. In that regard, the Secretary-General’s
report of 27 June 2017 notes that
“State fragility, the blurring of lines among
political, criminal and ideological interests,
as exemplified by the emergence of complex
economies of conflict, and the unclear objectives
of increasingly fragmented armed groups create
multiple challenges for mediation engagement”.
(A/72/115, para. 7)
Internal conflicts today are highly complex, quite
different from the conflicts of the past. Civil wars are
affected by various factors both internal and external,
which is why we need a comprehensive view and clear
plan to address those conflicts that are considered the
main obstacles to achieving security and sustainable
and comprehensive development.
There are a number of challenges to mediation
efforts aimed at resolving conflicts peacefully in line
with the Charter of the United Nations. We acknowledge
the noble objective of impartial mediation efforts that
aim to stop bloodshed, whether in conflicts between
countries or internally. We welcome all the mediation
efforts employed by the United Nations, and would
like to highlight the elements designed to enhance
mediation efforts that are mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report — that is, an enabling environment,
practical mediation strategies, effective operations,
implementation and capacity-building. In that regard,
we believe that any successful mediation effort,
especially where internal conflicts are concerned, must
address the following factors.
The parties to a conflict must be aware of their
humanitarian, historical and legal responsibility
regarding the disputed issue, and mediation efforts

18-2697051/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

must focus on strengthening the political will of all the
parties concerned. Mediation mechanisms must make
it clear to the parties that interlocutors should separate
themselves from the issue under dispute and keep the
mediation process amicable, refraining from attacking
one another. The importance of the notion of the nation
State as a basis for cooperation should be underscored.
Mediation should also be confined to a single initiative
under the auspices of the United Nations and in
cooperation with the relevant regional organizations.
No mediation effort should rely on time factors as a
way to achieve de-escalation. Mediators must resist the
belief that parties to the conflict will become fatigued
and make concessions as a result.
We believe that the Security Council can play a vital
role in promoting mediation efforts that can achieve the
peaceful settlement of disputes without interference
or orders from outside. The Council must be united
in promoting independent and impartial mediation
efforts, with a view to sending a message to the parties
to conflicts that the only way to settle disputes is by
peaceful means.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
mediation is at the core of the Libyan crisis. The
Security Council resolutions stressing that a political
settlement in Libya must be Libyan-owned have
not been reflected on the ground. Flagrant foreign
interference in Libyan affairs continues to contribute
to the deterioration of the situation, creating fertile
ground for clashes and mistrust between the parties
to the conflict. In that regard, we would like to note
that the Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya addressed that issue in a television interview
on 20 August, expressing his dissatisfaction with that
interference and noting that it obstructs mediation
between the parties to the conflict. With regard to the
situation in Libya, we stress that mediation must bring
together the parties to the conflict and all influential
actors on the ground. Mediators should not have hidden
agendas but should rather bring pressure to bear on
the parties to the conflict and convince them that the
aim is not only to achieve de-escalation but to reach a
comprehensive and durable settlement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I would first like to
congratulate the British presidency of the Security
Council for convening this open debate on a vital subject
52/77

29/08/2018

related to the maintenance of international peace and
security and a topic that has not been debated in the
Security Council since 2009 (see S/PV.6108), despite its
contemporary relevance and the growing complexity of
conflicts around the world.
Sri Lanka welcomes the participation of His
Excellency Lord Ahmad, Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and United Nations of the United
Kingdom, in today’s debate. We also thank the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Secretary-General and
the representative of civil society for their valuable
briefings this morning.
We also join other delegations in saluting the
memory of the late former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his notable contribution to the cause of
peace and development and the promotion of the
humanitarian agenda, which will remain his true legacy
to this Organization.
Mediation has been established over time as one of
the more effective methods for preventing, managing
and resolving conflicts. It is appropriate to recall here
that Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
states that any dispute that is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security should
first be addressed through negotiation, mediation or
other peaceful means, and also encourages the Council
to call on the parties to use such means to settle disputes.
However, the pacific settlement of disputes cannot be
forced. The parties to a conflict must be persuaded
by the merits of mediation and well-supported peace
processes. Indeed, mediation, if it is to lead to lasting
peace, must take place within normative and legal
frameworks constituted by the rules of international
law and humanitarian law and within the framework
of the Charter and the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. The recurring General
Assembly resolution entitled “Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution” recognizes the
increased use of mediation and reflects on the current
challenges facing the international community in
such mediation efforts, while calling on key actors
to develop their mediation capacities. In that context,
we particularly welcome the initiative taken by the
Secretary-General to establish the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation.
When we focus on the resolution of disputes by
peaceful means and in conformity with the principles
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8334

of international law and respect for human rights,
it is important to reiterate that all United Nations
bodies must uphold their commitment to the sovereign
equality of States and respect their territorial integrity
and political independence. It is the duty of all Member
States to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force in a manner inconsistent with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. As a country that in the course of a 30-year
conflict welcomed and engaged in reconciliation and
mediation efforts between 2001 and 2006 by an external
actor who was invited by both parties to the conflict,
Sri Lanka is well aware of both the advantages and
pitfalls of such efforts, however sincere, if not carefully
calibrated, monitored and managed. In that regard,
the coherence, coordination and complementarity
of mediation efforts, backed by reconciliation and
peacebuilding, are all essential and challenging, as a
number of delegations have stressed today. Mediation
actors at various levels — the international community,
including the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations, international entities, civil society and
national and local actors — must all be on board with
regard to such efforts. Given civil society’s immense
importance in mediation efforts, Sri Lanka is pleased
that a representative of civil society was included as a
briefer in this debate.

mediation is a voluntary process that requires the
consent of the conflicting parties to be effective and
lead to a lasting peace. Another important factor is
a sense of inclusivity, so that the views and needs of
the parties to a conflict and other stakeholders are not
only represented, but also heard and integrated into
the process and outcomes of a mediation effort. Above
all, national ownership and leadership are needed if
the parties to a conflict, and society as a whole, are to
work towards sustaining peace, since the responsibility
must be broadly shared by the Government and national
stakeholders. There is undoubtedly an inextricable link
between gender inequality and international peace and
security, as expressed in resolution 1325 (2000). The
active participation of women at all levels is necessary,
if national ownership is to be meaningful, as has been
stressed throughout today’s debate. Effective mediation
will therefore require gender equality and women’s
empowerment, human security, human rights and
development to mesh together.

The implementation of peace agreements may
often depend at the beginning on a degree of substantial
external support, including from donors. It can help to
incentivize the people to support political efforts as
they begin to enjoy the dividends of peace in terms
of development and real economic benefits. While
disputes and conflicts are unique and require specific
approaches, good practices should inform all mediation
efforts. We have to continue to adapt our approaches
and capacities to meet the changing nature of conflict,
particularly in the context of intra-State conflicts that
threaten international and regional peace and security.

Cuba is firmly committed to the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and their prevention
through mediation. The most effective way in which
the Security Council can support mediation as a means
for the pacific settlement of disputes is to ensure that
it is carried out in full respect for international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of sovereignty, refraining from the use or threat of the
use of force, territorial integrity, political independence
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
My country has noted with concern the increasing
tendency of the Security Council to invoke Chapter
VII of the Charter excessively and hastily, since war,
confrontation, hostilities and sanctions have never
helped to maintain peace and international security and
never will. It is regrettable that the Security Council is
too quick to seek recourse in the provisions of Articles
41 and 42 of the Charter without having fully exhausted
all other options, including those provided for in Chapter
VI, and without considering their consequences,
including the short- and long-term effects of imposing
sanctions, particularly for political processes aimed at
achieving the peaceful settlement of conflicts.

There are well-established best practices for
mediation, the most important of which is the
preparedness that is vital to responsible and credible
mediation efforts, as are a cohesive team of specialists
and the necessary political, financial and administrative
support from the mediating entity. Perceptions are
vital, and in that regard, impartiality becomes the
bedrock of successful mediation. The process must
never allow the possibility that it could perceived
as biased towards one party. Nor can we forget that

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We endorse the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

18-2697053/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

The recent events and precedents where we have
seen manipulation of the Charter, double standards and
flagrant violations of international law have shown that
when there is no good faith, impartiality or respect for
a country’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, objective mediation is impossible. Neither can
any mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including mediation, be effective as long as certain
States continue to use or threaten to use force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of others,
or to impose preconceived, uniform doctrines. Every
situation must be managed according to its specific
characteristics. Mediation should not be automatically
considered the most appropriate method in every case.
Cuba believes that for mediation to be credible and
effective, it must also enjoy the will and consent of the
parties to a particular dispute or conflict, the impartiality
of mediators, their fulfilment of the mandates agreed
upon, respect for national sovereignty, compliance with
State laws and operational preparedness, including
mediators’ substantive and procedural expertise.
In that regard, we stress the particular role that the
Charter confers on the Secretary-General in the use of
his good offices and mediation, while at the same time
acknowledging that the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflict prevention and resolution, particularly
through mediation, under the Charter and international
law, continue to be a fundamental responsibility
of Member States. We appreciate the efforts of the
Secretary-General to continue strengthening United
Nations mediation support capacities, in accordance
with the relevant adopted mandates. However, the role
assigned to non-governmental organizations, civil
society and other entities as mediation support actors
with regard to conflict prevention must be evaluated
carefully on a case-by-case basis, given that, as we have
seen in various conflicts, they have pursued foreign
agendas and lacked impartiality and good faith.
In conclusion, as one of the methods for the pacific
settlement of disputes provided for in Chapter VI of
the Charter, mediation can and has been proven to be
effective in certain situations. The peace agreements
reached by the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo in Havana in 2016, which ended more than
five decades of armed conflict, are one such concrete
example. Maintaining and implementing those peace
agreements currently is the responsibility not only of
the parties, but also of the international community
54/77

29/08/2018

and the Security Council. To the extent possible, Cuba
will continue to contribute with humility, discretion
and profound respect for the parties’ positions at their
request in providing the means to achieve stable and
lasting peace in Colombia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): Djibouti is very grateful
for the opportunity to address the Security Council
on how it can more effectively support mediation as
a means for the pacific settlement of disputes. My
Government would like to thank Lord Ahmad of
Wimbledon and the United Kingdom delegation for
bringing this important subject before the Council.
Coincidentally, this open debate on mediation and the
settlement of disputes is taking place as we continue to
mourn the loss of a truly inspirational leader, Mr. Kofi
Annan, who not only made an immense contribution
to peace in the world as Secretary-General but also
devoted the remaining years of his life to mediation
and resolving crises in many parts of the world. We in
Djibouti will be forever grateful to him for the support
he gave in 2000 to the Djibouti-led Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) peace process,
the so-called Arta peace process, named for the city
of Arta, 30 kilometres from Djibouti city. His support
and that of the Security Council were crucial to the
success of the largest Somali-owned peace process,
which culminated in the formation of the Transitional
National Government and offered a basis for peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia.
Djibouti’s views on mediation are informed by its
long and continuing involvement in peace and conflictresolution processes in the region, and by its recent
experience of participation in the six-year mediation
effort conducted by Qatar to resolve a territorial
dispute and related issues between Djibouti and Eritrea.
The mediation did not succeed, but there are important
lessons to be learned from it.
First, mediation is not for amateurs. It requires
special skills honed by experience, and cannot be
performed successfully by just anyone, no matter
how well intentioned. That is why Djibouti welcomed
the creation of a platform for sharing experience and
learning between the members of the IGAD roster of
mediators, the African Union members of the Panel
of the Wise and members of the Pan-African Network
of the Wise from regional economic communities and
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

regional mechanisms. We want to take this opportunity
to commend those involved in developing the Strategic
Guidelines on Mediation document, which, to borrow
the words of Dr. Aleu Garang, Coordinator of the IGAD
Mediation Support Unit, will serve the crucial purpose
of informing mediators about the steps that must be
followed in order to achieve professionally oriented,
impartial and efficient intervention in conflictprevention and mediation processes. Most importantly,
Djibouti applauds the Secretary-General’s establishment
of a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, and urges
the Council to lend it the maximum support. States
and international organizations called on to mediate
international disputes should be encouraged to seek
the active involvement and assistance of the SecretaryGeneral and the Advisory Board.
Secondly, there must be genuine commitment to the
process by the disputing States. Paying lip service is not
enough. Mediators cannot succeed if one of the parties
refuses to appoint representatives, appear at meetings
or cooperate with the mediator’s fact-finding efforts.
Thirdly, there must be accountability and
consequences. Participating States must be made aware
that they will be held accountable for non-participation
in the process, and that there will be meaningful
consequences if they fail to act in good faith.
Fourthly, there must be a time limit. If not,
mediation can be dragged out for years — six, in our
case — without meaningful progress. Mediators do not
easily admit failure. A cynical party may exploit the
cover that mediation provides to extend the settlement
process rather than expedite it, and to avoid an amicable
resolution rather than contribute to it. Time limits, in
our view, address both of those problems.
Fifthly, it should be understood from the outset
that recourse will be made to another of the settlement
procedures listed in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nation in the event that mediation fails.
Mediation will have a better chance of success if the
parties understand that one of the consequences of
failure will be arbitration or litigation, not a continued
stalemate. The fundamental objective is not mediation
for mediation’s sake, but settlement of the dispute.
If mediation fails, settlement must be pursued by
other peaceful means. In that regard, we want to call
attention to the decision that the Secretary-General
made in January following the failure of the goodoffices process — a form of mediation — to resolve

S/PV. 8334

a controversy between Guyana and Venezuela, ruling
that it would have to be resolved by judicial settlement
in the International Court of Justice. That will ensure
a final, binding and peaceful settlement of the dispute.
Another noteworthy precedent is the mediation
between Guatemala and Belize conducted by the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States. This process produced an agreement providing
that if the parties were not able to settle their longstanding territorial dispute, they would submit it
for resolution by the International Court of Justice.
Djibouti understands that both States are now in the
process of fulfilling their respective constitutional
requirements so that the matter can be resolved by
the Court. To the same end, Djibouti has proposed
that the Secretary-General, with the support of the
Security Council, and potentially the Advisory Board,
undertake a new, time-limited mediation effort to
achieve a final settlement between Djibouti and Eritrea,
with the proviso that if it proves impossible to reach
an agreement, the dispute will be submitted to binding
arbitration or the International Court of Justice.
Djibouti joins you, Sir, and all the members of
the Council, in supporting the peaceful settlement
of disputes in accordance with international law via
the means set out in Article 33. Mediation is one of
them and therefore merits our encouragement, as do
arbitration and judicial settlement, when mediation is
unavailable or unavailing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the United Kingdom on its
successful presidency of the Security Council and for
convening this very welcome and long-overdue debate
on mediation and the settlement of disputes. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the other
distinguished speakers for their statements. We reiterate
our heartfelt condolences and deepest sympathy at the
passing of former Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
Our discussion today is indeed timely and
necessary in several senses. First, the last dedicated
debate on mediation and the settlement of disputes
was held almost a decade ago, in 2009 (see S/PV.6108).
Secondly, this is a time when new, more complex and
global challenges are posing considerable threats to the
safety and security of our States. Thirdly, the scourges
and challenges we face today mean that only united

18-2697055/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

and concerted efforts can restore our ability as an
international community to find cost-effective ways to
prevent new conflicts and crises that could undermine
all the peacebuilding, development and sustainable
peace efforts made so far.
From our perspective, for mediation efforts to
be successful, the mediators should first operate in
full respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and national ownership of the
States Members of the United Nations. Secondly, they
should ensure consent with regard to the process as
well as a mutually acceptable political agreement, as
rightly stated in the definition of mediation included
in the concept note (S/2018/586, annex). Thirdly, they
should ensure that the main, essential stakeholders
in a dispute fully participate in and contribute to any
mediation process. Fourthly, they should underline the
importance of national capacity in conflict prevention
and resolution, with the aim of encouraging greater
involvement nationally, including that of women and
young people. Fifthly, they should draw strategic
conclusions from past experiences of good offices, best
practices and lessons learned, and sixthly, they should
help focus the international community’s attention on
the root causes of conflicts by acting before they occur.
Morocco is firmly committed to the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. Since
our independence, we have played a key mediating role
within the framework of the United Nations and at the
bilateral, regional and subregional levels, particularly
in Africa and the Middle East, a role based on our
firm belief in the principle of collective security and
in the centrality of the United Nations in promoting the
peaceful settlement of disputes. In addition, following
the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 65/283
encouraging Member States to promote regional
mediation initiatives, in 2012 Morocco and Spain
launched the Med-Med Initiative, promoting mediation
in the Mediterranean region. This unique experience
has enabled participants in the Initiative to achieve
concrete results, such as mapping all mediation actors,
as well as organizing several workshops, including one
dedicated to the work of women in mediation. Morocco
has also been part of the Mediterranean Women
Mediators’ Network, launched by Italy in 2017, and has
actively participated in building valuable contacts and
enlarging the scope of experiences and best practices
56/77

29/08/2018

for strengthening the role of women as drivers of peace
across the Mediterranean.
Morocco remains more committed than ever to
contributing to resolving conflicts at every stage
by fostering preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping
operations, mediation, disarmament and peacebuilding
efforts,
and
through
dedicated
collaborative
partnerships and South-South cooperation, aimed at
ensuring the benefits of economic development at the
regional level.
Before concluding, I would like to share a few
thoughts on how we as Member States, together with
the United Nations, can further promote mediation
for conflict resolution and the settlement of disputes.
First, we should focus on the key role that the
Security Council can play by promoting mediation
as a key aspect of the maintenance of international
peace and security. Secondly, a better knowledge and
understanding of disputes and their intricate dynamics
is key to preparing for any mediation effort. Thirdly,
to be successful, those efforts must be guided by
clear parameters and priorities while preventing any
proliferation of stakeholders. And fourthly, it is crucial
that the United Nations and the Security Council take
back the lead on any mediation process that does not
meet the prerequisites for successful mediation.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his new strategy of putting
conflict prevention, mediation and the primacy
of political solutions at the centre of the work and
priorities of the United Nations. I would also like
to thank the Department of Political Affairs for
supporting our efforts to promote mediation and the
Med-Med Initiative.Morocco will continue its strong
support for the Department of Political Affairs, as
it has for many years. It is our conviction that, if the
international community manages to unlock the full
potential of mediation and conflict prevention, then the
United Nations will be able to act in advance of any
crisis and to invest considerable human and financial
resources to benefit development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium associates itself with the statements
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of the Group of Friends of Mediation.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would also like to make some observations in my
national capacity.
Belgium has made conflict prevention one of its
priorities, for which mediation is an essential tool.
Belgium supports and encourages mediation initiatives.
That is why we have organized various conferences on
the topic that contribute to sharing experiences, the
making of contacts and the development of cooperation
between mediation participants. Last February, we
organized, in collaboration with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, a seminar in New York on
bridges between humanitarian negotiation and political
mediation. It was noted that there was sometimes
a difficulty in merging the objectives of political
mediation and those of humanitarian negotiation. Too
often, the actors involved in each of those processes
operate in isolation. Strategic reflection is therefore
necessary in order to make the best choices, while
information must also be shared freely, including
within the Security Council.
The need to promote the active participation of
women in mediation processes is another key theme.
Together with the African Union and the International
Peace Institute, we organized another seminar on that
topic with African women mediators. That led us to a
clear observation, namely, substantial participation by
women will never be the result of wishful thinking,
but rather the fruit of a decisive strategy. Without it,
negotiating teams and groups consulted in conflict
resolution will reflect our societies, which still too often
do not sufficiently include women. That has also had an
impact on the outcome of the mediation process. The
same is true for young adults, another group to which
the Council has devoted a resolution — resolution
2250 (2015). It is important to encourage local
and regional initiatives, such as the African Union
FemWise-Africa initiative.
I would also like to stress the importance of
coordination between mediation and peacekeeping
operations. Belgium supports the Secretary-General
in his determination to increase mediation expertise
within missions and to strengthen partnerships with
local and national mediation actors. The use of mixed
teams is a key tool in that connection, as it allows
increased contact with local authorities, traditional
and religious leaders and other relevant actors on the
ground in order to prevent local tensions from fuelling
conflict. Efforts made in that regard within the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the

S/PV. 8334

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic should be
commended. Special envoys and regional offices can
also play a critical role in conflict prevention.
The Security Council does indeed have a role to
play in this area. The complexity of the contexts in
which mediation processes take place requires an
integrated approach. Through its political messages,
the Council can contribute to the effective coordination
of these various initiatives and promote common goals.
The Council must support the Secretary-General’s
efforts in that regard.
Furthermore, it is important to pay particular
attention to the root causes that have given rise to
conflict. There must be total cooperation between
peacekeeping operations and country teams. Work on
fundamental issues such as governance, the criminal
justice system, elections and transitional justice is
essential to sustaining peace and supplements the
efforts of peacekeeping operations.
Finally, in addition to its support of the Department
of Political Affairs, Belgium also finances various
projects initiated by non-governmental organizations
specializing in mediation and conflict prevention,
as well as multiple mediation organizations based in
Brussels, each with a different conflict-related specialty.
With that institutional body and the availability of
many specialists, Brussels has broad expertise that
will increase the chances of success of a multifaceted
conflict mediation. Those assets are now at the service
of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Ms. Zappia (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and all the briefers for their
valuable contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of the Group of Friends of Mediation.
Experience has proven that the recourse to peaceful
means for the prevention and settlement of disputes
and crises is the best and most cost-effective solution.
Among the peaceful tools at our disposal, mediation
is key. It is a vital instrument to give substance to the
sustaining peace agenda. It is not just a way to overcome

18-2697057/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

crises, it is also an occasion to reinvigorate the positive
forces of a country, promote dialogue and inclusiveness
and, ultimately, eliminate the root causes of conflicts.
The United Nations plays an essential role in
promoting mediation, most notably through the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and its Mediation
Support Unit. Strengthening the mediation capabilities
embedded in United Nations missions in the field is
also crucial. The creation and deployment of Peace
and Development Advisers is an important step in
that direction.
The Secretary General has injected new energy
into this dynamic by promoting a surge in diplomacy
and establishing the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation. The dialogue the United Nations is fostering
in different parts of the world, such as Libya, the Horn
of Africa and Colombia, is a tangible example of this.
As a proud partner of DPA, Italy has consistently
scaled up its contribution to the Department in support
of its mediation activities, and will provide additional
funding soon. Italy is also partnering with UN-Women
and the United Nations Development Programme to
promote the inclusion of women and a gender perspective
into peace, national dialogue and reconciliation
processes, and to develop the necessary capabilities.
We encourage the Secretary-General to fully
exert his powers under Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Security Council should more frequently adopt
the informal-meeting format to discuss issues that,
while not being formally on the agenda, still deserve
its attention, and it should be briefed more frequently
by the relevant civil society actors. As a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Italy believes that inviting
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
to brief the Council is a practice that should be
regularly pursued.
The United Nations should also strengthen
partnerships
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations in the area of mediation. Civil society
actors are also important partners. I take the example of
the support that the Comunità di Sant’Egidio provided
to the Central African Republic peace process.
Mediation can produce sustainable and lasting
solutions only if it is inclusive. Women in particular
play an essential role in reconciliation processes and
in building inclusive societies, and therefore lasting
58/77

29/08/2018

peace. Today, however, too few women are involved in
mediation. Italy attaches great importance to ensuring
the full and active participation of women in conflict
prevention, management and resolution and in postconflict efforts. That has been a priority of our term
in the Security Council and is a key issue we are
promoting through our candidature to the Human Rights
Council for the 2019-2021 term. Italy has launched the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network in order
to promote the meaningful participation of women in
peace processes in the Mediterranean region.
In conclusion, Italy reaffirms its strong commitment
to mediation as a tool to overcome the most complex
challenges. In that spirit, we will continue to work
relentlessly to create opportunities and platforms for
dialogue. In October, Italy will host the Italy-Africa
Ministerial Conference, and in November, the fourth
iteration of the Mediterranean Dialogues. Finally, as
announced by Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte, Italy
will also host an international conference on Libya.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this open
debate. The focus on mediation and the settlement of
disputes is significant, since the last time the Council
deliberated on the subject was in April 2009 (see
S/PV.6108). The presidential statement adopted in the
aftermath of that debate remains (S/PRST/2009/8)
pertinent to our present day context. We thank the
Secretary-General for sharing his thoughts about the
use of mediation as a tool for his desired surge in peace
diplomacy. We appreciate the valuable insights shared
by other briefers this morning.
Our delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation
and to be delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Mediation has traditionally proven to be a useful
instrument for preventing and resolving both inter-State
and intra-State conflicts. There have been a number
of constructive initiatives in recent years with a view
to enhancing the capacity and expertise of the United
Nations on mediation. It is critical that the momentum
be sustained towards further integrating mediation
in the comprehensive approach to sustaining peace.
In that context, Bangladesh welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to establish the High-level Advisory
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Board on Mediation. We look forward to receiving
updates on the group’s work in order to have an
enhanced understanding of the evolving challenges
and opportunities concerning the use of mediation in
peace processes.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic have also set some
positive examples on the way the United Nations field
presences can contribute to mediation efforts at the local
level. The special political missions have been playing
a useful role in that regard in diverse contexts, which
should help build a repository of good practices while
highlighting potential pitfalls and missed opportunities.
We acknowledge the United Nations efforts to share
its mediation expertise with outside actors, including
interested regional and subregional organizations. We
urge all Member States to favourably consider proposals
to further strengthen the capacity of the Mediation
Support Unit under the Department of Political Affairs.
In order to be effective, mediation must pass the
rigours of transparency and objectivity, as also noted
by various delegations. Any fruitful, tangible outcome
from mediation efforts will hinge on the impartiality of
the mediators, their compliance with agreed mandates
and respect for national sovereignty.
The importance of appropriate buy-in by the parties
concerned need not be overemphasized. It is perhaps
advisable to make mediation efforts visible only when
the parties involved commit themselves to engaging in
any such exercise in good faith and right earnest. Ad
hoc and poorly coordinated mediation efforts — even
when launched with the best of intentions — are not
likely to advance the goal of achieving durable peace.
Promoting meaningful participation by women and
young people in mediation efforts is an area that requires
further investment across the board. That should go
beyond mere commitments and result in mainstreaming
their participation on the most critical issues at stake.
As the briefers mentioned, mediation should tap into the
resources and expertise offered by various stakeholders
to reach to the core of humanity among those involved.
In that context, we commend the initiative of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide to promote the role of religious leaders in
preventing and resolving conflicts.

S/PV. 8334

Bangladesh is a staunch supporter of the resolution
of conflicts through peaceful, non-confrontational
means. Our commitment to mediation and conciliation
features prominently in our foreign policy postures. It
has been most evident in our successful efforts to resolve
a number of outstanding issues with our neighbouring
countries, including those related to land and maritime
border delimitation and common water-sharing.
In a similar vein, we would remain open to any
constructive efforts by interested parties to help resolve
the Rohingya humanitarian crisis, which Bangladesh
has unwittingly been made a party to. We recognize
the efforts initiated by the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy, and by a number of Member States through
their designated Special Envoys. We remain convinced
that any progress in unlocking the crisis and achieving
a durable solution can be possible only through the
Security Council’s custodianship of the issue and
sustained engagement by the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
120 member States of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I would like to convey, on behalf of
the member States of the Movement, our respects to
His Excellency Lord Ahmad, Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and the United Nations of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and to
express our gratitude to his delegation for convening this
open debate on such an important matter, as well as for
the concept note (S/2018/586, annex) that was prepared
to guide our discussions today. We also wish to thank
the Secretary-General, the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their valuable briefings.
The theme of today’s open debate is a fitting
occasion to pay tribute to the life and legacy of Mr. Kofi
Annan, former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who in his lifetime was a genuine advocate of peace,
social justice, development, human rights, solidarity
and many other values so cherished by all here. Among
other things, he was an expert precisely in the area of
mediation and a leader who understood the importance
of dialogue and inclusiveness to make this a better world
for future generations. In the words of the Nobel Peace
Prize winner himself, “when one acts as a mediator, one

18-2697059/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

has to think about what the biggest need of the people
is”. That is merely a small token of his commitment to
and faith in humankind.
It bears recalling that the main objective of the
Non-Aligned Movement is none other than to make
a positive contribution to the establishment of a
prosperous and peaceful world and the achievement of a
just and equitable world order. However, that goal will be
difficult to achieve as long as conflict situations persist
around the world, hence the importance of diplomacy
for peace, as opposed to the increasing and deepening
tendency of some States to resort to unilateralism,
arbitrariness and the imposition of unilateral measures.
Furthermore, and in the context of new and existing
threats and challenges, it is imperative for the Movement
to continue to promote multilateralism, in particular by
strengthening the central role of the United Nations,
including with regard to governance and by defending
the interests of developing countries and preventing
their marginalization. We are therefore committed
to the promotion, preservation and strengthening of
multilateralism and multilateral diplomacy as the most
appropriate framework for resolving, through dialogue
and cooperation, the problems affecting humankind.
Consequently, and bearing in mind that the
challenges currently facing the international
community need to be resolutely addressed by all
nations through multilateralism, we underscore the
fact that any initiative undertaken by the international
community to promote peace must be based on high
ethical values, justice and friendship, if we are to be in a
position to denounce acts of aggression and strengthen
and promote stability, tranquillity and lasting peace
throughout the world.
NAM has historically been an advocate of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, of refraining from the
threat or use of force and of the increased use of the
provisions of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular its Article 33. In fact,
it has even suggested, without success so far, that the
International Law Commission consider including in its
programme of work a study on the obligation of States
to resort to peaceful means of settling international
disputes. That would, in our view, make a positive
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We also wish to take this opportunity to recall the
importance of the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
60/77

29/08/2018

Settlement of International Disputes, which was drawn
up at the initiative of our Movement, and which is
the first time that a normative text has developed a
detailed plan and strengthened the legal framework for
the peaceful settlement of international disputes. That
text reflects the international community’s increased
confidence in the rule of law as a cornerstone not only
of the peaceful settlement of disputes, but also of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
During the eighteenth Mid-Term Ministerial
Conference of the Movement, held in April in the city
of Baku in the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Ministers
recognized the growing interest in and the provision
and use of mediation as a promising and cost-effective
tool for the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict
prevention and resolution, without prejudice to other
means mentioned in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, including the use of arbitration and the
role and functions of the International Court of Justice.
It is also worth noting that, on the basis of an initiative
of our Movement, the next thematic discussion to take
place within the framework of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization will be
precisely on mediation.
In that context, we cannot fail to emphasize the
importance of the consent of all the parties concerned
in order to ensure the success and the legitimacy of any
mediation process if the ultimate goal is to effectively
achieve durable, inclusive and comprehensive
settlements, as noted in the concept note for this
open debate.
In conclusion, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, true to its commitment to ensuring its
position as an anti-war and peace-loving force,
reaffirms its resolve to strengthen its role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution, confidence-building, peacebuilding and
post-conflict rehabilitation within the Non-Aligned
Movement. In particular, we would also like to identify
specific measures to accelerate the establishment
of mechanisms within the Non-Aligned Movement
to that end whose terms of reference are in line with
its founding principles and those of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, while
emphasizing that such a mechanism should be based on
the consent of the parties concerned.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: May I remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes. If speakers have not concluded one
minute later, the presidency will intervene and ask
them to conclude. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I thank all colleagues for respecting that.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I hope that I will be able to
make my remarks within four minutes.
I take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for providing
a detailed concept note (S/2018/586, annex) to guide
us. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and all the previous speakers for their
insightful statements.
We note that this debate on mediation and the
peaceful settlement of conflicts comes at an opportune
time given the evolving nature of conflicts worldwide.
Now more than ever before, the prevention of conflicts
remains the best way to resolve them. However,
mediation cannot succeed in isolation. It is important
to invest in preventing conflict, building trust and
drawing up and having clear and inclusive mandates
to guide the mediation process, which should also be
complemented by reconciliation and post-conflict
development. Mediation therefore is and remains central
to the primacy of politics in the peaceful resolution of
conflicts in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
It has been observed that the United Nations has
registered more success in conflict management and
resolution than in prevention. We therefore note with
appreciation the success stories in conflict prevention
that the Secretary-General outlined this morning in
his briefing.
When the Secretary-General took up office in 2017,
he declared his vision for a renewed emphasis by the
United Nations on prevention and a surge in diplomacy
for peace. We note with satisfaction that a revamped
and expanded High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
of the Secretary-General is now in place. However,
more resources, both voluntary and assessed, should be

S/PV. 8334

allocated for mediation and preventive diplomacy in the
sustaining peace processes.
When a conflict breaks out, it is usually more
costly to resolve it. As such, as the saying goes, a dime
or a cent invested in preventive mediation has more
value than a dollar or a pound invested in addressing
the outbreak of conflict. There is therefore a need to
give more significance to prevention and to building
capacities in the field, particularly in peacekeeping and
other political missions.
For many decades, Kenya has been at the centre of
regional peace processes and has chaired and worked
with our neighbours on many peace initiatives within
our subregion. We have achieved success and have
also overcome challenges in the process. We therefore
call on the United Nations and the international
community to continue to support such worthy regional
peace initiatives.
In order to achieve greater success in mediation
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts, in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is important to include women in all peace
processes, including mediation and other initiatives for
conflict prevention, since women and children bear
the greatest brunt when conflicts occur. Furthermore,
it is important to leverage technology, particularly
in conflict early-warning mechanisms, to facilitate
timely intervention.
We also consider that it is equally important
to recognize the role of regional and subregional
organizations — if I look at the African case, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region — in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. They play a crucial role in mediation and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts in their respective
jurisdictions. Through continued technical assistance,
capacity-building, political support and general
goodwill, such organizations can even play a much
greater role. If I take the example of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, apart from degrading a terrorist
organization, it has also been active in promoting
local reconciliation and has contributed a great deal
in confidence-building measures to support mutual
trust among communities. They need support from the
United Nations and other players.

18-2697061/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

In that regard, there is a need for adequate and
predictable resources for conflict prevention and
mediation. Addressing the socioeconomic conditions
that lead to conflicts, promoting human rights and
building national and regional capacities for conflict
prevention are key to sustainable peace and development.
In conclusion, national ownership and inclusivity
are very important in mediation processes. That calls
for strong coordination and cooperation among the
United Nations, national authorities, civil society, the
private sector and other stakeholders on the basis of
mutual trust and complementarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): We would like to
express our appreciation to the United Kingdom for
presiding over this timely and important meeting.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of Turkey, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Mediation, and by the representative
of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Malaysia strongly supports the role of mediation in
bringing about a just, lasting, peaceful solution between
disputing parties. At the regional level, Malaysia, at
the invitation of the Government of the Philippines,
has been involved as a facilitator in efforts to bring
about peace in the southern Philippines, consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations. That effort
led to the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement
on the Bangsamoro between the Government of the
Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front on
27 March 2014. Malaysia has also played an active role
as a facilitator in the southern Thailand peace dialogue
since 2013. In line with the theme of today’s debate, we
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we should focus on conflict prevention. As
such, an early-warning system should be enhanced to
identify the initial signs of conflicts, by continuously
monitoring the situation in conflict-prone areas.
That would involve regional organizations and the
international community. Early preventive measures
are crucial, as they would help address uneasiness,
dissatisfaction or even concerns among them. In most
cases in the past, we simply reacted to the consequences
of conflicts.
62/77

29/08/2018

Secondly, at the heart of solving various conflicts
around the world is the need to address their root
causes — be they political or economic or as a result
of disenfranchisement and so on. To that end, all
stakeholders, including the United Nations, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
the private sector, must spare no effort in identifying
and, subsequently, addressing those root causes.
Thirdly, it is important to sustain peace to prevent
countries from relapsing into conflict. Countries
emerging from conflicts should be assisted, among
others, in the areas of socioeconomic development,
poverty eradication and capacity-building. To sustain
peace, Malaysia also encourages respect for the rule of
law, good governance, tolerance, non-violence, mutual
understanding, respect for diversity and inclusiveness,
as well as the promotion and protection of human rights.
Lastly, lasting peace is important to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. Therefore, it is vital
to galvanize the commitment, support and political
will of all stakeholders, including local and national
actors, women and youth, regional and international
organizations and the support of the international
community and all United Nations entities.
We should make every effort to implement the
various decisions adopted by both the Security Council
and the General Assembly that call for a continuous,
cross-pillar and cross-sectoral approach to preventing
conflicts and sustaining peace. In addition, Malaysia
supports the Secretary-General’s strategy for mediation
by strengthening the capacity of the United Nations and
ensuring that the Organization makes maximum use of
its assets in support of mediation initiatives.
In conclusion, Malaysia remains committed to the
promotion of mediation and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts in the various international forums, in
particular at the United Nations. We stand ready to
share our experience and assist the relevant parties in
the mediation process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mrs. Blokar Drobič (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes
the initiative of the presidency of the United Kingdom
to convene today’s open debate.
I align myself with the statements delivered earlier
today on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of Mediation, of which Slovenia is a member.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
First, let me reiterate our support to the SecretaryGeneral in his determination to bring mediation to the
forefront of United Nations peace-related activities. We
trust that the establishment of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation will further strengthen the
mediation capacities of the United Nations, and hope
that countries will use them.
As we previously stated in another debate here in
the Security Council, when it comes to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations offers good guidance and should
be used more often. We also wish to encourage the
Council to explore ways of identifying crises and risks
to international peace and security as early as possible
and to address them accordingly. Preventive diplomacy,
including mediation, pays for itself many times over.
Preventing disputes from escalating to armed conflict
will save enormous financial and other resources that
could be used elsewhere, but, most of all, it will save
human lives. Mediation is a powerful tool and can
encourage parties to prioritize negotiations, provide
alternatives to violence and end mass atrocity crimes.
Advocating a culture of peace and dialogue, together
with respect for human rights and international law, is at
the core of Slovenian foreign policy activities. In recent
years, we have focused on promoting mediation in the
Mediterranean region, through the Med-Med Initiative
and the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network,
by highlighting the indispensable role that women
and young people play in peace and reconciliation
processes. As agents of change on the ground, women
are well aware of what their community needs.
Therefore, they must be an integral part of processes
that will lead to viable long-term solutions. Awareness
campaigns on the advantages of women’s participation
in peace-related activities should be undertaken.
Promoting dialogue, in particular among young
people, is an important way of building lasting and
sustained peace through education, including about
peaceful conflict resolution and mediation. One good
example we wish to share is a project on school and
peer mediation that Slovenia launched in August last
year in Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the aim of
raising awareness about the positive effects of peaceful
and constructive conflict resolution in schools,
teachers and students in the Federation of Bosnia and

S/PV. 8334

Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska and the Brčko
district are trained in various mediation techniques.
By establishing mediation capacities among teachers
and students, schools become promoters of tolerance,
human rights, diversity and reconciliation. The project,
which currently runs in nine primary schools, has been
very well received in local communities and is already
showing positive results. With its potential, we plan to
expand it to other countries in the region.
Mediation is a valuable tool for conflict prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It nurtures
reconciliation and can help build and develop
democratic and resilient societies. Although every
mediation situation is unique, its basic principles can
be the foundation of solving crises before they escalate
anywhere in the world. That is why we must invest in
raising awareness about it, educating not only future
mediators, but the entire society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
United Kingdom, this month’s President of the Security
Council, for convening today’s open debate on one of
the most important instruments in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mediation, as a tool for the pacific settlement
of disputes, will be effective only if mediators and
the mediation process are objective, inclusive and,
most important, impartial. Over the past 10 years,
the Secretary-General has taken important steps to
enhance the abilities of the United Nations system in
deploying various tools to prevent and resolve conflicts
and sustain peace. The establishment of the Mediation
Support Unit, in 2007, and the Standby Team of Senior
Mediation Advisers, in 2008, are two such important
steps in the right direction.
While the institutional architecture is crucial, it is
equally important that the mediation efforts of the United
Nations be driven with the objective of addressing the
root causes of conflicts and that mediators be equipped
with the right information. There have been instances
where United Nations mediators, skilled with conflictprevention techniques, used the same toolbox to address
political disputes. Therefore, the United Nations must
enhance its own diagnostic capabilities to ensure that
the right tools are used for the right situations.

18-2697063/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

As a number of speakers highlighted today, the
success of any mediation depends, to a large part, on
the inclusiveness of the mediation team and mediation
process. The United Nations can appoint more women
mediators who have local knowledge and understand the
nuances of political and social relationships in a given
situation and enable them to exert leverage. At the same
time, inclusiveness must also be achieved here at United
Nations Headquarters. Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations envisages a system where the Council
and the General Assembly work jointly, as One United
Nations, to resolve conflicts. The Maldives would like
to see that oneness demonstrated more profoundly in
designing and implementing mediation efforts.
Impartiality, or the lack of it, plays a decisive role
in guaranteeing the success or failure of any mediation
effort. United Nations officials deployed as mediators
are expected to be impartial and objective. However,
gaps exist between such expectations and the reality on
the ground, and, as a result, various perceptions emerge
that do not always help the mediation process. There is
therefore a need to ensure that both the Department of
Political Affairs here in New York and the mediation
team in the field achieve maximum objectivity
and impartiality in managing and implementing
mediation efforts.
The ultimate objective of any mediation effort
must go beyond the cessation of hostilities or mere
short-term prevention. It is the absence of a legitimate
order, more than anything else, that gives space for
different kinds of disputes to evolve into conflicts.
Mediation efforts, whether they are aimed at preventing
or managing an actual conflict or a dispute of any kind
in an intra-State situation, should seek to increase the
capacity of the State in the target country to first govern
and then establish a governing order that is rooted in
the principles of the rule of law and good governance.
My Government hopes that the Standby Team of Senior
Mediation Advisers here at the Headquarters and the
teams that are active in the field take such an approach
to mediation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa joins
other Member States in expressing our appreciation
to the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom for
convening this open debate focused on mediation and
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. We thank the
64/77

29/08/2018

Secretary-General and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
in his capacity as a member of the Secretary-General’s
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, for their
contributions to this debate.
History has taught us that the use of military
force is far too costly as a means of achieving one’s
political objectives. The destruction of infrastructure,
loss of life and environmental impact of violent armed
conflicts are never worth the price of attaining one’s
ends. Furthermore, the Security Council’s ability to
make peace in conflicts while they are under way is
also a costly exercise.
Reflecting on the work of the Security Council, the
Council has arguably been most effective in dealing
with conflicts through the deployment of peacekeepers
and the imposition of measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. That may at times be
tantamount to putting a bandage on a festering wound.
What we ought to be doing is to prevent the wound from
occurring in the first place and, if it does, to ensure that
the necessary measures are in place to deal with it.
It is for that reason that we believe that our efforts
should be directed towards conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. That requires the Security Council to
support local and regional efforts in that regard. It also,
importantly, requires the Council to strengthen its own
instruments for the pacific settlement of disputes, in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter. The Charter,
for good reason, precedes the powers conferred to the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Before considering the use of force in Chapter VII,
we must consider a peaceful political solution to the
conflict, as envisaged in Chapter VI. Article 33 of that
Chapter of the Charter specifically states that parties
to a dispute shall first of all seek a solution through
political means, including negotiation and mediation.
The settlement of disputes through those means has the
added advantage of assisting parties to the conflict to
recognize and address its root causes and embark on a
process of negotiation, thereby fostering a spirit of trust
and cooperation.
In its consideration of its mandate in the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council has at its disposal a wide range of tools and
resources, which should be utilized to address conflict
situations to ensure that they do not occur and, if they
do, that they are dealt with effectively.
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8334

The promotion of the peaceful resolution of
conflict is a cornerstone of South Africa’s own foreign
policy. That is born out of our historical experience
in successfully and peacefully transitioning to a
constitutional democracy based on respect for the
human rights of all persons, following decades of
oppression and discriminatory governance under the
apartheid regime.

mechanisms, including the African Union Peace and
Security Council, and prioritize consultations with
African mediators in specific conflict areas. Those
individuals should be called upon, where possible, to
brief the Security Council to deepen its understanding of
those particular conflict situations under consideration,
as well as the process of mediation and its specific
nuances and challenges in different contexts.

As a strong proponent of the peaceful resolution
of conflict, including through mediation, South Africa
fully agrees with the Secretary-General’s call for a
surge in diplomacy for peace, in which he calls upon
the Security Council to make greater use of Chapter
VI of the United Nations Charter. We therefore support
the promotion of the peaceful resolution to conflict
through mediation, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts. United Nations peacekeeping
should not be a means to an end, but instead complement
those essential tools of peacemaking. That will be part
of our priorities during our membership of the Council
as an elected member beginning in 2019.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.

As the Security Council deliberates on this important
topic, I wish to emphasize the vital role that women
play in mediation, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts.
In particular, we believe that the Security Council’s
continued support for the development of female
mediators, and specifically women from countries and
regions affected by conflict, is imperative. Without
the adequate representation of women in those efforts,
the credibility of those processes is undermined. We
are confident that greater representation of women in
mediation efforts will correspond to a greater chance
of success.
South Africa recently hosted the fourth annual
Gertrude Shope Annual Dialogue Forum on Conflict
Resolution and Peacemaking, which took place under
the theme “Celebrating a legacy of liberation by the
pan-African women: taking forward the struggle for
gender equality”. That theme is particularly apt as 2018
commemorates the centenary of the birth of Albertina
Sisulu — a guiding light and champion of human rights
and democracy in South Africa. That initiative serves
as a valuable platform for women to discuss issues
relating to African peacebuilding and development and
to reflect on their personal experiences in that regard.
Finally, my delegation emphasizes that the
Security Council should continue to support regional

Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): We offer our thanks to the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this open
debate. I wish to add the following to the European
Union (EU) statement, which has already been delivered
and to which we fully subscribe.
As a conflict State and a beneficiary of the longrunning good offices mission of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, entrusted to him by the Security Council,
Cyprus has insights and lessons learned to share, even
though the role of the United Nations in our conflict is
limited to facilitating agreement by the parties.
Mediation is an important tool prescribed by the
Charter of the United Nations for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, provided it is used in line with the Charter
and in respect of the special role assigned by the latter to
the Security Council. Experience has shown that there
is sometimes a disconnect between the Council and the
mediator appointed as part of the United Nations effort
to contribute to the peaceful settlement of a dispute.
For such mediation efforts to be effective, the Council
must be able to assume responsibility for the work of
the mediator. That would require that the two to work
in tandem.
Experience has also shown that we could benefit
from more clarity as regards the framework of the
United Nations engagement in mediation and the code of
conduct of United Nations officials acting as mediators
on behalf of the Organization. We believe that a more
consistent and rules-based approach is required and
that the Council could develop a manual to that end.
At the core of the United Nations involvement in
mediation should be the inviolable rule of conducting
the process on the basis of the Organization’s values and
principles, the United Nations Charter and international
law. Those norms and principles mean that the United
Nations does not operate in a vacuum and that, while it
should, of course, be impartial, it should not be neutral.

18-2697065/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

As a mediator, the United Nations must not
be intrusive, but should respect the boundaries of
third-party facilitation and assist the parties as they
themselves shape the resolution of their dispute. The
parties should own both the dispute-resolution process
and its outcome, as they are the ones who will have
to live with the outcome and ensure its durability and
successful implementation.
As experience has also demonstrated, acrimony and
blame games can arise as a result of mediation proposals
that the parties are called upon to accept or reject,
and therefore United Nations mediators must tread
carefully, be cognizant of the complexities of a dispute
and know the realm of the feasible. That is why the
importance of selecting a mediator based on substantial
criteria cannot be overstated. Successful mediation
requires deep knowledge of local circumstances,
not only those pertaining to the root causes and the
particulars of a conflict, but the entire political,
strategic, socioeconomic, cultural and historical
context and circumstances underpinning a dispute and
its resolution process. When acting as a mediator, the
United Nations is well-placed to provide examples of
good practices in dispute-resolution processes, but
should always keep in mind that what works in one
context may not be transplanted to another, even if two
situations present commonalities. In addition, sharing
good practices should not be a vehicle to manoeuvre the
parties towards a specific direction or outcome.
The United Nations should be especially cautious
with enhanced mediation methods like arbitration as a
tool for political or non-judicial third-party intervention.
The endorsement of the Council should be required in
such cases, while it should bear in mind that, even if
the consent of the parties is present, the latter can be
coerced. Elaborating parameters for United Nations
mediation would enable the Council to make greater,
yet prudent, use of mediation as a tool for exercising its
overall responsibility to maintain international peace
and security in combination with other tools under
its direct supervision. The Council can also strive for
subsidiarity when there is a well-placed regional or
local actor close to a conflict who can ably contribute
to its resolution. That could also be done before the
Council is seized of the matter, in line with the spirit
of Article 33 of the Charter, without prejudice to the
role of the Council as the eminent organ responsible
for peace and security, while respecting established
66/77

29/08/2018

principles, such as the voluntary character of mediation
and the consent of the parties.
Before concluding, I should like to make two equally
critical points. Peacekeeping is a crucial component
of conflict resolution. Enabling environments in
which peace processes can be conducted depends on
peacekeeping operations, as does preventing escalation
within a conflict by establishing channels with relevant
actors on the ground and developing an understanding
of local circumstances. Last but not least, the
participation of women in conflict resolution is now
universally supported, and it can be a game changer.
For that to happen, however, such participation needs
to be meaningful, and the way for it to be meaningful is
by achieving gender equality more broadly in a society
and reflecting that in the participation of women across
public life and in core political decision-making.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the presidency of the United Kingdom for
organizing today’s open debate on the important topic
of mediation and the settlement of disputes.
Challenges to peace and security facing the world
today call for strengthening the international legal
order and redoubled efforts at all levels towards both
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and crises. It
is critical that mediation frameworks not be used as a
tool for entrenching situations that have resulted from
the unlawful use of force, war crimes, crimes against
humanity, acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing. In
the same vein, it is important that the international
community consistently oppose and reject any attempt
to cover up and consolidate acts of aggression and other
illegal acts through misinterpreting international legal
norms and principles. The established principle of the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of
territory and the ensuing obligation of non-recognition
of situations resulting from serious violations of
international law must be applied and enforced
universally and unconditionally.
Those obligations are part of the common rulesbased international order. They are universally binding
and apply to all situations and conflicts, whatever their
distinct root causes or nature. Equally important is
to ensure the implementation of resolutions adopted
by the principal organs of the United Nations. It is
unacceptable that armed aggression against sovereign
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

States and resultant military occupation of their
territories continue despite the relevant Security
Council resolutions. As is known, through resolutions
822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), all of
which were unanimously adopted, the Security Council
condemned the use of force against my country,
Azerbaijan, the occupation of its territories, attacks
on civilians and bombardments of inhabited areas in
my country, and reaffirmed respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the inviolability
of international borders and the inadmissibility of
the use of force for the acquisition of territory. In
response to territorial claims and forceful actions,
the Security Council reconfirmed in those resolutions
that the Nagorno Karabakh region is an integral part
of the Republic of Azerbaijan and demanded the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all occupied territories.
However, unfortunately, key Security Council
demands have yet to be implemented, and mediation
efforts, which have been conducted for 26 years
within the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, have yet to yield results. On the contrary,
despite earlier warnings, demands and condemnation
by the international community against the background
of ongoing efforts towards the political settlement of
the conflict, deliberate actions are being carried out
in the occupied territories with a view to securing
their colonization and annexation in clear violation
of international law. Such actions include, inter alia,
the implantation of settlers, the destruction and the
appropriation of historical and cultural heritage, and the
exploitation and pillaging of and illicit trade in assets,
natural resources and other resources in the seized
territories. As a country suffering from the occupation
of its territories and the forced displacement of
hundreds of thousands of its citizens, Azerbaijan is the
party with the greatest interest in the earliest possible
political settlement of the conflict and reversal of its
consequences. At the same time, no settlement to the
conflict can be reached that violates the Constitution
of the Republic of Azerbaijan and is inconsistent with
international law.
The primary objective of the ongoing peace
process, the mandate of which is based on the Security
Council resolutions I just mentioned, is to ensure the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all the occupied territories
of Republic of Azerbaijan and the return of forcibly

S/PV. 8334

displaced persons to their homes and property.
Achieving that objective is imperative and can in
no way be presented as a compromise or used as a
bargaining chip in the conflict settlement process. The
military occupation and ethnic cleansing of Azerbaijan
territories do not represent a solution and will never
bring about peace, reconciliation or stability.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas Auza,
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: At the beginning of December
1978, the leaders of Argentina and Chile concluded
that all possibilities had been exhausted with regard
to reaching an agreement that would end their age-old
dispute concerning the determination of their southern
borders. Pope John Paul II pleaded with them not to
close the door, while insisting that they consider the
problem calmly and responsibly. Forty years after the
peaceful settlement of their dispute, Argentina and
Chile remain deeply grateful that their mutual decision
to request the mediation of the Holy See spared their
peoples from the scourge of war. Argentina and Chile,
as well as Mozambique and, most recently, Colombia
have set an example of how it is always necessary to
leave open mediation avenues to settle disputes and
never abandon the process of patient dialogue and
negotiations so as to reach a just and worthy solution by
peaceful means proper to civilized peoples.
In contrast, there continue to be blatant cases in
which parties in dispute have made the fatal move of
resorting to arms without giving mediation the time to
mature towards a peaceful settlement. Indeed, as Pope
Francis affirmed during his 2017 visit to Colombia,
the quest for peace is an open-ended endeavour. The
more demanding the path that leads to peace and
understanding, the greater our efforts must be. The
focus of mediation and conflict resolution must be
founded on respecting and defending human dignity
and the common good. It is impossible to find a just
way out of situations that create violence without this
principle of recognizing and restoring the dignity of
those who suffer during conflicts.
A key issue in the international community’s
mediation efforts in the settlement of disputes is fair,
impartial mediation. While we may lament the failure of
parties to resort to mediation, we must also ask whether
we have impartial, unselfish and persevering mediators

18-2697067/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

with whom the parties in dispute can have a relationship
of mutual trust. Trustworthiness is mediators’ greatest
asset, the open secret in their capacity to build mutual
trust among the parties to a dispute. A trustworthy
mediator engenders trust by being able to objectively
identify the interests of the parties and, in spite of and
beyond those particular interests, by being able to lead
the parties to see their specific interests within the
dynamic of working together for the common purpose
of achieving a greater good that is mutually beneficial
to all the parties involved.
Another fundamental lesson that we have learned
in the experiences of the Catholic Church in its
mediation efforts is that authentic mediation requires
the participation of all the parties involved — not
just of those who exercise leadership, but the entire
community, particularly those who have suffered in the
conflict. In that sense, mediation involves listening and
being close to the victims of the injustices and violence
generated by conflict.
Participation in the peace process takes place at
various levels, from the negotiating table to grassroots
initiatives. What is important is that each level creates
mechanisms that ensure that everyone works around the
shared goal of building peace. The sustainability of the
process will be effective to the extent that there is broad
participation. Fostering inclusive social relationships
during the peace process is also key to the successful
implementation of any peaceful settlement of a dispute.
Conflicts leave very deep wounds, and an inclusive,
participatory process for the mediation and resolution
of disputes is essential to the process of healing and
reconciliation, which continues long after the ink is
dry. A good mediator, while working to settle disputes,
builds a future of peace. Mediators are artisans and
instruments of peace. We thank those who have done
such a precious service to humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland warmly welcomes the holding of this
Security Council open debate on mediation and the
peaceful resolution of conflict.
Switzerland fully supports the efforts of the United
Nations in peacefully settling disputes. In the light of
our long experience with the use of our good offices
and our partnership with the United Nations in the
68/77

29/08/2018

field of mediation, I want to focus on the following
three points.
First, mediation is a valuable tool for conflict
resolution, but experience shows that it cannot be
considered a cure-all. It cannot work effectively unless
certain conditions are met. Above all, it is voluntary,
and the parties to the conflict themselves must be
willing to participate. In addition, mediation initiatives
should be launched at the right moment, when a conflict
is ripe for resolution. It is equally important to ensure
that mediation processes are truly inclusive, so that
parties with a vital role to play in the peace agreement,
and those affected by its consequences, are consulted
and involved throughout the negotiation process.
Mediation is a tool that can be used at several stages
of a conflict, including before violence has broken out
and after agreements are signed, in order to contribute
to sustainable peace.
Secondly, the Security Council is a key player,
capable of strongly influencing the conditions
needed for good mediation. In that regard, as was the
case during the conflict in Yemen in 2011, a careful
warning from the Security Council announcing the
potential imposition of United Nations sanctions may
help a mediator to convince the opposing sides to
sit down at the negotiating table. Sectoral sanctions
targeting sources of funding essential to parties to a
conflict can influence their cost-benefit analysis and
thereby contribute to their decision to participate in
negotiations. However, Security Council sanctions
can also complicate mediation efforts. For example,
sanctions on entire groups can stigmatize them and
complicate the task of mediators, who will find it more
difficult to communicate with them. Furthermore,
sanctions imposed on specific parties to a conflict can
sometimes affect perceptions of the impartiality of the
United Nations and acceptance of the mediators whom
it mandates. It is important for the Security Council to
carefully evaluate the impact of its sanctions in conflict
situations where the United Nations is also conducting
mediation activities, so as to ensure complementarity
between the sanctions and mediation processes.
Switzerland is currently giving support to academic
research on the link between mediation and sanctions.
Thirdly, we strongly believe that mediation’s
effectiveness lies in the professionalism of the mediator.
We are making a concrete contribution to achieving that
objective, specifically thanks to the master’s degree in
mediation in peace processes offered by the Federal
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Institute of Technology in Zurich with the support of
the Governments of Switzerland, Finland, Germany
and Sweden.
We welcome the progress that the United Nations
has made in the past decade in enhancing the
effectiveness of its mediation efforts. We especially
welcome the establishment of the Mediation Support
Unit within the Department of Political Affairs, which
is enabling the United Nations to become an effective
and professional global mediator, and we propose that
it be further strengthened in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to express my appreciation to the United
Kingdom presidency for convening today’s important
debate. My thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the co-founder of the
PAIMAN Alumni Trust for their informative briefings.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
In a world where disputes and conflicts are
increasingly complicated and are having ever
more devastating effects on the humanitarian and
development fronts, it is crucial that the United Nations
continue to play a primary and central role in preventing
conflicts, settling disputes by peaceful means and
assisting countries in overcoming the consequences
of those conflicts. Viet Nam therefore fully supports
the Secretary-General’s call for a surge in diplomacy
for peace, including promoting the use of mediation
throughout the cycle of a conflict. In order to best
strengthen and support those efforts, I would like to
emphasize the following.
First, the United Nations should make full use of
the available tools of preventive diplomacy and its good
offices and mediation, including through the SecretaryGeneral’s special envoys and political missions, in order
to help strengthen capacity-building for mediators and
opposing parties on the ground. It must also enhance
coordination and synergies within the United Nations
system, as well as partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
with due attention to encouraging the broader
participation of all stakeholders, including women and
young people, so as to help affected countries improve

S/PV. 8334

their national capacities to address the root causes
of conflict.
Secondly, the Security Council must remain united
in pursuing the peaceful resolution of disputes and
conflicts, including through mediation at early stages
and by making greater use of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly Article 33.
In that regard, we appreciate the meaningful political
support that the Council has given to the SecretaryGeneral and to his good offices and other regional
actors in their mediation efforts addressing regional
and country-specific issues.
Thirdly, we reaffirm the vital importance
of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In our region, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations has been
contributing proactively to promoting dialogue and
mutual understanding, fostering an environment of
cooperation and friendship, establishing regional
codes of conduct, rules and norms and implementing
various confidence-building and preventive measures
to manage differences and settle disputes by peaceful
means, in full respect for international law.
Fourthly, we urge the parties to a dispute or conflict
to create conditions that favour mediation efforts by
refraining from any action that could escalate tension
and complying strictly with international law. Any
measure must have the consent of the parties concerned,
take into account their legitimate interests and conform
to the principles of objectivity, fairness and respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
equality in international relations.
In conclusion, we reiterate our strong commitment
to working closely with the Security Council, the United
Nations generally and all partners to explore further
ways to enforce these peaceful tools in a more effective
and timely manner, in order to ensure that world peace
and security can be achieved, secured and sustained.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on successfully
presiding over the Security Council this month and
convening this meeting on mediation. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General and the Archbishop of
Canterbury for their valuable briefings this morning.

18-2697069/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

I associate myself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Turkey on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Mediation.
As we all know, mediation has always been an
integral part of diplomacy and the settlement of
disputes, while negotiation, mediation, arbitration and
reconciliation are the first choices when it comes to
dealing with disputes. Their importance is enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. Mediation
is not a substitute for other tools for preventing
conflicts but rather a complement to them as part of
a comprehensive strategy for preventing, resolving
and managing disputes. Beyond that, we also have to
address the root causes of disputes, while recognizing
how peace, security, development and human rights are
all linked. In recent years the international community
has become more aware of those facts and of the
importance of prioritizing preventive diplomacy and
the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through
mediation. Every two years, for example, the General
Assembly adopts a resolution on mediation submitted
by Turkey and Finland and sponsored by a large group
of countries, including the State of Qatar. The report
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations has
focused on the fact that peacekeeping mandates must
work to help achieve political solutions to crises.
At the same time, it is encouraging that there are
developments in mediation’s arrangements and tools at
various levels that are essential in order to stay abreast
of the changing nature of today’s conflicts and threats to
international peace and security. We are also encouraged
by the increasing number of mediation actors. There
have been progress and practical achievements on the
mediation agenda at the United Nations, especially since
the establishment in the Secretariat of the Standby Team
of Senior Mediation Advisers in support of mediation
efforts worldwide. We commend the Secretary-General
for prioritizing preventive diplomacy and mediation
and for his efforts to enhance the performance of the
United Nations in that regard, including his initiative to
establish the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation.
We also underscore the important role of civil society
and the private sector in this area. In many instances
the success of mediation strategies relies on identifying
and engaging the right stakeholders. Moreover, it
is important to engage women and young people in
peacebuilding and mediation efforts to help to ensure
their efficiency and sustainability.
70/77

29/08/2018

The State of Qatar has unique mediation
experience, especially in the Arab and Islamic world.
Our mediation efforts have often led to the successful
settlement of disputes or to avoiding further escalation,
and the Council has recognized and supported them.
Integrity and inclusiveness are among the factors that
help mediation to succeed. We have no special purpose
in mediating except to ensure successful dialogue and
reconciliation in the settlement of a dispute. We must
also take into account the ways in which conflicts
differ and recognize the specific traits of each case.
It is the parties to a conflict who have the primary
responsibility for resolving it. They must recognize the
joint interest they all have in achieving reconciliation
and settling their disputes.
The State of Qatar is interested in mediation
because it lies at the heart of the maintenance of peace
and security and the peaceful resolution of conflict. We
also believe that it is important to support and sustain
peace, and we therefore contributed to the preparations
for the General Assembly’s high-level meeting in
April on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (see
A/72/PV.83). We have chosen to join the international
community in confronting our shared challenges,
and we will continue to do so at the regional and
international levels, despite the unfair blockade and
illegal unilateral measures that have been imposed on
Qatar since 5 June 2017. We will continue to honour
our obligations in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, and we will work
on resolving conflicts through peaceful means. We
therefore reiterate our appreciation for the mediation
efforts headed by His Highness the Amir of our sister
State of Kuwait aimed at resolving the crisis in the Gulf
and thereby enhancing the security and stability of the
region and peace and security internationally.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar hopes that the
Security Council will continue to support all actors and
stakeholders in the area of mediation in order to prevent
and resolve conflicts and ensure that they do not recur,
with a view to sparing future generations the threats
and woes of such conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for its valuable efforts during its presidency
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8334

of the Security Council this month and for convening
today’s important debate.

just be at the table during negotiations, they must be
mediators themselves.

Nowhere are peaceful solutions and mediation
efforts needed more than in the Middle East, which
has been destabilized by conflict. In order to address
the current conflicts in the region, the United Arab
Emirates remains deeply committed to the work of
achieving political settlements and the United Nationsled processes that underpin them, particularly in Libya,
Palestine, Syria and Yemen. We know that the surge
in diplomacy for peace that the Secretary-General
has called for is critical not only to achieving lasting
political settlements of these conflicts but also to
preventing similar conflicts from breaking out in the
first place. To that end, the United Arab Emirates is
working to foster diplomatic efforts to establish peace
throughout the region and its surroundings.

Thirdly, we urge the Security Council and United
Nations-led mediators to work closely with regional
organizations in seeking lasting political solutions.
To that end, we echo the Secretary-General’s call for
strengthening coordination with regional organizations
as part of his ongoing efforts to reform the Organization.

While there are many political crises that require
attention, there are some bright spots where diplomacy
has worked, agreements have been signed and mediation
has succeeded. We were especially pleased to see the
recent peace agreement reached between Eritrea and
Ethiopia, and we believe it will have a far-reaching
and positive impact on the whole Horn of Africa. The
United Arab Emirates would like to make the following
recommendations for strengthening mediation, as part
of a robust approach aimed not only at settling disputes
peacefully but also at preventing them from happening
in the first place.
First, the States Members of the United Nations
and the Security Council should give full effect to the
legal framework for the peaceful settlement of disputes
established by Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations. While the responsibility for the peaceful
settlement of disputes lies with the parties to a dispute,
the Security Council has an important role to play, and it
should be ready to do what is necessary and appropriate
to support and complement the efforts of Member
States. The United Nations has historically played, a
vital role in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
will continue to do so, and in that regard we support
the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board
for Mediation.
Secondly, if we are to strengthen mediation
efforts, they must be inclusive, particularly of women.
There is clear proof that when peace negotiations
include women, peace lasts longer. Women must not

In conclusion, I would like to take a moment
to remember one of the great mediators of our time,
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan. His loss has
occasioned deep sorrow throughout the United Nations.
Mr. Annan, a master of the art of diplomacy, created a
long legacy of successful negotiations with numerous
parties from all walks of life in his efforts to establish
peace across the world.
Finally, I would like to point out that when
developing procedures for settling disputes it is
essential that parties to conflicts participate in good
faith without trying to undermine those procedures or
exploit them for particular political purposes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the Haitian delegation, I would like to
welcome the initiative of the British presidency of
the Security Council to convene this open debate on
the very important topic of mediation and conflict
resolution. It is certainly not a new one; it is in line with
the commitment of the Security Council, following a
similar debate (see S/PV.6108) held in April 2009,
almost 10 years ago, to exploring ways to strengthen
the promotion of mediation as an important means of
peacefully settling disputes.
Threats to international peace and security today
have become increasingly complex. The multitude
of non-State actors and of identity- and ethnic-based
conflicts, the rise of terrorism, the correlation between
violent conflict and poverty — almost half of those
who live in extreme poverty are in fragile or conflictaffected countries, according to the Secretary-General’s
2018 report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43) — and the shortcomings of the international
preventive system are all factors that call for redoubling
our efforts to achieve peace. That includes improving
our mechanisms for preventing and resolving disputes
and conflicts under the Charter of the United Nations,

18-2697071/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

so that we can work more effectively upstream, save
more lives and ease human suffering.
As is frequently pointed out, one of the major
failings of the international community is its inability
to prevent conflict. As we know, that inability often
comes from behaviour that is passive and insufficiently
proactive, and even from inertia on the part of the
main body responsible for the maintenance of peace
and security. The Security Council has shown how
divided it can be when the so-called vital interests of
the permanent members take precedence over their
commitment to respecting the universal values on
which the Charter is founded. Their abuse of the right
of the veto deprives the Organization of the unity
necessary for the implementation of appropriate action,
which severely handicaps the efforts of the international
community when it comes to resolving conflicts that are
all too often accompanied by unacceptable violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
There are myriad missed opportunities in that
regard, of which the seven-year civil war in Syria is
a particularly tragic example. Clearly we must remedy
this kind of paralysis that sometimes takes hold of
the United Nations and tends to fuel cynicism about
it. Some critics have gone so far as to wonder if this
state of affairs is not ultimately favouring those who
do not want the United Nations to be too effective.
The fact is that the United Nations often waits too long
to act. We have not been there when people needed
us, as the President of the General Assembly rightly
noted last year, adding that we could have done more
to respond to conflicts and even more to prevent them
from happening.
For his part, the Secretary-General has reminded
us at a very opportune time that where wars are raging,
whether in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan or elsewhere,
or where there are long-standing disputes such as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we need more mediation,
arbitration and creative diplomacy. The Haitian
delegation endorses that vision. In that regard, we
support the efforts of the international community
to put greater emphasis on certain tools, such as
mediation, that can contribute to the maintenance and
sustainability of peace, in the spirit of the recent twin
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on sustaining peace (resolutions 2282 (2016) and
70/262). My delegation welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s establishment of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation, whose members include one of
72/77

29/08/2018

my compatriots. The Council’s purpose is to support
mediation initiatives and strengthen the collaboration
of the United Nations with regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and other actors
involved in mediation around the world.
That approach is particularly significant in the
context of the renewed focus on prevention and
mediation activities as part of United Nations peace
diplomacy. It gives mediation an even bigger profile
when we consider that the United Nations record in
that regard continues to be bleak. For we have to admit
that the United Nations often struggles to impose itself
on events, even though it has achieved some notable
successes. According to some statistics, during the 50
years from 1945 to 1995, United Nations mediation
efforts represented only a quarter of the total reported
attempts, and only half of those were led by States.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the United
Nations, especially the Security Council and the
Secretariat, must be ready to use its good offices and
its ability to mediate proactively wherever the situation
requires it. We must therefore spare no effort to
ensure that the Organization has the resources to fully
assume that role, while strengthening the coherence
that is so vital to international efforts in support of
national Governments and their peoples. Only then
can international peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights, to which we are all
committed, emerge victorious.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express its appreciation to the United Kingdom
delegation for convening this open debate and providing
us with a comprehensive concept note (S/2018/586,
annex). We also thank the Secretary-General, Lord
Ahmad of Wimbledon, the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Ms. Qadeem for their briefings today. The large
number of delegations participating in today’s debate
reflects the level of interest in the topic, as mediation
continues to provide important avenues for the peaceful
settlement of disputes in many parts of the world.
Mediation can be a critical tool for resolving
existing disputes, as well as preventing emerging ones,
paving the way for durable peace, development and
cooperation, the core values that lie at the heart of the
United Nations. In that regard, we would like to pay
tribute to the memory and legacy of former Secretary18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

General Kofi Annan, a dedicated multilateralist and
visionary for peace, whose contribution to conflict
prevention through mediation has inspired so many
in the ranks of United Nations diplomats and people
around the world.
Regional and subregional organizations play a
crucial role in mediation, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflict prevention. With their particular
regional experience and expertise, they often have a
better understanding of local circumstances and can
bring tailored approaches and effective tools. Wellestablished and internationally mandated mediation
formats within regional organizations have the potential
and capacity to address the complex challenges in
specific situations. The effective use of the capacity
of regional agencies and arrangements in mediation,
conflict prevention and pacific settlement of disputes is
also provided for in Article 33 and under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.
For any mediation process to be credible and
effective, it must be based on a consensus and duly
mandated with a deep understanding of the root
causes and anatomy of the conflict. Furthermore,
every effort should be made to avoid the duplication
of mediation activities, whereby multiple and diffuse
processes often lead to fragmented responses and can
be counterproductive.
Armenia welcomes the unwavering and continued
support of the United Nations system and of the
Secretary-General to the mediating efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group co-chairmanship of France, the Russian
Federation and the United States for the peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

S/PV. 8334

1323 (2000) and we support calls to increase the
proportion of women in mediation processes. In 2017,
an inter-ministerial working group was been set up
in Armenia to elaborate a national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1323 (2000). The drafting
process has been conducted through extensive public
consultations with the involvement of civil society
representatives, in particular women-led organizations.
The persistence and complexity of many crisis
situations around the world necessitate the careful
deliberation of early-warning mechanisms and
capacities for timely and effective mediation. Early
action and preventive engagement can help reduce
human suffering before conflicts develop into
humanitarian emergencies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the United Kingdom
for organizing today’s debate of crucial importance
to the United Nations in responding to more complex,
multifaceted and multi-layered conflicts across the
world. I also thank The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Qadeem for their thoughtful and incisive
comments this morning.
The United Nations needs to become better at
understanding, interpreting and responding to the
new drivers of conflict and insecurity. I shall draw
the attention of the Security Council to three of
those drivers.

The consolidated support of the international
community for the negotiating process within the
agreed format is of the utmost importance, not least in
order to avoid procrastination, deviation from agreed
principles of the settlement and forum shopping. The
people of Nagorno Karabakh have exercised their right
to self determination. Within the past three decades,
an entire generation has been raised free from any
foreign domination.

Fiji and many small island States find themselves on
the front lines of climate change. The impacts of climate
change are well understood; less well understood are its
consequences for conflict. As crops fail, coastal lands
become less fertile, excessive and frequent rains wash
away livelihoods, the competition for land and resources
become more intense and families and communities
are forced to relocate. That trend and the intensifying
competition for resources associated with it is fuelling
conflict across many countries. In turn, those conflicts
are becoming more intense and, as they do so, they are
becoming more complex.

Strengthening the role of women in peace and
security, particularly those affected by conflicts,
remains an important objective in translating
resolution 1323 (2000) into action. Armenia attaches
great importance to the implementation of resolution

There is a similar dynamic arising with regard
to oceans, which are facing great distress. Warming
waters, acidification and the illegal extraction of marine
resources are creating severe pressures on coastal
communities. As marine resources become scarce,

18-2697073/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflicts among coastal communities and between
coastal communities and non-coastal communities,
the private sector and Governments are intensifying
and becoming more prevalent. Some of those have the
potential to spill over into inter-State conflicts.
Climate change and rising sea levels are inducing
serious water stress across many islands. Many
countries across the Pacific now find themselves in
the midst of a serious drought. Competition for water,
managing water distribution and managing recovery
from drought also fuel conflict. Women and children
are especially impacted by conflicts that arise from
water stress.
I have highlighted those three interlinking
drivers of conflict for a special reason. First, with
current trends, those are likely to turn into full-blown
intercommunity conflicts. Secondly, they have the
potential to spill over into inter-State conflicts. And,
thirdly, the cost of managing them can potentially wipe
away the progress that small island States on the front
lines of climate change are making in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals.
There are three “asks” today. The first is to
acknowledge that climate and ocean stress have already
become conflict drivers. The scond is that the United
Nations development system reforms need to position
the Organization in a way that enables it to bring about
systematic understanding of those conflict drivers and
the conflicts themselves in the United Nations. The
third, and most important, is to reposition the United
Nations to play a proactive, preventive role in conflict
resolution, while supporting communities in mediating
climate and ocean stress-induced conflicts and therefore
stopping them from spilling over into open intra- and
inter-State conflicts.

29/08/2018

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to congratulate the delegation of the
United Kingdom on holding this important meeting
as numerous countries around the world in general,
and in the Middle East in particular, are facing many
challenges and conflicts. That requires activating
mediation mechanisms and enhancing dialogue at all
levels to achieve peace and stability.
The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in resolving
disputes and establishing stability and peace in the
world through joint political will and respect for
the foundations on which the relationships between
countries are built. These include good neighbourliness,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries and honouring international treaties and
conventions. Therefore, the best way to deal with the
crises is by enhancing good offices and mediation
efforts in any dispute.
At the United Nations level, the Special Envoys
of the Secretary-General shoulder considerable
responsibilities as they endeavour with determination
to manage crises and mobilize the necessary political
will to urge all parties to a conflict to take a seat at the
negotiating table.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the role
played by special political missions in numerous
countries. They address many situations in flexible
and different ways, and do what they can to support
the political process and work with partners to ensure
sustainable peace. Many such missions are working
under difficult security circumstances. Hence, the
international community must provide them with every
possible form of support and assistance so that they
can carry out their work to achieve reconciliation and
establish security and stability.

Business as usual cannot be an option. Reframing the
Organization’s mediation perspectives, strengthening
United Nations capabilities and skills and building
an institutional architecture to support mediation
capabilities for these newer types of conflict is overdue.
Fiji is overstressed in responding to the adverse
development impacts of climate change, managing
our recovery from persistent cyclones flooding and
drought. In spite of that, we stand ready to support the
Secretary-General’s efforts in this area.

I would also like to commend the initiative of the
Secretary-General to establish the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation in order to provide counselling
on mediation initiatives, in addition to dialogue and
negotiations. We consider that initiative to be a unique
and important one. We are confident that the members
of the Security Council will, with their experience,
push forward mediation and dialogue processes in many
important situations while working with all parties to
the conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Kingdom of Bahrain.

I would also like to commend the active role of
women and youth in mediation and dialogue processes.

74/77

18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

They are a main and effective element in bringing about
peace and stability.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain emphasizes
that respecting the sovereignty of countries and the
principle of non-interference in their internal affairs
are among the most important factors for achieving
and sustaining security and peace. Mediation efforts
in any dispute will be successful only if all parties,
in particular external parties, respect the principles
of good neighbourliness and non-interference in
the internal affairs of other States, while honouring
international treaties and principles.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sultanate of Oman.
Mr. Al Harthy (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): As we
are approaching the end of the month, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on successfully
presiding over the Security Council during August and
on the activities organized, including this debate.
I would like to associate myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Turkey on behalf of
the Group of Friends on Mediation, of which Oman is
a member.
We support the efforts of Secretary-General
António Guterres to enhance the concept of sustainable
peace and to establish the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation, comprised of high-profile persons with
distinguished expertise.
The use of mediation, diplomacy and political
means in resolving disputes at the international level
is a key principle in the work of the United Nations,
including the work of the Council. That is the original
means of taking action; it is the normal course to be
taken by humankind, designed to resolve disagreements
through dialogue and reaching understanding.
Several prerequisites are necessary for any
mediation so succeed. They include, credibility,
sustainability and impartiality towards all disputing
parties. Each party should have its minimum demands
and aspirations met.
In the Sultanate of Oman, we strongly believe that
dialogue is the best means to resolve any dispute. This is
a fundamental principle in Oman’s foreign policy. Upon
the directives of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos Bin Said,
the Sultanate has assumed its regional and international
role guided by that lofty principle. The Sultanate is

S/PV. 8334

willing and ready to continue playing this positive role
to help resolve the issues particularly in our region, in
collaboration with international organizations and the
parties concerned.
The world — and our region in particular — faces
many challenges and wars. The peoples of the region
are paying the price, at the expense of their security,
stability and development. Therefore today, more than
ever before, we need to advance mediation, peaceful
settlements and diplomacy to avoid further loss
and destruction.
In conclusion, we hope that the role of the United
Nations — including that of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, as well as all peace-loving
countries — will be strengthened in order to synergize
efforts for the success of mediation all over the world so
that international peace and security prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
United Kingdom for convening this very important
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General
and The Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, as well as the other
briefers, for their valuable perspectives on advancing
mediation and conflict resolution.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Turkey on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Mediation and by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Secretary-General’s report on United Nations
activities in support of mediation (A/72/115) presented
some grim realities: the number of major civil wars almost
tripled in the decade up to 2015, with an unprecedented
increase in conflict fatalities and displaced persons.
Another persisting observation in the report is the
substantial increase in the internationalization and
regionalization of conflicts, thus complicating their
resolution. We are pleased that the Secretary-General
has designated conflict prevention as a top priority. We
will assume a leading role on that agenda and call for a
surge in diplomacy.
As mediation is an essential component of sustaining
peace, we are also encouraged by the recent adoption of
resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, both
in the General Assembly and the Security Council. The

18-2697075/77

S/PV.8334

Maintenance of international peace and security

latest endorsement of the Secretary-General’s proposed
reform of the United Nations peace and security pillar
by Member States is also very positive. Everyone should
do their utmost to translate the those resolutions and
reforms to ensure concrete outcomes for those affected
on the ground. Let us see to it that mediation, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding are actualized effectively
inside and outside the United Nations.

29/08/2018

The United Nations must live up to its promise
to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, but as central as it is, the United Nations
alone — or a handful of countries and civil society
groups by themselves — cannot broker peace. We must
all play our respective roles responsibly and support
United Nations efforts.

Indonesia has long called for a greater recourse
to Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
As our Foreign Minister said during elections for
non-permanent Security Council seats in June,
Indonesia — as a true partner for world peace, security
and prosperity — is ready to play its role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In that context, I would like to
emphasize several points.

Indonesia commends the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoys, peace emissaries and the Standby Team
of Senior Mediation Advisers for their vital work, along
with the Secretariat for continuing to strengthen the
Mediation Support Unit. We also appreciate the work
of the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation. Together with Finland, Indonesia was
pleased to co-host the second meeting of the Advisory
Board, which took place in Helsinki in June.

First, promoting the habit of dialogue and respect
for international law is important. While we fully
support dialogue and mediation, it is crucial that they be
pursued on the foundations of international law, justice
and fair play. That protects the weak and prevents the
mighty from acting on impulse.

Allow me to conclude, Mr. President, by
congratulating your delegation on a successful
presidency of the Council throughout this month. Let
me assure you that Indonesia remains fully determined
to help enable credible dialogue, lasting peace and
harmony, be it nationally, regionally or globally.

Secondly, more engagement and partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations should
be undertaken. The deft matching of United Nations
resources and capacities with unparalleled local
knowledge, expertise and ties can greatly elevate
prospects for the success of mediation. As an example,
in our region, member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and China have finally
agreed on a single draft code of conduct negotiating
text to further settle issues in our region. Such regional
resolutions should be further encouraged within the
United Nations framework.

The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.

Thirdly, conflict prevention and mediation should
also be supported by more reliable resourcing and
capacities. The effective and efficient management of
all mediation and conflict-prevention activities by the
Secretariat, particularly the Department of Political
Affairs, is indeed most pertinent.
Fourthly, we underline the resolution of root
causes of conflicts in a just and even-handed manner,
with the Security Council fulfilling its role according
to principles of the Charter, international law and
international humanitarian law. In thatr egard, we agree
with the Secretary-General during his opening remarks
this morning that the Council can play its mediation
role only if it is united.
76/77

Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): My delegation is
compelled to take the floor at this late hour in response
to the statement made by the representative of India
earlier today.
While there was nothing novel in the content of the
Indian assertions — which we will not dignify with
a response — what was remarkable was the setting
chosen to undertake this disingenuous attempt to
disencumber the United Nations of its central role in
the pacific settlement of disputes.
To pontificate from the altar of the Security
Council for the so-called integral part of India is
unfortunately yet another flight of fancy that the Indian
delegation has made a vocation of practising. It is
also a blatant disregard of multiple resolutions of the
Security Council that recognize Jammu and Kashmir
as a disputed territory, the final status of which is yet to
be determined in accordance with the resolutions of the
Security Council.
We wonder why a mere assertion of that fact has
caused the Indian delegation so much panic. Rightfully,
it is the anxiety of an occupying Power — an all too
18-26970

29/08/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

familiar syndrome. Instead of blaming the storm on the
ship, India should recognize that the United Nations
is not ill-suited to undertake responsibility for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It is in fact India’s
continued occupation of Jammu and Kashmir that is
ill-suited to the purposes of maintaining peace and
stability in our region and the world.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers.

S/PV. 8334

That leaves me, as President, to thank all of the
participants in today’s meeting. In particular, I would
like to thank the Security Council Affairs Division for
its support, as well as the interpreter for their tireless
work throughout a long day.
We will be following up today’s open debate with a
President’s summary, which will summarize the points
made. We will distribute that in due course.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-2697077/77
