S/2017/665

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 August 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 25 July 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you with regard to the financing of the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
According to article 3 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of a Residual Specia l Court for
Sierra Leone, “the expenses of the Residual Special Court shall be borne by
voluntary contributions from the international community. The Parties and the
Oversight Committee may explore alternative means of financing the Residual
Special Court.” The Oversight Committee of the Residual Special Court has
informed me that the Court will run out of funding at the end of 2017 and that,
while fundraising efforts will continue, it is not expected that there will be sufficient
voluntary contributions for the operations of the Court beyond 2017.
The Residual Special Court was established pursuant to a mandate from the
Security Council and has been carrying out residual functions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone since 1 January 2014, including: supervising the enforcement of
sentences of the persons who were convicted by the Special Court; providing for
witness and victim protection and support; preserving and managing the archives of
the Special Court; responding to requests for access to evidence b y national
prosecution authorities; responding to requests from national authorities with
respect to claims for compensation; reviewing convictions and acquittals;
conducting contempt of court proceedings; providing defence counsel and legal aid
for the conduct of proceedings before the Residual Special Court; and preventing
double jeopardy.
The Residual Special Court is a lean institution with a small number of staff.
The Registrar is the only senior full-time official, and the judges, the Prosecutor and
the Principal Defender are remunerated on a pro rata basis for work actually
performed. In order to minimize costs further, the office of the Residual Special
Court in the Hague is co-located with and receives administrative support from the
International Tribunal for Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991. In this regard, the General Assembly has requested me to
ensure that the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals will
continue to provide logistical and administrative support to the Residual Special
Court when the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia completes its
work, on a cost-reimbursable basis, as appropriate and without prejudice to the
mandate of the respective institutions.

17-13250 (E)

040817

*1713250*

S/2017/665

The annual resource requirements for the Residual Special Court for the
coming biennium are approximately $2.97 million. The senior officials of the Court
have been fundraising since January 2017. Furthermore, in April 2017, I wrote to all
Member States to appeal for voluntary contributions for the Court. To date, two
Member States have contributed a total of $150,000, for which I am grateful. No
other contributions or pledges have been made.
The Residual Special Court is helping to consolidate the rule of law and the
contribution of the Special Court towards achieving peace and security in Sierra
Leone and the region. If it does not secure any funding, the Residual Special Court
will not be able to fulfil its important mandate. The failure of the Residual Special
Court would diminish the legacy of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and severely
undermine the achievements made in pursuit of accountability for the serious
international crimes committed in Sierra Leone.
In the light of the foregoing, I intend to propose to the General Assembly that
the costs of the Residual Special Court for 2018 and 2019 should be provided
through a subvention under the assessed programme budget.
A subvention would be a temporary measure to address the current financial
situation. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
recommended that I further analyse and develop alternative long -term options for
financing the Residual Special Court. I will continue to consult with the
Government of Sierra Leone, the Oversight Committee of the Residual Special
Court and relevant stakeholders on potential alternative financing arrangements and
support from the International Residual Mechanis m for Criminal Tribunals.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

17-13250
