VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Takes note with appreciation of the oral report of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and of the assessment of the needs of the refugees in
Djibouti contained in the report prepared by the mission;
3. Endorses the report of the mission to Djibouti and
the recommendations contained therein;
4. Invites the High Commissioner to continue his
humanitarian assistance to the refugees in Djibouti;
5. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
ensure that adequate assistance programmes are organized for the refugees, to keep the refugee situation in
Djibouti under constant review and to maintain close
contact with Member States and the governmental and
non-governmental organizations concerned to mobilize
the necessary assistance to the Government of Djibouti
to cope effectively with the refugee situation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35/183.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/39 of I August 1978, by which the Council requested the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in co-operation with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Health Organization and other specialized agencies, as well as non-governmental and
voluntary organizations, to render maximum possible
assistance to the Governments of the countries in the
Horn of Africa,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution I 980/54 of 24 July 1980, by which the Council requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
High Commissioner, to appeal to the international community to find ways and means of mobilizing urgently
humanitarian assistance for displaced persons and
voluntary returnees in Ethiopia,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 105 prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution I 980 /8 of 28 April 1980,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the Secretary-General, 106 in which he requested the assistance of the international community in carrying out
the recommendations and proposals contained in the report,
Having heard the statement of the Commissioner for
Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia, 101 in which he
outlined the grave situation facing the large number of
displaced persons in Ethiopia and the difficulties encountered by his Government in providing for their relief and rehabilitation,
11

" A/35/360andCorr.l-3.
"'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session.
Third Committee, 51 st meeting, paras. 13-15.
101
Ibid., 53rd meeting, paras. 40-46.

Taking note of the appeal of the Secretary-General' in
his note verbale of 11 November 1980,
I. Endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General in
which he urged Governments and international organizations to provide prompt and generous assistance to
displaced persons;
2. Endorses also the appeal of the Economic and
Social Council to Member States, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and all voluntary
agencies to assist the Government of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide relief and rehabilitation to displaced
persons;
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia and the
recommendations contained therein;
4. Commends the Secretary-General for the preparation of the comprehensive report on the needs of displaced persons \n Ethiopia;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts to mobilize humanitarian assistance for the relief and rehabilitation of certified voluntary returnees;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/184.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/174 of 17 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, noted with concern the continued
influx into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia
of student refugees from Namibia and South Africa and
the urgent need to provide facilities for their care, health
and education,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 108 the annex to which contains the findings of
the review missions sent by him to Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia in May and June 1980 to examine the status of the programmes of assistance to student refugees in southern Africa,
Conscious of the responsibilities and obligations
shared by the international community to assist the
countries of asylum by providing financial and material
assistance to enable them to cope with the influx of these
student refugees,
Co~vinced that the discriminatory policies and repressive measures being applied in South Africa and
Namibia will lead to a further exodus of student refugees from these countries,
Recognizing the need to strengthen the capacity of the
countries of asylum to deal with any new emergency
which may develop as a result of a sudden influx of student refugees from Namibia and South Africa,
Disturbed by the adverse effects which the application
of apartheid, particularly the bantustan policy, is having on settled communities living in South Africa in
areas bordering Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, and
"" A/35/149.

202

General Assembly- Thirty-fifth Session

by the consequent flight into those three countries of
large numbers of families, including children of school
age,
A ware of the problems confronting the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland created by the entry into their school systems of large numbers of children from the South African side of the border and their
need to determine more precisely the number of children involved and the extent of the assistance required to
relieve the Governments of this particular burden.
Recognizing the need to enable former student
refugees from Zimbabwe to continue their education in
neighbouring countries until alternative arrangements
can be made for their education in their own country.
I. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
commends him and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on their efforts to mobilize resources and organize the programme of assistance to
student refugees in the host countries of southern
Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the assistance which they are giving to the student refugees
and for the extent of co-operation which they have extended to the Secretary-General and to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on matters
concerning the welfare of these refugees;
3. Notes with satisfaction the financial and material
support provided for the student refugee programmes
by Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations;
4. Decides to make provision in the student refugee
programme for former student refugees from Zimbabwe until they complete their studies in the country of
asylum or until alternative arrangements can be made
for the completion of their education in their own country~
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to organize and implement an effective programme of educational and other appropriate assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges all Member States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to contribute generously to the assistance programmes for these students, through financial support of the regular programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and of the projects identified in the report of
the Secretary-General;
7. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization. the World Food
Programme, the World Bank and the United Nations
Children's Fund, as well as other international and nongovernmental bodies, to provide humanitarian and development assistance to expedite the resettlement and
integration of refugee families from South Africa who
have been given asylum in Botswana. Lesotho and
Swaziland;
8. Calls upon all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner

for Refugees in the implementation of humanitarian
programmes of assistance for the student refugees in
southern Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to continue to keep the matter under review and to
apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of 1981, of the current status of the programmes, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/185.

Human rights in Bolivia

The General Assembly,
Noting that all Member States have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Recalling its resolution 34/175 of 17 December 1979
on effective action against mass and flagrant violations
of human rights.
Having taken cognizance of reports on violations of
human rights in Bolivia,
Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the
Preparatory Committee of the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States to include the question of Bolivia in the agenda for its tenth regular session, and of resolution 308 of 25 July 1980 of its Permanent Council. 1"''
Taking note also of the letter of the Bolivian
authorities to the Secretary-General, dated 29 October
1980, indicating their readiness to fix a date on which a
delegation from the Commission on Human Rights may
visit Bolivia, 1111
l. Urges the Bolivian authorities to ensure respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of expression and trade union rights;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
accept the invitation by the Bolivian authorities, in order to study the human rights situation at first hand and
to review at its thirty-seventh session the human rights
situation in Bolivia.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35 / 186.

Exchange of information on banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 /173 of 17 December 1979,
in which it recognized the urgent need to take concrete
measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a
world-wide basi~.
Noting with regret that the Secretary-General was unable to present the report requested in General Assembly resolution 34 · 173.
.... See Organi1.ati,,n of American States. Annual Report of the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights to the General Assembly
(Oh\ Ser.I'. ,\(i 'd"c 12.:'9 'XO). chap. II. sect. H.

'" ,\ c.' \'i l)
