A /68/PV.72

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

72nd plenary meeting

Monday, 23 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I shall now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft resolution A/68/L.34,
circulated under sub-item (b) of agenda item 67, entitled
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
Members will recall that, at its second plenary meeting,
on 20 September 2013, the General Assembly decided
to allocate sub-item (b) of agenda item 67 to the Third
Committee. To enable the General Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it that
the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of agenda
item 67 directly in the plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/68/L.34)
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position before taking a

decision on draft resolution A/68/L.34, I should like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Watanabe Patriota (Brazil): I would like to
thank all Member States, particularly the delegation
of South Africa, as well as you, Mr. President, for the
leadership shown in this process.
Brazil welcomes the impending decision to adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.34. My delegation engaged fully
and constructively in the consultation process and made
every effort to ensure that there were no more delays
in proclaiming the International Decade for People of
African Descent. Our commitment to the issue has been
longstanding and consistent at every level — domestic,
regional and international — because we represent
the largest group of people of African descent outside
Africa, and we still face manifestations of racism and
race-based discrimination inherited from a past of
colonialism and slavery. The Brazilian Government
is a strong advocate of the fight against racism and
race-based discrimination. For Brazil, the International
Decade provides an opportunity to educate the public in
general and raise society’s awareness about combating
prejudice, intolerance and racism. My delegation would
like to congratulate and thank everyone here today.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.34, entitled
“Proclamation of the International Decade for People

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-63013 (E)

*1363013*

A/68/PV.72

of African Descent”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/68/L.34 was adopted (resolution
68/237).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption of
resolution 68/237, may I again remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The United
States remains fully and firmly committed to upholding
the human rights of all people and to combating racism
and racial discrimination. We are pleased to join the
consensus on resolution 68/237, and look forward
to helping to formulate what we hope will be an
appropriate and successful programme of action for the
International Decade for People of African Descent.
In the United States, our history has shown that
by reducing the discrimination faced by minority
women, men and children, including those of African
descent — whether that discrimination was in education,
access to credit, entrepreneurship or employment
opportunities — the country has benefited from their
talents and contributions. We recognize, commemorate
and celebrate those contributions, including through an
annual African-American history month. We support
global efforts to promote knowledge of, and respect
for, the cultural heritage and contributions to society of
people of African descent.
We welcome the additional time allotted for work
on the programme of action. We also appreciate that its
final version will benefit from additional consultations
with Member States and other stakeholders on the draft
prepared by the Working Group of Experts on People
of African Descent. We have previously expressed
concerns about the Working Group’s current draft, to
the extent that it calls for multiple new instruments and
mechanisms of questionable value. As Member States
continue to work on the programme of action through
consultations and the intergovernmental process, we
will pay attention to potential associated costs and
sources of funding in the context of the pressures
that Member States are experiencing in meeting their
existing obligations. We must also make every effort
to ensure, as far as possible, that funds are shifted

2/23

23/12/2013

away from lower-priority activities in order to cover
those associated with the programme of action within
existing resources. We look forward to the negotiations
over the programme of action and will participate with
an eye to ensuring that any commitments are effective,
meaningful and cost-efficient.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union, who wishes to make a statement
following the adoption of resolution 68/237.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) in order
to explain our position on resolution 68/237, which was
submitted by you, Mr. President.
At the outset, I would like to emphasize our
appreciation of the efforts by the facilitator, Ambassador
Mamabolo of South Africa, for his successful conduct of
the consultations in a limited period of time, producing
a short procedural resolution on the proclamation of the
International Decade for People of African Descent.
We welcome the proposed two-step approach to
establishing the Decade and the possibility of having a
proper intergovernmental discussion of the programme
of action that will underpin it. Postponing the start of
the Decade to 2015 is not time lost but time won. The
EU’s interest lies in making the most of the Decade,
and we are willing to work to make it a successful
and meaningful process. We hope it will contribute to
adding value and delivering concrete improvements
to the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance everywhere and for
all.
While today we applaud the fact that the Decade
has been launched on a consensus basis, we look
forward to working with all Member States next year
on developing a consensual, realistic and achievable
programme of action. We therefore call for the launch
of the work of the Intergovernmental Working Group
on the Effective Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action in Geneva as
soon as possible, in order to give us the necessary time
to reach a consensus outcome.
I would like to conclude by assuring you,
Mr. President, of the full support of the European
Union in this process. The fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
remains a top priority on our human-rights agenda.
We are therefore strongly committed to a Decade that
contributes to the advancement of that cause.

13-63013

23/12/2013

The President: I should like to express my
sincere appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Kingsley
Mamabolo, Permanent Representative of South Africa
and facilitator of the consultations on resolution 68/237,
who so ably concluded the discussions and complex
negotiations involved. I am sure the members of the
Assembly join me in extending to him our sincere
appreciation, as well as our confidence in the continuing
constructive deliberations on formulating a programme
for implementing the International Decade for People
of African Descent, to be adopted by 30 June 2014.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item
67.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its
53rd plenary meeting, on 18 November 2013, the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
129. In order for the Assembly to consider agenda item
129, it will be necessary to reopen its consideration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item
129 and proceed immediately to that consideration?
It was so decided.

A/68/PV.72

2130 (2013), of 18 December 2013; and a draft decision,
issued as document A/68/L.35.
Members will recall that, at its 53rd plenary meeting,
on 18 November 2013, the Assembly elected Mr. Koffi
Afande of Togo as a member of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for a term
of office beginning on 18 November and ending on
31 December 2013, or upon the completion of the cases
to which the judge is assigned, if sooner.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/68/L.35. The Assembly will now take
action on draft decision A/68/L.35. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/68/L.35 was adopted (decision
68/416).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
129.
In view of the fact that the Fifth Committee has not
yet completed its work, it is my intention to suspend the
meeting now. The plenary will resume following the
adjournment of the work of the Fifth Committee.
The meeting was suspended at 3.20 p.m. on
23 December and resumed at 3 p.m. on 27 December
2013.
Agenda item 19 (continued)

Agenda item 129 (continued)

Sustainable development

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

(b) Follow-up to and implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States

Letter from the Secretary-General (A/68/623)
Letter from the President of the Security Council
(A/68/668)
Draft decision (A/68/L.35)
The President: In this connection, the Assembly
has before it document A/68/623, in which the
Secretary-General transmits letters dated 30 October
and 19 November 2013 from Judge Meron, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
document A/68/668, in which the President of the
Security Council draws the attention of the President of
the General Assembly to the text of Council resolution

Report of the Second Committee (A/68/438/Add.2)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/679)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/68/679.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Second Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

13-630133/23

A/68/PV.72

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/238).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea, who wishes to
speak in explanation of positon following the adoption
of resolution 68/238.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): On behalf of the
Pacific small island developing States and on my own
delegation’s behalf, I wish to present our position on
the report of the Second Committee contained in
document A/68/438/Add.2, submitted under sub-item
(b) of agenda item 19, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States”, as well as on the Fifth Committee decision on
the programme budget implications of the resolution.
We joined the consensus for the following rationale.
As we embark upon the road to Samoa in September
2014 for the third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States and beyond, commencing
with the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee
on 24 February 2014, which coincides with the launch
of 2014 as the International Year of Small Island
Developing States, we recognize that, as small island
developing States, we have made measured progress
in achieving the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Barbados Programme of Action,
the Mauritius Strategy of Implementation, Agenda
21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). However,
much more remains to be done.
We are cognizant of the opportunities, challenges
and vulnerabilities that we continue to face, especially
the evolving global economic and financial situation,
the adverse impacts of climate change and our respective
national constraints in the post-2015 development
agenda. However, we are equally determined to take
ownership and leadership of our future sustainable
development pathway. That was aptly demonstrated once
again by our collective regional and interregional efforts
in Jamaica, Fiji, Seychelles and Barbados in July and
August 2013, respectively, where we identified, agreed
on and articulated our key sustainable development
priorities now and for the years ahead. We recognize
that, in certain areas, we will continue to require
durable and genuine partnership and cooperation from
our development partners in the global North and South

4/23

23/12/2013

and trilaterally in order to complement and support
our national development efforts. That is why we are
continuing to reach out to our partners as important
stakeholders.
It is in that context that we thank the three small
island developing States regions of the Atlantic, the
Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean and South China
Seas, the Caribbean Community and the Pacific for
their mutual understanding, trust, cooperation and
partnership and for their ownership and leadership
and as architects of small island developing States’
priorities in our sustainable development agenda, now
and in future.
Our commendation is also extended to the Group
of 77 and China for the support and encouragement
under the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities in our pursuit of a transformative
sustainable development agenda that will bring about
pragmatic, durable and resilient solutions to small
island developing States communities and people’s
lives and livelihoods.
We also acknowledge and thank our partners,
including the United States, the European Union,
Japan, Australia and New Zealand, for their openness,
flexibility and understanding of our sustainable
development challenges and needs. We welcome our
partners’ willingness, support and commitment to the
programme budget implications for the resolution on
small island developing States modalities.
We remain committed and therefore pledge to work
with all stakeholders to ensure that the outcome of
the Samoa Conference builds on the solid foundation
laid by the Barbados Programme of Action and the
Mauritius Strategy of Implementation and galvanize
support for small island developing States in the
remaining lifespan of the MDGs and for the post-2015
development agenda.
In conclusion, we would also applaud and thank the
Rapporteur of the Second Committee, the representative
of New Zealand, the lead negotiators and facilitators
and the Fifth Committee for the satisfactory level of
cooperation and partnership in ensuring the adoption
of the resolution by consensus.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 19.

13-63013

23/12/2013

Agenda item 20 (continued)
Implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II) and strengthening of
the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat)
Report of the Second Committee (A/68/439)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/678)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/68/678.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/239).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 20?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/675)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution I, recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 20 of its report. The
report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of draft resolution I is contained in
document A/68/675.
We will now take action on draft resolution I,
entitled “Human Rights Committee”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that it is the wish
of the Assembly to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/240).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 69?

A/68/PV.72

It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.2)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/677)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution XVII, recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 146 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution XVII is contained in
document A/68/677.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution
XVII, entitled “United Nations Human Rights Training
and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the
Arab Region”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,

13-630135/23

A/68/PV.72

United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Ethiopia
Draft resolution XVII was adopted by 132 votes to
1 against, with 1 abstention (resolution 68/241).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Belarus,
Greece, Lebanon, Lesotho, Morocco, the Russian
Federation, the Sudan and Tunisia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/676)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution II, recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 27 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of draft resolution II is contained
in document A/68/676.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution II,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar.” The
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/242).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 69 and of agenda item 69
as a whole?
It was so decided.

6/23

23/12/2013

Agenda item 94
Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of
international security
Report of the First Committee (A/68/406)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/674)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft resolution recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of the draft resolution is contained
in document A/68/674.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The First Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/243).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 132 to 134, 136 to 139, 141, 143 to 146, 148, 158
and 159 (a).
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Ken Siah of Singapore, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Mr. Siah (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to introduce the reports
of the Fifth Committee. The Fifth Committee met from
3 October to 27 December 2013, and held 26 plenary
meetings and numerous informal consultations.
The Committee’s reports on the following agenda
items were considered by the General Assembly at its
32nd, 52nd and 59th plenary meetings: agenda item 138,
entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations”, specifically on
Article 19; agenda item 116, entitled “Appointments
to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other
appointments”; agenda item 131, entitled “Financial

13-63013

23/12/2013

A/68/PV.72

reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors”; agenda item 135, entitled
“Programme planning”; and agenda items 142 and 132,
entitled, respectively, “Report on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services” and “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”. I shall now
introduce additional reports of the Fifth Committee on
the following items.

Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”; and item 146, entitled “Financing of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of the reports contained
in documents A/68/681, A/68/682 and A/68/683,
respectively, the adoption of the related draft resolutions
adopted by the Committee without a vote.

On agenda item 137, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/68/673, the adoption of a draft decision
adopted by the Committee without a vote.

The Committee adopted all the draft resolutions
on the financing of peacekeeping operations without a
vote. The reports of the Fifth Committee are introduced
under the following agenda items: item 148, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei”, as contained in document A/68/672;
item 158, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali”, as contained in document A/68/680; and sub-item
(a), entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force”, of agenda item 159, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle
East”, as contained in document A/68/671.

On agenda item 138, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report contained in
document A/68/504/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
decision adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 139, entitled “Human resources
management”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report contained
in document A/68/690, the adoption of a draft resolution
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 141, entitled “United Nations
common system”, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/68/684, the adoption of a
draft resolution adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
On agenda item 143, entitled “Administration
of justice at the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/68/670, the
adoption of a draft resolution adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
On agenda items 144, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”;
item 145, entitled “Financing of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for

On agenda item 133, entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 2012-2013”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 9 of its report
contained in document A/68/688, the adoption of two
draft resolutions adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
On agenda item 134, entitled “Proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2014-2015”, as reflected in
paragraph 34 of document A/68/689, the Committee
considered five draft resolutions. The Committee
adopted draft resolution I, on questions relating to the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20142015, without a vote. With regard to draft resolution II,
on special subjects relating to the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2014-2015, a recorded vote
was requested on section VI. The Committee voted to
retain section VI of draft resolution II, and the draft
resolution as a whole was adopted without a vote. The
Committee also adopted without a vote draft resolution
III, on financing, draft resolution IV, on unforeseen
and extraordinary expenses, and draft resolution V, on
the working capital fund of the proposed programme
budget biennium 2014-2015.
The Committee also recommends the adoption of
six draft statements on programme budget implications.

13-630137/23

A/68/PV.72

The relevant reports of the Committee have been issued
in documents A/68/674 to A/68/679.
On agenda item 132, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
5 of its report contained in document A/68/691, the
adoption of a draft decision on questions deferred for
future consideration, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.

23/12/2013

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that, where
recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I should
also hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the Committee.

I thank delegations for their cooperation and assure
them that changes made during the Fifth Committee’s
26th plenary meeting will be reflected in the draft
resolutions and reports that will be issued shortly.

Agenda item 133

The President: Before proceeding further, I would
like to emphasize to representatives that, as the Fifth
Committee has just finished its work, the reports are
available in English only. I have been informed that
they will be issued in all languages as soon as possible.
I thank members for their understanding.

The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take action on
draft resolutions I and II, one by one.

If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that,
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

8/23

Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/688)

We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Managing after-service health insurance liabilities”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/68/L.6. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/244).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/68/L.18. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/245).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda item 134
Proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/689)
The President: The Assembly has before it five
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 43 of its report.

13-63013

23/12/2013

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, who wishes to speak
in explanation of vote.
Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation has the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the delegations
of Bolivia, Cuba, Ecuador and Nicaragua with regard
to section VI of draft resolution II, entitled “Special
subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2014-2015”.
We wish to make clear before the General Assembly
our rejection, given the lack of a legislative mandate,
of the inclusion of narratives, functions, expected
outcomes, indicators and metrics related to the socalled responsibility to protect in the logical framework
of the Office of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide. We reaffirm
that such inclusion undermines successive General
Assembly resolutions on programme planning and
programme budgets.
We Member States have not negotiated any
agreement on the definition of that concept, its
scope of applicability or other topics related thereto.
Consequently, it is clear that there is no legal basis for
the Special Adviser to undertake the development and
fine-tuning of a concept that has not been agreed upon
by Member States.
In reiterating our unconditional support for the
activities of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide and our strict
adherence to international law, we want to request a
vote on section VI of draft resolution II, owing to the
reasons I have just outlined.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to V, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Questions relating to
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 20142015”, the text of which, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/68/L.19. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/246).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
II, entitled “Special subjects relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015”,

A/68/PV.72

the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/68/L.20.
A separate recorded vote has been requested on
section VI of draft resolution II. Member States are
reminded that, in accordance with rule 83 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, budgetary
questions require a majority of two thirds of those
present and voting.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)

13-630139/23

A/68/PV.72

Abstaining:
Belarus, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Haiti, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka
Section VI of draft resolution II was retained by
136 votes to 7, with 8 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Belarus and the
Russian Federation informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution II as a whole. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 68/247).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/68/L.21. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 68/248).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Unforeseen extraordinary expenses for the biennium
2014-2015”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/68/L.22. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 68/249).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2014-2015”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/68/L.23. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 68/250).
The President: I shall now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote
or position following the adoption of the resolutions.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation joined the consensus with regard to
resolution 68/246, entitled “Questions relating to the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20142015”, after having participated in the process that led
to agreement on the draft resolution as a part of the

10/23

23/12/2013

package presented by the Chair of the Fifth Committee
on 23 December.
Although it covers an important group of elements
related to methodology and budgetary procedures, the
text lacks other factors that necessarily should provide
guidelines to the Secretary-General on the topic and
establish a framework for the implementation of the
budget for the next biennium. That legislative vacuum
is the result of the difficult scenario that characterized
the interaction among delegations when it came to
agreeing upon the aforementioned text. Therefore, we
agree that the resolution that we have just adopted is
exceptional and, as a result, should not be considered a
precedent for future negotiations.
Scenarios such as that which characterized the
work related to the budget undermine multilateralism,
friendly relations among countries and delegations
and the spirit of cooperation that should prevail in the
Organization and that the international community so
yearns for.
My delegation regrets the fact that the General
Assembly did not agree to maintain a group in the
Publications Section. In that regard, we reiterate the
fact that the introduction of new technologies should
not necessarily lead to the involuntary separation of
staff nor to staff reduction. We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will take the actions necessary to place the
affected staff in other areas and facilitate the necessary
training to carry out their new functions.
My delegation did not insist on modifying
subprogramme 2, entitled “Disasters and conflicts”,
and the related narrative of programme 14,
“Environment”, for facilitating consensus on the work
of the Committee at such a late date. However, we
underscore that we had and have the right to do so,
since the text does not reflect the intergovernmental
agreements that were reached at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and on the
2012-2013 programme budget, nor does it have a legal
basis in the context of the Conference. My delegation
expresses its reservations with regard to the content of
the aforementioned subprogramme, and its intention to
reconsider this topic when the next strategic framework
is considered.
Furthermore, we hope that during the
implementation of the budget for section 24, on human
rights, the Secretary-General will establish a separate

13-63013

23/12/2013

section to support the Universal Periodic Review, in
accordance with resolution 66/246.
Mr. Bayat Mokhtari (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation has asked for the floor to explain its vote
on section VI of resolution 68/247.
Iran has always supported the activities of the
United Nations in all areas related to its scope of work,
as long as they abide by the rules and regulations of
the Organization and remain within the parameters of
international law and the realm of the United Nations.
Although Iran supports the functions of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, in the view of my delegation, the issue of
the responsibility to protect, including its definition,
is still under consideration by the General Assembly.
It is therefore not acceptable to my delegation that
the limited financial resources of the Organization
be allocated to funding posts for which there is no
mandated definition.
It was based on that reason that my delegation voted
against section VI of the resolution.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.
Agenda item 136
Improving the financial situation of the
United Nations
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-eighth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer the consideration of this item to the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to defer its
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 136.

A/68/PV.72

Agenda item 137
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/673)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.11.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/251).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/504/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft decision is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.10.
We will now take action on the draft decision. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/548).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position following the adoption of the
decision.
Mr. Goren (Israel): Israel regrets and objects
to the use of the misleading terminology “State of
Palestine” in decision 68/548, adopted under agenda
item 138, entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations”.
It is counterproductive to use that term when no such
State exists and when such a State can be established
only through direct negotiations, as has been affirmed
repeatedly by the international community and agreed
between the parties.

13-6301311/23

A/68/PV.72

There is only one route to Palestinian statehood.
That route does not run through this Hall in New York,
but only through direct negotiations between Jerusalem
and Ramallah. In that regard, Israel reiterates the
position expressed at the General Assembly by Israel’s
Ambassador to the United Nations on 29 November
2012 (see A/67/PV.44), and on 23 January 2013 in the
Security Council (see S/PV.6906), and is compelled
to disassociate itself from this decision. I ask that this
disassociation be noted in the official records of this
meeting.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda 139
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/690)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.25.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/252).
The President: I shall now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position.
Mr. Kalindra (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the European
Union.
The States members of the European Union have
long been staunch supporters of human resources
management reform. The goal of making the work
of the United Nations more effective and efficient by
implementing a modern human resources system and
by fostering an organizational culture that enables staff
at all levels to contribute to their greatest potential is
one we fully subscribe to. This year’s resolution 68/252
on human resources management includes several
welcome elements. In particular, we are pleased to see
the shared recognition of the importance of improving
performance management, and we request that the
Secretary-General present proposals in that regard next
year.

12/23

23/12/2013

As we have recalled several times in the last year,
we have been strong proponents of the principle of
managed mobility, which we need in order to meet the
needs of the Organization and its staff, including their
families, and to respond to the concerns of Member
States. During the formal meetings of the Committee
on 25 November, we made it clear that we were entering
this session with an aspiration to agree to a workable
new scheme. It is therefore disappointing that for
various reasons the Fifth Committee was collectively
unable to go beyond the decision to defer the SecretaryGeneral’s refined proposal on mobility to the first
resumed session. However, our view is that the decision
does not amount to a rejection of the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal. We will be working hard with the
other States members of the Committee to ensure that
the first resumed session yields a positive outcome on
this important matter.
Since I have the floor, I would like to conclude my
statement with a few additional remarks, expressing
our deep appreciation for the outstanding way in which
the Chair of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador Janne
Taalas of Finland, has carried out his duties in the face
of some of the most difficult negotiations in recent
memory. His resilience and professionalism were key in
getting us together around a final overall deal that, while
not perfect for anyone, contains welcome elements. We
would also like to thank the principals from the Group
of 77 and China, and from Russia, who participated in
the crucial final stages of the negotiations.
We dedicate a special tribute to the efforts of the
Chair of the Group of 77, Ambassador Peter Thomson
of Fiji, during the Fifth Committee negotiations and
throughout the year. He was always a tough negotiator
and defended the interests of his group with admirable
passion and effectiveness, but at the end of the day, on
our side we always felt that a sensible and mutually
acceptable compromise could and would be found. We
fully concur with him that when people sit together
and talk in a timely manner, even the most intractable
problems can be worked out. That spirit will continue to
guide us in dealing with all our partners in this Hall on
Fifth Committee matters and any other United Nationsrelated business.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to every delegation
for having reached an agreement on the 2014-2015
biennium budget and the 2012-2013 performance
report, as well as other issues on the Fifth Committee

13-63013

23/12/2013

A/68/PV.72

agenda. It is regrettable, however, that despite all the
hard work and extended discussion, we have not been
able to reach an agreement on the managed-mobility
proposal.

Agenda item 143

The most valuable asset of this Organization is
its human resources. A managed-mobility policy is
essential to their optimal use. While it was proposed
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, it will far
transcend his term. It would be a shame if, due to shortsightedness or lack of wisdom, we could not bring an
urgently required reform to the Organization. I hope
that we, as responsible members of this body, will take
a decision on mobility at the next resumed session in
order to provide the Secretariat with a clear direction of
where we are headed.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.7. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): On the occasion of the
adoption of the human resources management resolution
(68/252), my delegation notes how unfortunate it was
that we could not arrive at an agreement on the mobility
proposal. We look forward to and intend to participate
actively in the discussions in the first resumed session
on this important proposal, so that we may quickly
resolve any outstanding issues and come together to
adopt a consensus resolution at that session.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 141
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/684)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.17. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/253).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
141.

Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/670)

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/254).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
143.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/681)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.14. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/255).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
144.

13-6301313/23

A/68/PV.72

23/12/2013

Agenda item 145

Agenda item 146

Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/683)

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.15.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.16. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation for an explanation of vote.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/257).

Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for presenting draft resolution A/C.5/68/L.15. Despite
the fact that the Russian Federation decided not to
oppose its adoption, we feel compelled to express
our regret over the non-inclusion of our proposal for
strengthening the Tribunals’ budgetary discipline
and introducing independent evaluations of the
effectiveness of the work of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. This is added to the fact
that more questions are raised for us every year about
the effectiveness of the Tribunals’ work, let alone their
transparency and accountability. Should the Tribunals
not demonstrate substantive progress in the future with
the questions of the ultimate conclusion of their work
and the transfer of their remaining functions to the
International Residual Mechanism, we will press for
seriously decisive measures to be taken, including a
comprehensive independent investigation of their work.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
146.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/682)

The President: We will now take a decision on
the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/256).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
145.

14/23

Agenda item 148
Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/672)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.9. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/258).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 148.
Agenda item 158
Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/680)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.13. The Assembly will now take a decision

13-63013

23/12/2013

on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/259).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 158.
Agenda item 159
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/671)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.8. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/260).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 159.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/691)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. The text of the draft
decision, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/68/L.26. The Assembly will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for
future consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/549).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 132.

A/68/PV.72

On behalf of the General Assembly, I would
like to thank Mr. Janne Taalas, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Finland to the United Nations and
Chair of the Fifth Committee, the Secretary of the Fifth
Committee and the members of the bureau, as well as
representatives, for a job well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all of the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
I shall now call on those delegations that have
requested an opportunity to make statements.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): I speak on behalf of of the
Group of 77 and China.
I believe that the spirit of Nelson Mandela hovers
over the United Nations, guiding us and pointing the
way to higher ground. His spirit urges us to extract the
essence of that which rests within our better natures
to carry out the formidable tasks and responsibilities
with which the United Nations and its community of
diplomats are charged. We all know the many lessons he
gave on the subject of opposing sides coming together
to work in partnership for the good of all, knowing that
in the end he and the other side, as Madiba said, must
be closer and thus emerge stronger. May the spirit of the
great man lead us to such unity, for the United Nations
and the world we represent will need it if we are to
overcome the great challenges lying before us in the
twenty-first century.
We have negotiated, in the long hours of the days
and nights approaching Christmas, on Christmas Day
itself, and during these past two concluding days,
a 12-point package that has led us to the adoption
of the biennium budget this afternoon. Having so
arduously agreed on that delicately balanced package,
we have found it necessary to defend its integrity
with vigilance. From the Group of 77’s position, such
vigilance was required because it has been our solemn
duty, throughout this process, to protect the delivery
of essential United Nations services to the people of
the developing world. We all know that such services
are vital to our efforts to eradicate poverty and uplift
conditions in the developing world.
One of the elements of the 12-point package was
the decision to defer the Secretary-General’s proposal
on mobility to the first resumed session in March 2014.
That deferment has been a bitter disappointment to
many parties, including many in the Group of 77 and
China, for the central aim of the mobility proposal is

13-6301315/23

A/68/PV.72

to increase equity and effectiveness with respect to the
human resources of the United Nations. It is clear to
many that mobility will improve the lot of those public
servants who dedicate themselves to the provision of
United Nations services on the ground in the developing
world. As such, it behoves us all to remain seized of the
mobility proposal and to talk through any remaining
differences, so that we might sit down in March ready
to deliver a positive outcome.
Mr. President, I take this moment to thank you for
the firm hand and wise counsel that you have exerted
during the budget negotiations. We have been most
fortunate to have had a man of your stature at the
helm, a man with such a deep understanding of the
affairs of the General Assembly, a man with so many
years of United Nations leadership under his belt. The
Group’s thanks also go to the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat for their ever-responsive action on the
necessary number crunching and their ever-available
expert analysis and good advice.
I would like to present the Group of 77 and
China’s sincere appreciation to the Chair of the Fifth
Committee, Ambassador Taalas. In the wee small hours
of the morning, Ambassador Taalas was always there,
giving everything he had to brokering the 12-point
package that brought home the biennium’s budget.
And to Ambassadors Torsella, Yamazaki and Vrailas,
representing the partners, along with their tireless
expert negotiating team, I doff my fedora and give
thanks for their understanding and for the commitment
we all shared towards achieving a settlement that would,
under the circumstances, be the best possible for the
United Nations. I have a special word of appreciation
for Ambassador Torsella, who is moving on from the
United Nations to new duties. He has left his mark, and
we wish him Godspeed for what lies ahead.
Finally, I would like to thank Ambassadors Patriota,
Tommo Monthe, Pacunega Manano and Goicochea,
along with Juliana Ruas and the Group of 77 and China
experts negotiating team, for their dedication to the job
of representing our Group through the long negotiations.
Lastly, a special word of thanks to Sai Navoti of the
Mission of Fiji, who was sitting behind me, who has
so steadfastly led the Group of 77 and China in the
Fifth Committee during 2013. He returns to his island
paradise in Fiji next week. To one and all, as we say in
Fiji, Vinaka vaka levu — thank you very much.
We have today approved the $5.4 billion budget
for the United Nations for the 2014-2015 biennium.
16/23

23/12/2013

It represents the best that we as Member States can
muster at this time of continuing austerity in the
world economy. It has been crafted with the desire
we all share to fortify the Organization so that it may
fulfil its fundamental duty to humanity. In joining the
consensus on the biennium, the Group of 77 and China
does so with deep concern that budgetary austerity may
negatively affect the development pillar of the work of
the United Nations. We ask the Secretary-General to
make every effort to keep that from occurring.
The commencement of the biennium is now days
away. Let us enter it as members of a global community
standing side by side as we design a global development
agenda for the universal betterment of the planet, an
agenda that has as its centre a renewed commitment to
the abolition of poverty from the world and a common
dedication to uplifting the freedom of others.
Mr. Torsella (United States of America): The
United States is indeed pleased that after so many long
days and nights of difficult discussions, weeks of intense
and important debates, and months of hard work by so
many people, we have a United Nations budget for the
2014-2015 biennium that follows the same responsible
trend established in the last biennium — a reduction in
the starting level of the new biennium from the final
spending level of the last and a dramatically different
trend line of essentially level spending since 20102011 in comparison with the biennium-to-biennium
increases of 15 per cent in the previous decade.
We welcome the major first step toward streamlining
the Organization represented by the 2 per cent reduction
in the staffing table for the first time in many years.
As we have said many times, staffing costs represent
the primary driver of the vast expansion in the United
Nations regular budget in previous bienniums, and the
agreement we have reached is a recognition that the
first step in addressing spiralling costs is to eliminate
unnecessary, duplicative or outdated posts.
Likewise, we applaud the action taken today to
freeze United Nations pay for one year and United
Nations allowances for two. At a time when the
budgets and crucial services of many common system
organizations have been squeezed, those measures will
hold compensation costs in place until we can act in
the next session on the recommendations to bend the
five-year pay curve down to an appropriate level and
make the total compensation package more sustainable
in the session thereafter.

13-63013

23/12/2013

We are also very pleased that there will be no
new assessment on taxpayers for the final portion
of the 2012-2013 recosting bill. And while we are
disappointed that the budget did not end the practice
of recosting entirely, we are encouraged to have at
last commissioned an independent study on recosting
reform that will enable us, if we have the political
will, to make long-needed changes to that antiquated
process next fall. Likewise, we are optimistic that our
agreement on recosting today, combined with the post
adjustment and allowance freeze we approved, will
remove much of the variability of past bienniums.
We further hope and expect that the Secretariat will
continue its management reform efforts and continue
to utilize financial risk management tools to find
further efficiencies that will minimize the impact of
any additional financial requests and recosting needs
not already covered in the budget.
The aforementioned milestone measures mark a
new commitment to real fiscal discipline at the United
Nations at a tough time for hardworking families
around the world. They benefit not only taxpayers, but
the people around the world who depend on the United
Nations. All of us want and deserve a United Nations
that is sustainable, effective and credible, and today’s
budget represents a recognition by Member States that
business as usual is not sustainable.
There are other significant achievements. We have
advanced the important work of the United Nations
Missions in Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali and elsewhere. We
have strengthened the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
United Nations Environment Programme in followup to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and the support given by the Department
of Political Affairs to the Central African Republic, to
name a few areas.
Of course, there is more the General Assembly could
have done this session. We are especially disappointed
that the pressure of time prevented Member States from
approving a mobility proposal — as we were urged
to do by the Secretary-General — and the proposal
to establish the United Nations Partnerships Facility,
which would provide coherence and guidance to the
many private and non-governmental entities working
with the United Nations to enable them to provide for
the neediest people around the world.
Key concerns about the implementation details of
mobility had been addressed over the past few weeks

A/68/PV.72

through intensive dialogue and hard work with other
Member States and the Secretariat. We were prepared
to move forward, and we are deeply disappointed
that the Fifth Committee was not able to complete
its work on those items. The United States reiterates
today our support for a managed-mobility programme,
our commitment to working constructively with all
colleagues to achieve it in just a few weeks’ time in the
first resumed session as a matter of priority, and our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his passion and
determination on the issue.
It is crucial both for Member States and for the
Secretariat to continue to manage with vigilance
during the upcoming biennium to protect the gains that
we have made over the past few years. We thank the
Secretariat for its efforts over the course of 2012-2013
to manage prudently and responsibly, not on behalf of
any Member State, but because that is its obligation to
this Organization. Our shared goal should be to ensure
that the United Nations can maximize the results that
it delivers with the amount of resources that Member
States are collectively able to provide.
In closing, we wish to thank the Secretary-General
again for his leadership in proposing revised budget
levels that seek to do more with less by capitalizing on
ways to do business better and smarter and that respond
to the fiscal climate affecting many Member States. We
also thank his senior managers for their tireless work
this session and throughout the year. In particular,
we commend Chef de Cabinet Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General Yukio Takasu and Assistant
Secretary-General and Controller María Eugenia Casar
Perez for their commitment to reform.
As we have heard, we would have not been able
to complete our work without the leadership of
Ambassador Janne Taalas. His dedication, relentless
drive and inexhaustible energy helped the Committee
to navigate the many difficult issues that threatened
to derail the budget and other issues. We were also
kept on track by our dedicated bureau members and
Ms. Sharon Van Buerle and her team. And we are
grateful, Mr. President, to have been in your wise and
firm hands at various points in the process.
Finally, I want to acknowledge both our colleagues
in the Like-Minded Group and our negotiating
counterparts, especially the always tough but always
gracious, calm and professional Ambassador Peter
Thomson, the Chairman of the Group of 77 and China.
I must say that this is the first time in my life that I have

13-6301317/23

A/68/PV.72

23/12/2013

wished I did have a fedora because if I had one I would
tip it back to Ambassador Thomson.

effective and time-bound. We must take an early start
to meet the deadlines.

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): First of all, I want
to thank you, Mr. President, for your close personal
engagement with the Fifth Committee leadership,
negotiating teams and representatives to expedite the
decision-making process. We particularly thank you,
Sir, for your intervention at the last moment to bridge
the gaps between the Group of 77 and China and the
Partners. Your wise counsel helped the two sides to
bring the current phase of negotiations to a close.

We strongly believe that the two issues before
the Committee — staff mobility and the Partnerships
Facility — were ripe for decision. It is pity that the
issues have been postponed until March 2014, to the
Fifth Committee’s first resumed session.

We fully associated ourselves with the statement
made by Ambassador Peter Thomson, Permanent
Representative of Fiji, who spoke on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
In the past two weeks, negotiations were intense
and difficult, and yet negotiators from both sides moved
to common ground on many issues, leading to adoption
of all the draft resolutions by consensus. Negotiating
teams continued to work hard, even during Christmas.
They spent several nights here. That fact alone must be
recognized by all with deepest appreciation.
I want to pay special tribute to Ambassador Peter
Thomson and his dedicated negotiating teams from
the Group of 77 and China, which engaged with their
equally able interlocutors from among the Partners.
Ambassador Thomson has set new standards of
leadership, outreach and camaraderie. We thank him
for the constructive role he has played throughout the
year.
I would like to make three brief points. First, there
has been inordinate delay in reaching decisions in the
Fifth Committee this year. That is regrettable because
the complexity of the issues this year was by no means
more challenging than in previous years. We are
concluding our work today, two days after Christmas,
which sets a new precedent, but not a good one. We
should resolve not to let that happen next year.
Secondly, despite the Committee’s affirmations to
conduct its work in a open, transparent and inclusive
manner, the budget negotiations were held in small
group configurations and behind closed doors. That
must be rectified.
Thirdly, from delays this year we have learned
a lesson once again that the working methods of the
Committee should be reformed and reviewed in earnest.
Conduct of negotiations should be made more efficient,

18/23

We are glad that the two issues have been postponed
for a very short time and have not been shelved. The
momentum generated with respect to the two issues
must be maintained between now and March. Staff
mobility, in particular, could have been addressed
definitively because of the broad convergence of
a critical mass of constituencies on the issue. The
Secretary-General himself has widely engaged with
the membership to highlight the merits of making the
transition to a system of phased managed mobility to
make the United Nations a truly modern and efficient
Organization. Member States are convinced of the
merits of the case. We therefore urge all Member States
to prepare themselves for taking a decision in March
next year.
Separately, the Partnerships Facility is also mature
for a decision. In fact, in practice, the United Nations
has established partnerships with a vast array of
organizations. It is time to formalize those partnerships
to optimally use their full potential. Once formalized,
the partnerships could reinforce the United Nations
core agenda and functionalities in the areas of peace,
development and human rights.
Although there has been frequent interaction on
the subject, some Member States have raised questions,
mainly in relation to the oversight of the extrabudgetary
resources. That and other issues can be discussed
further between now and March, when we will take a
final decision.
We hope that when we begin our discussions during
the resumed session in March 2014, we will engage
constructively in an open, transparent and inclusive
manner and seek to resolve particular and legitimate
concerns of some Member States through an inclusive
negotiating process.
Finally, we also wish Ambassador Torsella well and
great success as he moves on. He leaves his mark on the
Committee and we appreciate his rich contribution to
its work.

13-63013

23/12/2013

Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): Ambassador Thomson of Fiji
has spoken eloquently on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, and Samoa happily defers to his wisdom and
outstanding leadership of the Group throughout 2013.
Celebrations of occasions like today’s are few and
far between, especially for a small island developing
State (SIDS) like Samoa. When they do come around,
we must necessarily take the floor to add our voice
of appreciation for the understanding and sympathy
shown by all Member States when addressing resolution
68/238, on modalities for the SIDS Conference in 2014,
as evidenced by its successful and consensual adoption
today. In the same spirit, Samoa aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Papua New Guinea, who spoke on behalf of the Pacific
Small Island Developing States.
Since the decision was taken 18 months ago in
Rio de Janeiro to hold a third conference on SIDS, we
have been reminding the General Assembly and the
Member States of one simple truth, a truth that can
easily or conveniently get lost in the heat of multilateral
negotiations. That simple truth is that the 2014
conference is a global event. Yes, it will be a United
Nations international conference on SIDS, not a SIDS
conference only for SIDS.
Thankfully, today’s consensus resolution is
a powerful and tangible expression of that truth.
Everyone’s support and understanding was critical. The
SIDS, the Group of 77 and China and our partners could
not have achieved that result on their own. Looking
forward, it is a fitting method for underpinning our
joint path from here on to Samoa in September 2014.
It is also an appropriate way to usher in 2014 as the
International Year of Small Island Developing States
and to underscore the theme of the Samoa Conference,
namely, the sustainable development of SIDS through
genuine and durable partnerships.
The SIDS are an integral part of our global family,
and my delegation remains confident that as long as our
member States focus on our positive attributes, not the
negatives; on our strengths, not our weaknesses; on the
way forward, not the past; and on what binds us, not
the artificial barriers that divide us, we can utilize the
2014 Samoa Conference in a genuine way to effectively
address the special case and needs of small island
developing States.
Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil):
I would first like to highlight the exceptional work

A/68/PV.72

done by the experts in the Fifth Committee with a
view to achieving an agreement on the budget for
2012-2013 and for 2014-2015. In particular, I should
express Brazil’s sincere appreciation for the competent
leadership of the Chair of the Group of 77, Ambassador
Peter Thomson of Fiji, and his team. Due recognition
should also be given to the tireless and fruitful efforts
of the Fifth Committee Chair, the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Finland, Mr. Janne Taalas, and of the
colleagues who contributed to a consensus.
My delegation considers that in our strenuous
efforts to reach an agreement there are no winners or
losers, only a win for the Organization, which needs a
budget. Brazil will continue to do its utmost to build
consensus on an ongoing basis over the issues we were
unfortunately not in a position to agree on at this time.
Today we were able to arrive at a text that preserves the
rules and regulations governing the budget process of
this Organization while providing the necessary level
of resources for implementing mandates. In that regard,
we are glad that the budget process and methodology
have been preserved.
Brazil is very much in favour of increasing the
efficiency and the use of the Organization’s resources.
However, in our view, the standard against which
achievement of that goal should be measured is not a
simple quantification of cuts; it is whether or not we
are providing the Organization with the resources
necessary to ensure the adequate implementation of the
mandates we have decided to adopt. In considering the
regular budget of the United Nations, we must strive
to strengthen the Organization’s ability to effectively
make a difference to the people around the world who
suffer from poverty, inequality, conflicts and natural
disasters. That means making resources available to the
development pillar, and prioritizing it. We believe that
the resolution we adopted today will be instrumental in
that regard.
We also wish to highlight how important we consider
the staff of the United Nations to be. Their contribution
to implementing the mandates and achieving the higher
ideals of the United Nations cannot be overstated.
In a final word on the workings of the Fifth
Committee, the 12-point Christmas Eve agreement was
painstakingly arrived at through sleepless nights, in a
spirit of mutual accommodation and compromise. But
we have to face the fact that the negotiating methods
of the Committee border on dysfunctional. We have an
individual and collective responsibility to ensure better

13-6301319/23

A/68/PV.72

practices in the future — practices that guarantee the
highest level of transparency and technical clarity, and
that do not establish unnecessary brinkmanship as the
rule. We must improve mutual trust among Member
States as well as between Member States and the
Secretariat in order to strengthen our Organization.
The President: I should now like to consult
Members with a view to giving the floor to Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General and Chef de
Cabinet. If there is no objection, may I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly, and without setting
a precedent, to invite Ms. Malcorra to make a statement
at this meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with the decision
just taken, I now give the floor to Ms. Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: I would like to thank everyone
here for their dedication, hard work and flexibility.
Their late nights and round-the-clock negotiations have
paid off. The approval of a new budget for 2014-2015
is a collective achievement of all Member States, with
support from the Secretariat. With that step, the United
Nations is ready to continue to deliver for the world’s
people.
The Secretary-General also expresses his
appreciation and has asked me to deliver the following
message on his behalf:
“All budget years are tough. But this year has
been especially difficult. The budget proposal
reflected a difficult reality — how to ensure
that our Organization can deliver at a time when
demands on the United Nations continue to grow
while funding continues to shrink. The world is
turning more and more to the United Nations for
answers and help across a broad spectrum of issues.
We have a duty to live up to people’s expectations
and to meet their pressing needs. And we must
uphold our obligation to Member States to make
the most prudent use of the precious resources that
they provide. The new budget is lower than the one
for the previous biennium, reflecting our shared
wish for a fiscally responsible Secretariat. We will
continue to adapt and equip the United Nations
to better implement its mandates. I have urged
all managers to rethink our business practices,
reduce overlap, embrace innovation, encourage
creativity and build synergies. I have also stressed
the importance of upholding the standards of
20/23

23/12/2013

effectiveness that the Assembly has requested. It
can count on our commitment.
“At the same time, I cannot hide my
disappointment that the General Assembly has
failed to reach agreement on two critically important
reform proposals — a managed-mobility policy and
strengthened arrangements for partnerships with the
private sector. They were designed to significantly
improve and modernize the way we operate — with
staff in building a global Secretariat, and with key
actors in promoting development. I sincerely hope
that when discussions on these issues resume, we
can bring these initiatives to fruition without any
further delay.
“I would also like to reiterate that it would be
unrealistic to presume that any substantial budget
reduction will have no impact while mandates keep
growing. The time may have come for the Assembly
to consider reviewing mandated activities that
may have been fulfilled or overtaken by new
developments. In this era of dramatic change and
growing interconnectedness, the United Nations
must meet ever higher standards of effectiveness
and accountability. We are determined to make
the most of Members’ contributions, fulfil our
mandates and serve the world’s people, counting on
our staff.
“I wish all a healthy and happy New Year. I
look forward to working together and to the support
of the Assembly for our efforts to build a modern,
effective, twenty-first-century United Nations.”
Statement by the President
The President: As the main part of the sixtyeighth session of the General Assembly comes to a
close, I would like to begin by thanking each and every
one of those here. Their insights, engagement and
professionalism have kept the Assembly rich and active.
I extend these thanks to all those in the Secretariat from
the thirty-eighth floor on down, but particularly to the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, which has serviced the General Assembly
and its Committees so ably. The Vice-Presidents have
supported me throughout the session and helped me
fulfil my duties when I was unable to do so, and the
various Chairs and Rapporteurs have kept the session
running smoothly. Together, these collective efforts
enable the nations of the world to voice their opinions
and take action on the issues that concern them and
13-63013

23/12/2013

affect their populations. That in itself is no small
achievement, as our United Nations Charter calls for
harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of
common ends.
There have been a number of impressive highlights
during the sixty-eighth session. We opened the highlevel week on 23 September with a meeting recognizing
that we must make space for persons with disabilities
in our development efforts (see A/68/PV.3). We saw
the inauguration of the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development, which met under the
auspices of the General Assembly and will do so under
the auspices of the Economic and Social Council in
2014. We adopted an outcome document that paves the
way for a universal and shared post-2015 development
agenda (resolution 68/6). And we held the first ever
High-level Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament, which
produced a resolution designating 26 September the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons. During the general debate, more than 110
Heads of State and Government shared their platforms
with us, underlining the vibrancy and centrality of our
Assembly.
We then proceeded with our agenda. During this
session, the Assembly has adopted 259 resolutions and
took 66 decisions. The resolutions cover a wide range of
issues, from nuclear disarmament to the rule of law at
the national and international levels (resolution 68/116),
and from financing for development (resolution 68/204)
to the peaceful use of outer space (resolution 68/74).
We have also seen new resolutions introduced on the
right to privacy (resolution 68/167) and the safety of
journalists (resolution 68/163), as well as a resolution
designed to strengthen the Economic and Social
Council (resolution 68/1).
Today’s conclusion of the work of the Fifth
Committee again underscored the need to
adapt — indeed, to revitalize — the General Assembly’s
methods of work to fit the challenging times we live
in. As the work of our Organization becomes more
challenging, so do its financial and administrative
needs. We therefore have to ensure that the ways in
which we deal with those challenges do evolve and that
the approaches of yesteryear must also evolve if we are
to have a fully functional Organization. We know a
priori that in a budget year, adequate time is needed to
consider all aspects of what is now a fairly detailed and
intricate United Nations budget.

A/68/PV.72

Perhaps, then, the time has come for us look at
either a dedicated session of the Committee for that
important process or to introduce the budget at the
outset of the Committee’s work, rather than in the latter
part of October, as is the current practice. And maybe
the time has come for us to move to a more broadbased introduction of electronic means both for the
Committee’s issuance and its preliminary consideration
of documents, assuming, of course, the later availability
of paper versions of the relevant documents. l hope that
Member States will consider these ideas in the sessions
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly when it meets next
year.
The sixty-eighth session has also had some
other noteworthy firsts. For the first time, Palestine
was accorded the privileges of a State in the general
debate and cast its first vote in the General Assembly.
Following an uncontested election to the Security
Council, one Member State chose to decline its seat,
which was unprecedented in our United Nations history.
I very much appreciated the fact that Member States
were quickly able to come to an agreement to ensure
that the seat would be filled as of 1 January 2014. With
that in mind, I would like to commend representatives
on the resumption of intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform. While the issue is
unquestionably a challenging one, we are determined
to make our best efforts in the coming months. Finally,
we saw a moving tribute to Nelson Mandela in a special
meeting of the General Assembly last week, during
which 53 Member States paid tribute to one of the
world’s most revered peacemakers.
As the main part of the session closes and we
prepare for the holidays, let us be mindful that such
peacemakers are sorely needed in this world. Reports
of recent turmoil in our world, including in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, as well as
the ongoing conflict in Syria, of course distress us all.
While responding to such upheavals does not primarily
fall under the Assembly’s mandate, they are very much
a concern to every one of us and may at some point
be brought to our collective attention. As a testament
to our collective commitment to advancing global
peace, I would also like to express my hopes that the
Arms Trade Treaty, which was adopted by the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, will enter into
force during the sixty-eighth.

13-6301321/23

A/68/PV.72

As we all know, I proposed the theme for the general
debate of the sixty-eighth session as “The post-2015
development agenda: setting the stage”. To that end, I
announced that there would be three high-level events
and three thematic debates. I am pleased that today I can
share with the Assembly the dates proposed for them
in 2014. The first thematic debate, on water, sanitation
and sustainable energy in the post-2015 development
agenda, will take place on 18 and 19 February. The first
high-level event, on the contributions of women, the
young and civil society to the post-2015 development
agenda, will take place on 6 and 7 March, in advance of
the fifty-eighth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women. The second thematic debate, on the role of
partnerships and their contributions to the post-2015
development agenda, will take place on 8 and 9 April.
The third thematic debate, on ensuring peaceful and
stable societies, will take place on 24 and 25 April.
The second high-level event, on the contributions to the
post-2015 development agenda of South-South, NorthSouth and triangular cooperation and information and
communication technologies for development, will
take place on 20 and 21 May. And the third and final
high-level event, on human rights and the rule of law in
the post-2015 development agenda, will take place on
17 and 18 June.
Finally, in order to assess our progress and review
outputs — including, we hope, those from the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing — we will convene
a stocktaking event in early September. Specific
information about the high-level events and thematic
debates, including concept notes, will be available
in early January on the website of the President of
the General Assembly. I would like to thank all the
Member States that have shared their ideas with me on
these proposed events and thematic debates, and I look
forward to their active engagement during the actual
sessions.
There are a number of other such events taking place
during the remainder of the sixty-eighth session that
merit mention. They include, first, a thematic debate to
consider the role of culture and sustainable development
in formulating the post-2015 development agenda;
second, the launch of the International Year of Small
Island Developing States and the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, to be
held in Samoa; third, a high-level thematic debate on
investment in Africa; fourth, an interactive dialogue
22/23

23/12/2013

on the commemoration of International Mother Earth
Day on 22 April 2014, aimed at advancing discussions
on harmony with nature and sustainable development;
fifth, a series of four one-day structured dialogues for
considering possible arrangements for a facilitation
mechanism to promote the development, transfer
and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies; sixth, a special meeting during
the commemoration of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination; seventh, the
human rights treaty body review, which will conclude
in 2014; eighth, an informal interactive hearing in
preparation for the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples; and, finally, the biennial review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Our General Assembly will play a critical role in
ensuring the success of other major conferences and
events in the social, economic and environmental
fields that fall outside our time frame. Some of these
are the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,
the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, the International Decade for People
of African Descent, a comprehensive review and
assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases, and a
special session of the General Assembly on the followup to the International Conference on Population and
Development Programme of Action Beyond 2014,
which will take place during the following year. We will
also work to ensure that commitment and momentum
are maintained towards the Third World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction, scheduled to take place
in 2015, and the Third United Nations Conference
on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development,
scheduled for 2016.
As promised in my statement at the start of the
session (see A/68/PV.6), we will also remained focused
on United Nations reform next year. I look forward to
continued negotiations on Security Council reform in
the early part of the year. Likewise, following a recent
plenary debate on the revitalization of the General
Assembly (A/68/PV.59), the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly will begin early in the new year
in the form of four clusters. I look forward to more
in-depth deliberation on the various issues under the
leadership of the co-Chairs. On both issues, I expect
the Assembly’s full cooperation and commitment to a
vibrant and effective United Nations, which depends on
all of us.
13-63013

23/12/2013

A/68/PV.72

My team and I have very much enjoyed working
with the Assembly over the last three months, and I look
forward to seeing what we can accomplish during the
next nine months of my tenure. Let us continue to work
hard so that we can look back on our time here with a
sense of pride and accomplishment. To those who are
about to leave us — and here I would like to mention
Ambassador Joseph Torsella of the United States and
others — I wish all the best. For the rest of us, I wish
everyone all the best for the remainder of 2013, and I
look forward to working with all in 2014.

a decisive and positive step towards our acquisition of
full-fledged membership in the Organization. We hope
that, with the support of the whole of the Assembly, this
goal will be achieved soon.

I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.

Programme of work

Mr. AlHantouli (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, and briefly, I would like to convey my
delegation’s appreciation for your work, Mr. President,
in presiding over the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session.
A short while ago, the Assembly adopted some
very important resolutions and decisions that required
considerable effort on everyone’s part. Here, on behalf
of the State of Palestine, I would like to express our deep
appreciation and thanks to His Excellency Ambassador
Janne Taalas for his wise and skilful leadership of
the Fifth Committee, and for his valuable efforts in
presenting the draft decision on the contributions of the
State of Palestine to the regular budget of the United
Nations. By the same token, I would like to express
our thanks and appreciation to Member States for
their support for that decision and for its adoption by
consensus. We would also like to thank the Group of 77
and China and its Chair, and the Group of Arab States,
for their support and efforts.
We hope that the State of Palestine’s contributions to
the regular budget of the United Nations will constitute

In conclusion, I hope that 2014 will be a happy and
peaceful year for everyone, particularly my people, the
people of Palestine, who are doing their best to make
this the year that the Israeli occupation ends, freeing
our people and our land and achieving the independence
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The President: With regard to the programme of
work of the General Assembly, apart from organizational
matters and items that may be considered by operation
of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, and bearing
in mind that the Assembly has already considered and
taken action on the majority of items thus far, I should
like to inform members that the following agenda items
remain open for consideration during the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly: agenda items 9 to 16,
18, 19 (a), (b) and (h), 21 (d), 29 to 31, 33 to 36, 38, 39,
41 to 47, 53, 63 (a) and (b), 67 (b), 70 (a) to (d), 85, 111,
112, 114 (b), 115 (a), (d) and (e), 116 (g), (h) and (i), 117
to 126, 128, 129, 130 to 135, and 137 to 165.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of those items on the agenda that remain open
for consideration during the sixty-eighth session of the
Assembly?
It was so decided.
The President: On that very pleasant note, I wish
everyone happy holidays.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

13-6301323/23
