A /67/PV.73

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

73rd plenary meeting
Friday, 12 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Román-Morey
(Peru), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Confirmation of the appointment of the
Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/808)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I would
now like to draw the General Assembly’s attention
to the note by the Secretary-General contained in
document A/67/808, which pertains to the confirmation
of the appointment of the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme.
In paragraph 22 of its resolution 1240 (XIII) B, of
14 October 1958, on the establishment of the Special
Fund, the General Assembly provided that the SecretaryGeneral, after consulting the Governing Council of the
Special Fund, would appoint the Managing Director,
subject to confirmation by the Assembly. That
procedure has been construed as applying also to the
appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.
By its decision 63/419, of 31 March 2009, the
General Assembly confirmed the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Ms. Helen Clark as Administrator

of the United Nations Development Programme for a
four-year term of office beginning on 20 April 2009.
Following consultations with members of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the Secretary-General wishes to request
the General Assembly to confirm the appointment of
Ms. Helen Clark as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme for a four-year term of office
beginning on 20 April 2013.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves that
proposal to appoint Ms. Helen Clark as Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for a
four-year term of office beginning on 20 April 2013?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 111.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now consider the reports of the
Fifth Committee under agenda items 129, 130, 135, 136,
137, 139, 140 and 144.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Justin Kisoka of the United Republic of Tanzania,
to introduce the reports of the Fifth Committee in one
intervention.
Mr. Kisoka (United Republic of Tanzania),
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee: I have the honour

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-28825 (E)

*1328825*

A/67/PV.73

today to introduce to the General Assembly the reports
of the Fifth Committee containing recommendations
on issues that require action during the resumed part
of the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 4 to 28 March and
held five plenary meetings, as well as numerous rounds
of informal consultations and informal-informal
consultations. I am therefore honoured to present
the following brief report on the work of the Fifth
Committee.
With regard to agenda item 129, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/67/673/Add.1,
the adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 130, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/67/677/Add.1,
the adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 135, entitled “Human resources
management”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/67/816, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
On agenda item 136, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit,” the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/67/817, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 137, entitled “United Nations
common system,” the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/67/678/Add.1, the adoption
of a draft resolution, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.
Under agenda item 139, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary coordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 5 of its report
contained in document A/67/662/Add.1, the adoption

2

of a draft resolution, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.
On agenda item 129, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations” and agenda item
140, entitled “Report on the activities of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services” the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of
its report contained in document A/67/818, the adoption
of the draft resolution on the activities of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
Finally, on agenda item 144, entitled “Financing
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/67/767/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
resolution, which the Committee adopted without a
vote.
I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation
and to assure them that the actions taken in the course
of the 27th formal meeting of the Fifth Committee have
been duly taken into account and are reflected in the
reports before them.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the Chairman of
the Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Miguel
Berger, and my fellow Bureau members for their
dedicated efforts and commitment in facilitating the
work of the Committee.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): If there
is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure,
I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not
to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee that are
before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations
of vote. The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its

13-28825

A/67/PV.73

vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 129 (continued)

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/254).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 130.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/816)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/255).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/673/Add.1)

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 135.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Assembly will now take action on the draft resolution
entitled “Progress towards an accountability system in
the United Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/253).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 129.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/677/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Assembly will now take action on the draft resolution
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

13-28825

Agenda item 136
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/817)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/256).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 137
United Nations common system (continued)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/678/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted

3

A/67/PV.73

the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/257).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary coordination of the
United Nations with the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/662/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Budgetary and financial
situation of the organizations of the United Nations
system”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 67/533 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda items 129 and 140 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services

recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution, entitled “Report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on its activities”, without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/258).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 129 and 140.
Agenda item 144 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for the Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/676/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take action on the draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution, entitled “International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/244
B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 144.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/818)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take action on the draft resoltuion

4

13-28825
