S/2007/566

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2007
English
Original: French

Letter dated 20 September 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1772 (2007), in which the Council
requested me to report to it within 30 days after the adoption of the resolution, I
have the honour to inform members of the Council of the steps I have undertaken
pursuant to paragraphs 6, 7, 15 and 16 of the resolution since its adoption.
In implementation of paragraph 6, in which the Council requested me to
intensify my efforts to strengthen the National Reconciliation Congress (NRC) and
promote an all-inclusive political process, I have initiated the development of an
integrated strategy for Somalia based on a two-track approach: (a) a political track
to encourage dialogue between the Transitional Federal Government and all
opposition groups both inside and outside Somalia, in the hope of bringing about a
cessation of hostilities that would allow for the establishment of broad-based and
inclusive transitional institutions; and (b) a security track that would necessitate the
strengthening of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to a level that
provides the necessary conditions for the withdrawal of Ethiopian forces.
In an effort to promote an all-inclusive political process, in close cooperation
with regional and international partners, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, participated in the meeting of the
International Contact Group in Rome on 10 September 2007, at which participants
called on the transitional federal institutions to implement in good faith the
recommendations of NRC and to urgently develop a road map for the remainder of
the transition period, including the drafting of the new Federal Constitution, the
conduct of a population census and preparations for national elections in 2009, as
set out in the Transitional Federal Charter.
Further to my letter to the Council dated 27 August 2007 on strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), I recommend
that UNPOS be provided with the necessary resources to implement an integrated
United Nations approach for Somalia leading to a common United Nations
peacebuilding strategy.
The strategy will include the facilitation of mediation with all Somali parties;
the coordination of United Nations political, security, electoral, humanitarian and
development support to the Somali transitional federal institutions; and
collaboration with external partners engaged in facilitation efforts. At Headquarters,
discussions are under way on the possible establishment of an integrated task force,
to be led by the Department of Political Affairs, to define common United Nations
07-51932 (E) 280907 280907

*0751932*

S/2007/566

strategic objectives in Somalia that would inform the elaboration of a United
Nations integrated plan.
With respect to AMISOM, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Safety and Security have initiated discussions on
further support that could be provided to the Mission and will soon consult with the
African Union on the nature and scope of that support. The Department of Safety
and Security will undertake a comprehensive assessment of the security situation in
Mogadishu to determine the requisite capacity for AMISOM to secure that city and
advise the Secretary-General on the possibility of relocating UNPOS from Nairobi
to Somalia.
Since my last report on Somalia, a team of 10 military, police and civilian
planners has fully deployed to Addis Ababa and is assisting the African Union in the
continued planning and management of its mission in Somalia. Among other
activities, the United Nations planners have assisted the African Union in revising
the concept of operations for AMISOM and provided briefings to a Burundian
reconnaissance team before it undertook an assessment visit to Mogadishu.
In a letter dated 4 August, African Union Chairperson Konaré reiterated the
call of the African Union Peace and Security Council for the United Nations to put
in place a financial, logistical and technical support package for AMISOM, and
proposed that experts from the two organizations should meet to work out the details
of such a package. Despite the absence of the essential conditions for a
peacekeeping operation to succeed, it is still important to provide further support to
AMISOM to enable it to increase its strength and effectiveness, as it could help in
stabilizing Mogadishu, at least in the short term. Currently, the African Union is
facing serious financial, logistical and other constraints in deploying troops which
would join the two Ugandan battalions already in the Somali capital. I have
informed Mr. Konaré that the United Nations stands ready to explore, together with
the African Union, how it may provide further assistance in strengthening and
expanding the Mission’s presence on the ground. In addition to providing further
technical advice to the ongoing efforts at African Union headquarters, the United
Nations could assist in mobilizing bilateral assistance for troop-contributing
countries, thereby speeding up the deployment of pledged contingents and possibly
encouraging other countries to contribute troops. In this connection, we have
requested the African Union to provide detailed information on the Mission’s
concept of operations and supporting plans, as well as any indication of the type of
support that it envisions. Once the United Nations receives this information, we will
be better placed to prepare for the proposed meeting of technical experts to develop
an appropriate support package.
I remain of the firm belief that it is crucial to ensure that the conditions set out
in my report of 25 June 2007 are in place before the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation can be considered a realistic and viable option.
The security situation in Mogadishu has been deteriorating in recent weeks,
with a sharp increase in targeted assassinations and incidents of direct armed
confrontation between Transitional Federal Government and Ethiopian forces on
one side and insurgent groups on the other. In addition, clashes between clans and
sub-clans increased in other regions of southern Somalia during the month of
August. In view of the current security environment, a new technical assessment

2

07-51932

S/2007/566

mission which could spend enough time inside Somalia to gather detailed
information about the conditions on the ground has not been possible. On the other
hand, I did not consider it worthwhile to dispatch an assessment mission to the
region with only limited access to Somalia, as such a mission would have been
unlikely to add much to the findings of the one that was sent in March of this year.
Nevertheless, military and other experts have continued to review and update the
existing contingency plans. While the probable tasks and disposition of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in southern and central Somalia have not changed
significantly since my last report, the continuing volatility of the security situation
could mean that additional troops with armoured vehicles would be required.
In the meantime, given the complex security situation in Somalia, it may not
be advisable to limit the options for security arrangements only to the deployment of
AMISOM and a United Nations peacekeeping force. One other option that could be
explored is the deployment of a robust multinational force or coalition of willing
partners for a specific period of time, with the limited objective of securing a
specific area that could pave the way for the withdrawal of foreign forces.
In early July, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations held a series of
informal exploratory meetings with potential troop contributors, during which they
were given an opportunity to discuss the details of the Organization’s contingency
plans and indicate their possible interest in participating in a possible future mission
in Somalia. Although some of the Member States that participated in these meetings
expressed a tentative interest in providing troops, most of them made it clear that
they would not commit personnel to an operation in Somalia unless the necessary
conditions were in place, in particular at a time of unprecedented demands on
United Nations peacekeeping.
On the humanitarian side, the food security and nutrition situation has
deteriorated dramatically in the Lower and Middle Shabelle regions of Somalia.
According to the September 2007 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations/Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FAO/FEWSNET) food and crop
assessment, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance has increased
from 1 million to 1.5 million. This figure includes 295,000 people in a humanitarian
emergency, requiring life-saving interventions; 490,000 people in acute food and
livelihood crisis, requiring livelihood support; an estimated 325,000 additional
internally displaced persons (IDPs) since April 2007; and 400,000 protracted IDPs.
Some 85 per cent of those identified as being in a humanitarian emergency and
31 per cent of those identified as being in acute food and livelihood crisis are in the
Shabelle regions. Recent nutrition surveys confirm that acute malnutrition rates in
those areas are currently above the 15-per-cent emergency threshold. Insecurity in
the south-central regions due to banditry and illegal roadblocks by armed freelance
militias (238 roadblocks reported as of August) that impose taxes on humanitarian
commodities are the main impediments to aid delivery.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia is threatening commercial shipping and
impeding the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. The rise in the frequency of
pirate attacks has resulted in higher shipping costs and a significant reduction in the
number of cargo vessels in the water. Close to 80 per cent of World Food
Programme (WFP) assistance to Somalia is shipped by sea; however, due to piracy,
the availability of ships willing to carry food to the country has been halved. So far
this year, there have been 15 attacks on ships in or near Somali waters, including

07-51932

3

S/2007/566

two on WFP-contracted vessels, with a security guard killed in one of them. In
2006, there were 10 attacks.
In March 2006 the Security Council responded to reports of piracy in a
presidential statement which encouraged United Nations Member States with naval
vessels and military aircraft operating in international waters and airspace adjacent
to the coast of Somalia to be vigilant against piracy and to take action to protect
merchant shipping, especially vessels being used to transport humanitarian aid.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

4

07-51932
