United Nations

A/RES/57/201

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 109 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/556/Add.1)]

57/201. International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
The General Assembly,
Guided by the basic instruments regarding the international protection of
human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 2 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, 5 and reaffirming the obligation of States to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind the principles and norms established within the framework of
the International Labour Organization and the importance of the work done in
connection with migrant workers and members of their families in other specialized
agencies and in various organs of the United Nations,
Recalling that, despite the existence of an already established body of
principles and norms, there is an urgent need to make further efforts worldwide to
improve the situation and to guarantee respect for the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers and members of their families,
Conscious of the marked increase in migratory movements that has occurred,
especially in certain parts of the world,
Deeply concerned at the grave situation of vulnerability of migrant workers
and members of their families,
Considering that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 6 all States are urged to
guarantee the protection of the human rights of all migrant workers and members of
their families,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
4
Resolution 34/180, annex.
5
Resolution 44/25, annex.
6
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2

02 55255

A/RES/57/201

Underlining the importance of the creation and promotion of conditions to
foster greater harmony and tolerance between migrant workers and the rest of the
society of the State in which they reside, with the aim of eliminating the growing
manifestations of racism and xenophobia directed against migrant workers by
individuals or groups in segments of many societies,
Recalling its resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990, by which it adopted and
opened for signature, ratification and accession the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,
Bearing in mind that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
States are invited to consider the possibility of signing and ratifying the Convention
at the earliest possible time,
1.
Expresses its deep concern at the growing manifestations of racism,
xenophobia and other forms of discrimination and inhuman or degrading treatment
directed against migrant workers in various parts of the world;
2.
Welcomes the signature or ratification of or accession to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families 7 by some States, and takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the status of the Convention; 8
3.
Again calls upon all Member States that have not yet ratified the
Convention to consider urgently signing and ratifying or acceding to it as a matter of
priority, expresses the hope that it will enter into force at an early date, and in
particular takes into account the fact that, pursuant to article 87 of the Convention,
only one more ratification or accession is needed for it to enter into force;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to make all necessary provisions for the
timely establishment of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families referred to in article 72 of the
Convention, as soon as the Convention enters into force, and calls upon States
parties to submit their first periodic reports in due time;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to provide all the facilities and
assistance necessary for the promotion of the Convention through the World Public
Information Campaign on Human Rights and the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights;
Welcomes the increasing activities of the global campaign for the entry
6.
into force of the Convention, and invites the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
intensify further their efforts with a view to disseminating information on and
promoting understanding of the importance of the Convention;
7.
Also welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on the human rights of migrants in relation to the Convention, and
encourages her to persevere in this endeavour;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit an updated report on the status
8.
of the Convention to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
9.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General at its fifty-eighth
session under the sub-item entitled “Implementation of human rights instruments”.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002
_______________
7
8

2

Resolution 45/158, annex.
A/57/291.
