S/2019/363

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 May 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 2 May 2019 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
We have followed with great interest the session of the general debate on
conflict-related sexual violence, held by the Security Council on 23 April 2019, and
we hereby emphasize the importance of this event, through which the Council adopted
an important resolution that would strengthen continued international efforts to
eliminate sexual violence in conflict situations. This form of sexual violence has
become an aggravating and abhorrent phenomenon against human dignity and
freedom, which causes devastating psychological impacts and will, undoubtedly,
affect the aspirations of the victims for a secure future that fulfils their legitimate
aspirations, hopes and dreams.
In this context, we reaffirm Libya’s commitment to all relevant Security Council
resolutions and its readiness, despite the current challenging transitional phase, to
enhance cooperation at the regional and international levels so as to ensure the
elimination of this phenomenon, and to hold accountable thos e responsible for this
heinous action and fight against impunity.
We believe that participation in such significant topics should not be exclusive
to the States Members of the United Nations. We also support the invitation of
representatives of non-governmental organizations and civil society institutions,
provided that the invitees have credibility and enjoy recognized legal status in their
respective countries. In this regard, we were closely watching the statement made by
Ms. Inas Miloud, who claimed to speak on behalf of the Amazigh women in Libya;
therefore, we would like to clarify the following:
– In her statement, Ms. Miloud pointed out that she represents all Libyan women
as well as a group of women’s non-governmental organizations. This claim has
no legal basis, as she was never mandated to assume these functions at all.
Furthermore, she also alleged that she is interested in the topic of sexual
violence, as she monitors the situation of internally displaced persons and
migrants in Libya. She made this allegation without providing any objective
evidence of her studies or of any contribution to responding to the challenges
and difficulties that arise in this respect.
– She spoke of what she called the marginalization of Amazigh women over
decades, the discrimination against the Amazigh people, as she claimed, and the
denial of their political, cultural and social rights. We would like to point out
that this false claim seeks nothing but sedition and the destabilization of the
values and principles of the unified Libyan people, who are socially cohesive

19-07265 (E)

070519

*1907265*

S/2019/363

and who do not recognize discrimination or marginalization against any social
component but have stood united in the face of colonialism and foreign
ambitions. The Libyan people continue to look forward to achieving a
democratic system that advances prosperity, well-being and dignity for all
Libyans. This popular cohesion embraces everyone, including our Amazigh
brothers and sisters, who enjoy the same rights and have the same duties. They
actively participate in all aspects of life, without exclusion or marginalization,
and enjoy all political, economic and social rights and probably even more than
others. This is evidenced by the fact that some of them hold the highest political
positions in the Libyan State and some of them hold senior positions in the
judiciary, sovereign ministries and all service sectors. It was unfortunate that
these facts were not mentioned by one who claims to speak on behalf of the
Amazigh.
– She referred to an incident of rape that we have not verified yet; although these
incidents may unfortunately occur when the security situation in conflict
situations deteriorates, they are not systematic, and whoever commits them will
eventually be held accountable and brought to justice. We condemn such
despicable acts and absolutely deny the claim that a particular social component
is the sole target of rape. The biggest evidence is that reports of all United
Nations organs concerned with the situation in Libya make no reference to what
she claimed. Therefore, we would like to emphasize in this regard that the
judicial institutions take seriously such allegations reported by anyone.
– In her statement, she called for the provision of comprehensive sexual and
reproductive health services for pregnant women and means of contraception in
cases of emergency, and we are surprised by the presentation of these
controversial concepts, which include many interpretations, including those that
are incompatible with the religious teachings and moral values of Libyan society
in all its components, including our brothers and sisters who speak the Amazigh
language. This initial position was the basis of the cooperation programme
signed by Libya last year with the United Nations Population Fund, which
included responding to some of the public health needs, services and social
needs of women and young people.
– We stress that the difficult challenges facing Libya in this transitional phase
require the consolidation of national efforts, emphasizing the sove reignty, unity
and territorial integrity of the nation, preserving its social fabric, enhancing the
search for solutions to meet the challenges and preserving people ’s lives and
property. These principles and values agreed upon by all Libyans were,
unfortunately, not reflected in the statement made by the aforementioned lady.
In conclusion, we express our appreciation and respect for the efforts of the
Security Council to continue to address such important issues, to reach
comprehensive solutions in order to prevent further casualties and to end the suffering
in the cycle of conflict-related sexual violence.
We should be grateful if you would have the present letter issued as a document
of the Security Council.
(Signed) Elmahdi S. Elmajerbi
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

2/2

19-07265
