S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7533rd meeting

Wednesday, 14 October 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Jorge
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Cabezas Reveco
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Ms. Gharbi
Mr. Al-Moumani
Ms. Birštunaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Haidara
Mr. Zagaynov
Ms. Jobbins
Ms. Lee
Ms. Chan

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2015/716)
Letter dated 1 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/749)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-31302 (E)
*1531302*

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to kindly limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber in order for us to work
more efficiently. I would like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a normal speed so that the
interpreters can do their work properly.
I now give the floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, let me thank
President Rajoy Brey and Spain for taking the lead in
organizing this open debate, marking 15 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General and his dedicated staff for
their efforts in making a difference for women and girls
in conflict situations.
Austria aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union.
In its national capacity, Austria commends the
extensive review exercises that have been carried out
in parallel, on the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), involving the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, United Nations
peace operations and the women, peace and security
agenda. We welcome the launch of the global study
that was made public earlier today and which Austria
has supported from its inception. This exercise was
not only necessary in terms of taking stock, but it also
provides us with important lessons learned.
Austria is alarmed by the current spread of brutal
and systemic violence, which is not only causing
unspeakable suffering to civilian populations, but
has also triggered the biggest wave of refugees and
displacement in recent history. We must develop
answers on how to deal with the growing spread of
violent terrorism and extremism, which are marked
by unprecedented levels of sexual violence, abuse, and
violations of women’s and girls’ rights. The perpetrators
must be held accountable for their acts before the
International Criminal Court. We must also empower
and support the work of women activists and women
human rights defenders. Therefore, a conference in
Austria in June 2016 will bring together local women
leaders with political representatives and discuss ways
forward in tackling sexual violence in armed conflict.
2/33

14/10/2015

Austria believes that a dedicated body on the
Security Council and regular briefings on matters
related to resolution 1325 (2000) would increase the
Council’s capacities to take timely and consistent
action. Gender expertise, at adequate levels, needs to
be included as well into all peace and security related
work of the United Nations. We also need champions
that take the lead. Austria would therefore support the
idea of reviving a women leaders network and would be
ready to work together with other interested Member
States in this endeavour.
Austria would like to use this occasion to join other
Member States in pledging support to women, peace
and security. These are the following pledges.
We are committed to completing a review of the
Austrian national action plan, originally dating from
2007, by the end of 2016 — with the broad participation
of civil society and women’s organizations — which
will reflect findings of the United Nations highlevel review. Our inter-ministerial working group on
resolution 1325 (2000), which was established under
the national action plan and works with civil society
and women’s organizations, will organize at least one
big public event per year.
Together with other interested Member States,
Austria will continue to work on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent relevant
resolutions in all regional organizations. In that respect,
Austria, together with Finland, Turkey and Kazakhstan,
will continue to push for the adoption of an action plan
on women and peace and security by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as
many other international organizations have done
before. We call on the Russian Federation to join in
that endeavour. It would be a timely deliverable for the
OSCE ministerial meeting in December in Belgrade.
Austria supports the work of UN-Women and will
continue, on a voluntary basis, to support its activities
in the field of women and peace and security. Austria
commits to realizing concrete results at the policy
level by earmarking at least 15 per cent of all our
peacebuilding spending by our development assistance
agency, Austrian Development Cooperation, for
programmes and projects aimed at furthering women’s
empowerment and gender equality.
Civil society efforts are also a critical element
for the effective implementation of resolutions on
women and peace and security. Austria, through its

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Development Cooperation, will spend more than
€1 million in the next 3 years on its cooperation with
civil society activists in that field.
Austria will also follow up on the recommendations
developed at the symposium entitled “Enhancing
Women’s Share in Peace and Security”, held in
November 2014 in Vienna.
Austria commits to intensifying efforts to
achieve the goal of a 10 per cent proportion of female
soldiers within the Austrian Armed Forces and to
creating the organizational structures needed for the
institutionalized integration of gender mainstreaming
and women’s empowerment within the Ministry of
Defence and the Austrian armed services.
Finally, Austria will continue to further strengthen
its training activities on resolution 1325 (2000), in
particular in pre-deployment training for peace and
humanitarian operations, which is now provided for
civilian and military experts from around the world in
Austria, as well as in its national training courses.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Joyini (South Africa): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
statement, as well as to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her insightful
contributions, and to Ms. Yanar Mohammed, President
of the Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which drew attention to
the effects of armed conflict on women and girls.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was highly
significant because it gave impetus to South Africa’s
international commitments to gender equality. That
resolution was the first to provide women with the
space to participate and voice their opinion on peace
and security issues.
Our own history has taught us about the influential
role that women can play in a post-conflict setting.
South African women represent a commanding
constituency and have been at the forefront of driving
reform, developing and advancing responsive policies
and legislation across all sectors of Government
and the private sector. Today, at the level of political
decision-making, 42 per cent of South Africa’s
representatives in Parliament are women.

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

South Africa is also encouraged by the progress
made at the African Union (AU) level and the
commitment made there to gender mainstreaming, and
we further commend the development and adoption of
the AU Gender Training Manual for AU Peace Support
Operations. There is no doubt that the empowerment of
women will have a long, lasting and positive impact on
the overall protection of vulnerable groups affected by
conflicts. Allow me to outline five core areas that my
delegation views as priorities.
First, my delegation reaffirms its commitment
to the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent related resolutions
as the building blocks for advancing the women and
peace and security agenda. We would like to encourage
the strengthening of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), given the complex and dynamic nature
of conflict, which has changed the character of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding practices.
Secondly, at the heart of the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) is the need to address sexual violence in
conflict, which is an integral aspect of the overall women
and peace and security agenda. Member States have the
primary responsibility to put an end to impunity and
to prosecute perpetrators responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including those relating to
sexual violence against women and girls. South Africa
appreciates the active role and full participation by
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict in monitoring implementation. As
stated before, my delegation would like to encourage
the Security Council to develop a broader framework
of prevention, for example by explicitly referencing
sexual violence in conflict in all relevant countryspecific resolutions.
Thirdly, access to justice for women in conflict
and post-conflict settings through conscious policies
is essential to the building of fair, equitable and equal
societies. Women suffer disproportionately from
poverty, and the risks that they face are heightened in
armed conflict and post-conflict settings. The legal
framework to address issues of discrimination against
women with respect to land ownership and other fields
should be strengthened in line with the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Access to development, economic opportunity,

15-313023/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

employment, education and health care is an essential
component of gender-responsive peacebuilding.
Fourthly, it is also important to emphasize that
women should be involved in every phase of the peace
and security agenda, including being provided with
a greater role in preventive diplomacy, formal peace
processes and mediation. We believe that promoting
the role of women in the mediation of conflict will
strengthen the potential to find sustainable solutions to
conflict that cover a wider range of interests, especially
those of women and children, whose interests are not
sufficiently reflected in outcomes. We therefore support
the inclusion of a clear component stressing women’s
participation in the terms of reference of mediation and
peacebuilding processes.
My fifth and last point is that good practices,
challenges and lessons learned must be documented by
all stakeholders. It is also of critical importance to secure
State-level and political buy-in and commitment in the
form of financial and human resources. The collection
of statistics and data is pertinent to developing policies
that are inclusive of women and responsive to women’s
needs. That will, no doubt, ensure contributions
to the already existing monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms with regard to resolution 1325 (2000). A
mentoring and coaching mechanism for women must
also be established as a support mechanism. Mentoring
is critical in sharing experiences and therefore ensures
that new recruits mature in the process.
While there is value in developing monitoring
mechanisms for the Security Council to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions, the greater
participation of women in negotiation and peacemaking
processes will allow for the greater incorporation
of gender perspectives and the concerns of women,
thereby contributing to the sustainability of peace and
security efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): I am greatly honoured to
address the Security Council at this meeting convened
to mark the 15 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and to express my gratitude to Spain and
personally to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. This is an opportunity to review
the implementation of the resolution over the past
15 years, but it also a chance to see what still remains

4/33

14/10/2015

to be done and how we can better deliver in the future.
In that regard, we welcome the recommendations of
the global study on women and peace and security, as
well as the report of the Secretary-General on the issue
(S/2015/716). In my statement, I shall outline some
of the most important experiences of the Republic of
Serbia in implementing the resolution.
Based on its firm commitment to the goals and
objectives of the resolution, in 2010, my country
adopted a national action plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security in
the Republic of Serbia over the period 2010-2015.
Its seven chapters, encompassing seven general
goals, 15 specific goals and 106 activities, have been
successfully implemented over the past five years. The
action plan established a structure of gender-equality
institutions and mechanisms, such as the Government’s
political council, the governmental multisector
coordination body, the National Assembly Committee
on Gender Equality, analytical groups and research
teams, counsellors and ministers/directors for gender
equality, which have been established, for the time
being, only within the defence and security system.
It also established a colleague-assistance mechanism,
called a “person of trust”. The structure incorporated
the standards of the United Nations, European Union
and NATO Partnership for Peace programme in the
field of gender equality.
Along with the progress made in building a more
democratic society and in protecting human rights, a
significant step towards laying the foundation for a
better and more humane and secure future for women
has been made in the field of gender equality as well.
The action plan is currently being evaluated, and the
extension of its implementation in the coming mid-term
period, 2016-2020, is being considered.
Figures show clearly the progress achieved.
Compared to 2010, when women made up 27.4 per
cent of the defence and security system in the Republic
of Serbia, in 2015, women now account for 31.47 per
cent. Women held 14.47 per cent of the management/
command positions in 2010, whereas in 2015, that
percentage has risen to 19.68 per cent. More so than
in administrative positions, the percentage increase
tended to occur in operational positions — the so-called
women-in-uniform posts in the military, police and the
customs and correctional services. In addition, women
make up 10.06 per cent of the total staff complement of
the Ministries of Defence and the Interior and Serbia’s

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

armed forces deployed in 11 multinational operations.
Seven of those operations are under United Nations
auspices.
In order to further the normative and effective
protection of women, in particular protection against
violence in partnership and family relations, government
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the
media and other stakeholders have instituted a number
of projects aimed at taking preventive measures to
reduce violence against women and children. Projects
have also been devised in the field of education, both
by the Government and by civil society, and are being
implemented in Serbia and the region. My country has
maintained intensive cooperation with international
actors, including UN-Women, the United Nations
Development
Programme/South-Eastern
Europe
Clearinghouse for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, NATO, the Geneva Centre for the Democratic
Control of Armed Forces and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Two years ago, the 2014 Swiss and 2015 Serbian
OSCE Chairmanships identified gender equality as
one of their priorities in the joint workplan for their
consecutive Chairmanships. In June 2014, the firstever OSCE Gender Equality Review Conference took
stock of progress in the implementation of the 2004
OSCE General Action Plan, as well as a number of
follow-up Ministerial Council decisions. It identified
implementation gaps, challenges and lessons learned
since the adoption of the Action Plan in 2004. The
current Serbian OSCE chairmanship is working on
the adoption of an addendum to the Action Plan at
the meeting of the Ministerial Council in Belgrade, in
December, in order to update the Gender Action Plan
and operationalize the recommendations developed
during the 2014 Gender Review Conference. Over the
past decade, the OSCE has made important strides in
implementing measures to achieve gender equality
in its policies and programmes, including in the
political-military dimension. That development goes
hand in hand with a steadily growing global awareness
of the importance of the women and peace and security
agenda.
The Serbian OSCE Chairmanship is committed to
strengthening the role of women in peace and security
by building on the many efforts already undertaken
by OSCE participating States and the OSCE executive
structures. However, multiple challenges still lie ahead,
and considerable efforts will have to be invested at the

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

global, regional and local levels in order to make much
more effective progress than has been made so far.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): First, I would like to
compliment the President and his great country, Spain,
for organizing this important debate on women and
peace and security on the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement, and the
briefers for their insights.
Nepal has been closely engaged in the Council’s
work on women and peace and security from its
inception, and has remained true to its commitments
to the cause, both at home and globally. Nepal has
been implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) through a dedicated national action plan and
with appropriate mechanisms at the local, district,
and national levels. As the first such effort in South
Asia, our action plan was the product of a transparent,
inclusive and nationwide consultations process. It is
now a central instrument articulating the country’s
programmes on women and peace and security.
Nepal recognizes the close link between United
Nations peacekeeping operations and resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent related resolutions. As a leading
and consistent troop- and police-contributor, Nepal
is committed to increasing the number of women in
its army and police forces, deploying more women to
peacekeeping, and integrating the protection of women
and girls from sexual violence into predeployment
training courses. The tools and training developed
with the national action plan partners for the army,
police and other Government stakeholders have proved
useful. The security agencies are implementing a zerotolerance policy against gender-based discrimination
within their institutions, using tools such as genderbehaviour directives and directives regarding women in
the military. We welcome the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. It
resonates with the action plan on gender-based violence
that Nepal has been implementing since 2010.
Our Prime Minister’s Office has a dedicated unit
for addressing sexual and gender-based violence, which
provides protection to victims and brings perpetrators
to justice. In over 50 districts now, women and girls
service centres investigate and address such incidents.
The Gender Equality Act of 2006, together with the

15-313025/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

amendment of 56 laws identified as being genderdiscriminatory, has expedited meaningful reforms in
the country. Under our laws, sexual violence is a serious
crime against human rights. Rape and violence against
women are serious offenses against the State. Polygamy,
child marriage, forced marriage, sexual harassment in
the workplace, as well as sexual and domestic violence,
are punishable by law. Nepal was careful to ensure
that its peace process was gender-inclusive. Women
comprised 33 per cent of district peace committees, set
up to address local post-conflict issues by, inter alia,
providing relief to victims of conflict. The current
transitional justice mechanism investigates conflict-era
cases and addresses the needs of the victims.
After eight years of consultations, an inclusive
and democratic Constitution, written by elected
representatives, was promulgated in Nepal last month.
It has brought our home-grown peace process to its
logical conclusion and has ushered in an era of promise
for peace, progress and prosperity. The Constitution is
extraordinarily progressive, especially in empowering
women through representation. At least one third of
the members of the federal Parliament must be women.
No two persons of the same gender or community
may, at any given time, occupy the elected offices of
President and Vice-President. Similarly, the offices of
either the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Lower
House and the Chair or the Vice-Chair of the Upper
House must be held by women. That spirit, which is
reflected in the Constitution, will be instrumental
in our efforts to undertake further steps towards the
greater empowerment and participation of women.
The Constitution has institutionalized many of our
achievements in the past and inspires many more.
Much still remains to be done, though. Despite
formidable challenges, including the devastation caused
by earthquakes earlier this year, we are committed to
integrating the national action plan into our mainstream
development plan, in the context of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We also want to further
localize the action plan for the benefit of the people on
the ground. Likewise, we are committed to ensuring
that all victims of sexual violence have access to justice
as well as to relief benefits and support services. We
also want to emphasize gender mainstreaming in
our recovery, relief and rehabilitation efforts so as to
align the implementation of national action plans with
the gender-specific recommendations of the various
treaty bodies and mechanisms and to engage more men

6/33

14/10/2015

and boys in our campaign to oppose violence against
women at all times.
To conclude, in Nepal we are convinced that much
can be accomplished with our own efforts and with the
support of the international community. With sustained
and enhanced levels of joint funding and other means of
implementation in place, Nepal will continue to make
meaningful progress.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
ASEAN commends the Spanish presidency of the
Council for convening this high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/716) and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for her insightful briefing. This highlevel review provides us with an opportunity to look
back at the past 15 years, and more importantly, to map
out how the important agenda of women and peace and
security can be brought forward in a more forceful and
effective manner.
Although much progress has been made in key
aspects of the implementation of landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions, gaps
in their implementation still need to be addressed, even
as we tackle new challenges. Indeed, today’s security
environment differs dramatically from that of 15 years
ago. ASEAN is deeply concerned by the unprecedented
threats posed by the wars and conflicts ravaging many
States and regions, the rise of violent extremism and the
increasing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons. We are particularly alarmed by the horrendous
phenomenon of widespread sexual violence committed
against women and girls.
Those challenges, new and old, necessitate a
stronger commitment and more determined and
coordinated actions from the international community.
ASEAN believes that the women and peace and security
agenda must be placed within the broader framework of
conflict prevention and resolution. As highlighted in the
global study, as well as in the review of United Nations

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

peace operations, prevention is key in all contexts. The
Charter of the United Nations and international law
provide a crucial framework for conflict prevention and
resolution. Respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter, as well as for the fundamental principles
of international law, is critical. In that context, special
emphasis must be placed on respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States, on refraining from the threat of or use of force
and on the settlement of disputes by peaceful means.
Women have an important role to play in that
regard and must be empowered to play an active role in
conflict resolution and peace processes. As reaffirmed
in the global study, the meaningful participation of
women, particularly in decision-making, will enable
early conflict prevention, sustainable peace and strong
post-conflict recovery and resilience. It is essential
to mainstream gender-sensitive approaches in efforts
to promote more inclusive and effective responses to
conflicts and emergencies.
ASEAN is gravely troubled by the violation of
the rights of women and girls in conflicts and when
they fall victim to extremist non-State actors. We
particularly deplore sexual violence against women and
girls, especially when it is deployed as a tactic of war.
Women and girls in conflicts are also being deprived
of their most basic needs, including shelter, food, water
and health care. We call on the United Nations and the
international community to take immediate action to
end all acts of conflict-related sexual violence and to
provide protection and support to women and girls in
conflicts.
Most importantly, we believe that it is vital to
address the root causes that give rise to violence and
conflict, such as poverty, inequality and injustice.
Women have an indispensable role to play in building
inclusive and peaceful societies. ASEAN therefore
calls for the full and effective implementation of the
inspiring, universal and transformative 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), recognizing its strong interlinkages
with the women and peace and security agenda.
Regional organizations play an essential role in
implementing global obligations and commitments to
better protect women and girls from sexual violence,
discrimination and social exclusion and to promote the
role of women in conflict resolution and peace processes,
including by supporting their member States in their

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

efforts to do so. The ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation held a workshop in March in Cebu City,
the Philippines, to strengthen women’s participation in
peace processes and conflict resolution. The workshop
aimed at highlighting the level of women’s participation
in peace processes and conflict resolution in the region
and at raising awareness of resolution 1325 (2000) and
existing national action plans on women and peace and
security.
As we move towards an ASEAN Community,
ASEAN members are determined to strengthen the
work of the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission
on Human Rights, the ASEAN Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children and the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation. We believe that the best way to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
is to protect and promote women’s rights, empower
women and increase their involvement in all economic
development and political processes, particularly in
decision-making positions. ASEAN is also working
hard with partners to ensure that the South-East
Asia region remains one of peace, security, stability
and prosperity. ASEAN stands ready and is strongly
committed to joining efforts with other Member States,
the United Nations and other regional organizations to
safeguard the rights of women and girls and empower
women in conflict prevention and resolution.
Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize, in my
national capacity, that Viet Nam remains committed to
addressing the issue of women and peace and security.
We are pleased to have been able to introduce and
facilitate the adoption of resolution 1889 (2009) under
that agenda item. While the protection of and support
for women as victims are essential, Viet Nam strongly
believes in the value that women can bring and the
contributions they can make to conflict prevention
and resolution and to post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency of the Council for taking the
initiative to organize this important debate on the
occasion of the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) and the high-level review of its implementation.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and

15-313027/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

wishes to add the following from a national point of
view.
Over the past 15 years, there have been seven
Security Council resolutions demonstrating the
international commitment to the principles of the
protection, prevention, participation of women and
gender mainstreaming. Yet, despite progress at the
normative level, 15 years after the establishment of the
women and peace and security agenda, women continue
to remain largely excluded from peace, security and
political processes, and women leaders and human
rights defenders are still being targeted.
We particularly welcome the adoption of resolution
2242 (2015), which we have proudly co-sponsored. The
high-level review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will provide a road map to accelerate the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and to address new challenges, such as the rise
in violent extremism, the humanitarian crises and the
growing refugee and migration flows.
However, as many others have stated earlier in
this meeting, much more needs to be done to translate
normative progress into results on the ground. We should
strive to change the traditional conceptual framework
in which security tends to be a man’s narrative. The
recognition of the fact that women’s participation
in all peace and security efforts offers important
advantages is crucial for achieving progress on the
issue. Gender-inclusive peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peacebuilding can contribute effectively to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Women need to be included in the decision-making
at all stages of conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconciliation processes.
Greece is strongly committed to actively promoting,
in law and in practice, women’s participation in
peacebuilding and mediation efforts. It is our priority
to tackle the underrepresentation of women in
political decision-making with a view to attaining a
more balanced participation of women and men in all
institutions, including the military and the police. In
that context, we have been in close dialogue with civil
society concerning the role of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations in order to promote women’s
leadership in all relevant initiatives.
The major priorities have been incorporated into
our national programme of action for substantive
gender equality, which covers a wide range of public

8/33

14/10/2015

policies at the national and regional levels aimed at
empowering women and girls and promoting their
participation in all areas of policy on an equal basis.
The national programme of action focuses on specific
actions targeting thematic areas, where women and
girls are either underrepresented or primarily affected,
such as violence, employment and decision-making.
In the light of the national programme of action, the
Greek General Secretariat for Gender Equality monitors
all national policies at the governmental, regional and
local levels and assesses their impact on gender by
rating their results. The follow-up and evaluation of
such policies will be based on statistical data and the
development of gender indicators according to United
Nations and European Union criteria. A range of eight
strategic priorities will guide the structural funds
for gender equality, which are especially aimed at
the protection of women against the economic crisis,
unemployment, poverty and exclusion.
Today, 15 years after Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and 20 years after the Beijing Declaration,
we sincerely hope that we can fulfil the expectations to
redouble our efforts for gender equality. Women’s role
is critical for resolving conflicts, fostering peace and
promoting reconciliation. No society can achieve peace
if half of its population is left behind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Ms. Hrdá (Czech Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank the Spanish Presidency
for organizing this debate, which is so important to all
of us here today. For there to be more than 110 names
on the list speaks for itself. I would also like to thank
all those who participated in the preparatory process.
(spoke in English)
Resolution 1325 (2000) was definitely a
visionary document, which perfectly recognized the
role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, in peace negotiations, in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, in humanitarian response and in postconflict reconstruction. We have before us, 15 years
after its adoption, a global study on its implementation
that shows remarkable progress according to specific
indicators and identifies gaps to be filled, emerging
trends and priorities for action.
The Czech Republic takes the agenda in resolution
1325 (2000) very seriously, and we have tried hard to

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

implement it, both nationally and internationally. At
the national level, our Government recently approved
its first long-term framework document for gender
equality, and the Czech Ministry of Defence adopted an
action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000), which
will require a considerable effort on the part of the
Ministry, both to meet its obligations pursuant to the
resolution and to inform experts from the public and the
organizations concerned about the measures adopted to
implement the resolution.
Internationally, the Czech Republic became the
lead nation of a programme requested as part of a
partnership for cooperation in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), with a focus on training female
Jordanian soldiers in explosive ordnance disposal.
In more general terms, the Czech Republic seeks
to strengthen women’s position in society through
development cooperation and humanitarian aid.
The goal is enshrined in our strategy of multilateral
foreign development cooperation, and in fulfilling
those priorities we cooperate with the relevant United
Nations agencies, in particular UN-Women, the United
Nations Population Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. In the field
of humanitarian aid, we pay special attention to the
victims of gender-based violence.
Gender perspective continues to be taken into
account also as a cross-cutting target within projects in
countries such as Iraq, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Syria and Ukraine. In addition to traditional
means of foreign policy, the Czech Republic uses a
financial instrument aimed at supporting democracy
and human rights, the so-called transition promotion
programme, which makes use of our recent experiences
with the social transition and democratization of the
country. Gender mainstreaming belongs to the crosscutting principle reflected in that programme.
In
recent
years,
in
cooperation
with
non-governmental organizations, we have implemented
a number of projects in more than seven countries,
including Myanmar, Zimbabwe, Palestine and Egypt,
focused especially on protecting women’s rights
and on enhancing their participation in public life.
The study comprehensively demonstrates that the
participation of women at all levels is the key to the
operational effectiveness, success and sustainability
of peace-process, peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts. That is one of the reasons why the Czech

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Republic has negotiated several times in Geneva a
resolution on equal political participation that urges
all States to eliminate the barriers that limit the full
and effective participation of all segments of society,
including women, in political affairs. The resolution
has always been adopted by consensus and sponsored
by a large number of countries.
I look forward to the day when resolutions such as
1325 (2000) and others concerning equal participation,
which have been so widely recognized and supported,
will become obsolete because all their principles have
been fully and globally implemented and are, of course,
fully respected.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I thank you, Mr. President,
and Spain for convening this important meeting and
for ensuring that we all stay engaged in our goal of
achieving the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for having facilitated the comprehensive global study
on the implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000). As
others have already underlined, it provides an excellent
overview of gaps and challenges, emerging trends and
proposed priorities.
Denmark remains as committed as ever to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). Denmark was
among the first countries to formulate a national action
plan for implementing the resolution, and last year we
adopted our third national action plan, for the period
2014-2019. We emphasize using the untapped potential
of women. We seek to involve women actively, on
an equal basis, in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, in humanitarian response and in postconflict reconstruction. We commit to concrete actions
in order to achieve those ends.
It is widely acknowledged that the absence of women
from early peace negotiations and reconstruction
measures can have a long-lasting negative impact on
the development of good governance. No society can
afford the luxury of excluding half of their population
from decision-making processes. Therefore, the
Security Council must send a strong message in
support of women’s political participation in the peace
and development processes for the benefit of all women

15-313029/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

and men. In that regard, we applaud the adoption
yesterday of resolution 2242 (2015). As described in
the global study, progress has been made and should be
recognized. The incorporation of gender perspectives
into peace processes is emerging, although too slowly.
All countries must develop national action plans.
The root causes of war and conflicts must be
addressed. Again, as described in the global study,
while the wars immediately after the Second World
War were nationalist wars or political wars based on
political ideology, many of today’s wars are religious or
ethnic in origin. Often the ideologies we see are deeply
conservative and reactionary towards women and their
rights. The global community needs to address these
issues.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is a strong resolution, and
we all have an obligation to implement it effectively at
both the national and international levels. Denmark has
identified a number of 1325 commitments, of which I
will mention only a few.
We will focus on promoting women as
peacebuilders in Danish-funded programmes in fragile
and conflict-affected States. Our military deployments
to peacekeeping missions will all receive mandatory
training on the role of gender in peace-support
operations. We will immediately investigate suspected
criminal misconduct during deployments and, when
relevant, ensure the prosecution of alleged perpetrators.
We will continue to focus on the recruitment of
Danish female officers, including police officers,
to international missions, including for leadership
functions.
The global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) contains an excess of excellent
proposals for action. Inspired by these, we must ensure
that the resolution and its follow-up resolutions are
enacted, so let us get to work now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Nina (Albania): We appreciate the opportunity
to take part in this open debate on the review of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) to assess progress at the
global, regional and national levels in implementing the
resolution. We also welcome the adoption by consensus
yesterday of resolution 2242 (2015), which we were
very pleased to co-sponsor.

10/33

14/10/2015

We would also like to thank the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council for the very interesting concept
note (S/2015/749, annex) issued in preparation for the
debate.
As pointed out in the concept note, we concur
with the view that Member States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the implementation of the
global commitments and obligations in the context of
the women and peace and security agenda.
Albania is not a post-conflict country. It has been
striving, however, to achieve higher standards in facing
new challenges and emerging asymmetric threats
on our path to consolidating democracy, peace and
security, and respect for human rights.
My Government is convinced that peace and
security cannot be achieved without joint efforts by
both women and men, given the inextricable links
between gender equality and international peace and
security.
In implementing resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government of Albania identified and focused its
efforts on several key objectives that take account of
the need to enhance women’s leadership; increase
the participation of women in political and public
decision-making; increase the participation of women
in the police and armed forces; and enhance the relevant
programmes for professional training on gender issues
and violence against women.
Recent legal acts such as those entitled “Protection
from Discrimination” and “Military Discipline in the
Armed Forces of the Republic of Albania” provide for
appropriate legal and disciplinary measures in cases
of sexual harassment, sexual violence and genderbased violence committed by military personnel in
discharging their duties. All military structures under
the armed forces and the Ministry of Defence have their
own gender equality focal point. There are currently
nine focal points altogether: seven women and two men.
On the normative framework, the national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted in 2011, provides for enhanced institutional
gender capacities, which made it possible, starting that
year, for eight women to participate in international
peacekeeping operations.
The 2013 directive from the Ministry of Defence
provided for gender equality and gender mainstreaming
as annual priorities, achieving later that year the

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

objective of 17.7 per cent representation of women in
the armed forces.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
significant threats to global peace and security have
emerged, the most prominent of which is the rise of
violent extremism. The Balkans Regional Summit
on Countering Violent Extremism, held in Tirana on
19 and 20 May 2015, recognized that women are both
vulnerable to radicalization and have an important role
to play in countering violent extremism.
The Summit further committed to integrating
women into efforts to counter violent extremism and
underscored the need to work together in the region to
better understand the precise nature of violent extremist
threats at the local and regional levels, including by
promoting research, analysis and information-sharing
on the drivers of violent extremism in all of its forms
for all segments of society, including women and youth,
and on how best to counter those drivers.
Civil society has also played a very important role
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). In recognizing
this role, my Government has systematically
engaged and supported women’s organizations in the
implementation of the 1325 agenda. We emphasize
in this context the importance of developing and
implementing the relevant national strategies and plans
of action, in close cooperation with civil society.
In concluding, allow me to underline the need for
the Security Council to strengthen its commitment
to the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda through a more coherent and
systematic approach. Let us not forget that resolution
1325 (2000) was adopted following a decade of terrible
failures in protecting women, including on the territory
of the former Yugoslavia. This fifteenth anniversary
of the resolution should mobilize us in addressing key
challenges of the women and peace and security agenda,
including the lack of consistent implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Ambassador of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report on women and peace and
security (S/2015/716) and yesterday’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which we were very
proud to co-sponsor. We were pleased to participate in
today’s launch of the ground-breaking global study.

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

While there have been advances since resolution
1325 (2000) was adopted, there are areas where the
international community is still failing. Women and
children continue to suffer disproportionately in
conflict and post-conflict countries. Maternal mortality
rates are twice as high; education parity has not been
achieved; there are record numbers of people forcibly
displaced; and rates of violence, including sexual
violence, against women are escalating.
Australia is pleased to make a number of pledges
today to help address this dire situation.
First, Australia is committing an additional
4 million Australian dollars over three years to the
Global Acceleration Instrument on Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, bringing our total
contribution to 5.5 million Australian dollars. This is
in recognition of the fact that more is needed to support
the critical role of women’s organizations in preventing
and resolving conflict, building peace and ensuring
relief and recovery.
Secondly, the women and peace and security agenda
must be implemented across the military. Accordingly,
the Australian Defence Force is deploying more women
and increasing their number in senior decision-making
roles; has introduced recruitment targets for women in
non-traditional roles; and is developing a gender adviser
and female engagement team capability. The Australian
Defence Force will also provide a technical expert for
women and peace and security to UN-Women for five
years from 2016.
Our third pledge recognizes that women, girls and
women’s organizations are vital to promoting gender
equality in countering terrorism and violent extremism.
We will therefore support new research to be conducted
by Monash University in Melbourne on preventing
conflict and countering fundamentalism through
women’s empowerment and civil-society mobilization.
Australia will also support women’s organizations
in their participation in the regional network of civilsociety groups being established as an outcome of
the June 2015 Regional Summit to Counter Violent
Extremism, held in Sydney.
Fourthly, Australia understands that humanitarian
efforts need to do more to prevent and support survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. That is why
Australia has dedicated specific funding to address
sexual and gender- based violence in response to the

15-3130211/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Syria crisis: 7 million Australian dollars, as part of our
overall commitment of 59 million Australian dollars in
the last 12 months.
Finally, Australia is reviewing its national action
plan on women and peace and security, and we will
use the global study to inform future actions under our
plan.
We call on the United Nations system as a whole
to respond to the global study’s recommendations.
Women and peace and security must be considered
and implemented as part of the Secretary-General’s
review of peace operations and the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture in addition to this
high-level review.
Global leaders have now agreed to the historic
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), recognize the links between
development, human rights and peace and security, and
are placing gender equality at the heart of these efforts.
We must, as a global community, do more to deliver on
these promises for women around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Uğurluoğlu (Turkey): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Spanish presidency for
organizing this timely debate. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank Prime Minister Rajoy Brey for
his words yesterday of solidarity on and condemnation
of the heinous terrorist attack perpetuated in Turkey on
10 October.
The year 2015 is a landmark year for gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda. This
year we not only celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, but we
also mark the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). Furthermore, the recently adopted Sustainable
Development Agenda (General Assembly resolution
70/1) has a Goal dedicated to gender equality. The
high-level review conducted on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), along with the review processes
carried out vis-à-vis United Nations peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding architecture, has
yielded a sound foundation for us to reflect on the
international framework for prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, with a strong emphasis on the
empowerment of women.

12/33

14/10/2015

We welcome the continuing attention paid to the
women and peace and security agenda at the Security
Council and thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2015/716), inter alia, submitting the results of
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Nevertheless, we would also like to stress
that some inaccurate references in the global study do
not serve the intended purpose of their inclusion, and
thus we express reservations on those references, which
in fact do not relate to the overall role or influence of
women.
Eliminating conflicts and related violence continues
to be a great challenge on which the international
community is still trying to deliver 70 years after the
United Nations was founded. The severe effects of
conflict on women and girls in various regions of the
world continue to be a significant problem that needs
to be addressed. Furthermore, our world is now facing
the largest humanitarian crisis since the Second World
War, with a growing influx of displaced populations
resulting from protracted conflicts and lack of security
and stability, which causes even further difficulties to
vulnerable groups, including women and girls.
In the face of these threats, a stronger and more
inclusive approach is required. First, strengthening
our political will to achieve gender equality,
empowerment of women and girls and recognition of
their human rights is a necessary step. Secondly, the
horrific acts perpetrated against women and girls by
terrorist organizations such as Daesh and Boko Haram
require a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy.
Accordingly, eliminating the root causes of conflict is
essential. Thirdly, ensuring a comprehensive approach
to decision-making and policymaking, peace processes,
mediation efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, is
another important step.
The meaningful participation of women in these
processes should be promoted. Therefore, as a case
in point, we welcome the establishment of a technical
committee on gender equality in the context of the
ongoing negotiations in Cyprus. We hope and believe
that this committee will contribute to the efforts of the
two sides, the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, to
find a just and comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus
problem without further delay.
Finally, deepening the gender perspective in the
United Nations system’s normative and operational
frameworks, entities and practices will enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations action in responding
15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

to the needs of women and girls, particularly in
humanitarian emergencies and protracted crises.
Turkey supports the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls in various emergency, conflict and
post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
development assistance programmes. The projects we
carry out in Afghanistan and Somalia, especially in the
fields of education and health services, are concrete
examples of our efforts to this end. Moreover, Turkey
has been a safe refuge for over 2 million Syrians,
including women and girls, who had to flee Syria
for their lives and has also ensured that cross-border
humanitarian assistance reaches millions of people in
dire need on the Syrian side of the border, in conformity
with its international obligations and in support of the
United Nations. We have offered Syrians fleeing a
brutal conflict and a regime that targets its own people
temporary protection status and enabled them access to
Turkish hospitals. So far, more than 66,000 babies have
been born in the medical facilities inside the temporary
protection centres in Turkey, and more than 200,000
children are enrolled in school.
Turkey makes every effort to provide security
and safety to women and girls who have fled from the
conflict. Within this scope, multiple initiatives and
programmes have been put in place to ensure prevention,
participation, protection and education for women and
girls. The humanitarian aid programme for eliminating
and responding to gender-based violence that we carried
out in collaboration with the United Nations Population
Fund is an example of such initiatives. We strongly
believe that women and children have a tremendously
important role to play in rebuilding Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tin (Myanmar): At the outset, my delegation
thanks the Spanish presidency for organizing this
important open debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2015/716) and the Executive
Director of UN-Women and others for their insightful
briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam who spoke on behalf of the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The fifteenth anniversary of the Council’s landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) presents us with the opportunity

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

to review the progress made and strengthen our resolve
to address the remaining challenges in alleviating the
impact of conflicts on women and girls. As the global
study has indicated, the nature of warfare today is
changing. Today, conflicts are becoming more complex,
and the number of major conflicts has risen drastically.
Brutal extremist terrorism has raised its ugly head and
become a major threat to global peace and security.
Due to their vulnerability, women and children are the
first group to bear the brunt of violent conflict. It has
therefore become all the more urgent to revitalize our
collective efforts to better protect women in conflict.
My delegation commends the United Nations for
keeping the issue of protecting women and girls high
on its agenda. Much has been done to implement key
aspects of the Council’s landmark resolution 1325
(2000). The creation of such institutions as UN-Women
should be counted as examples of very positive progress.
As the debate focuses on translating rhetoric to
effective results, my delegation wishes to share some
of the steps taken in Myanmar to address the issue at
hand. Sexual violence is a crime strongly abhorred by
our traditional values and strictly forbidden by law and
the culture of Myanmar. As such, severe legal action
is taken against perpetrators of all reported cases,
be they civilians or members of security forces. The
penal code strongly prescribes severe penalties for
committing sexual violence. We have put in place a
strong legal foundation for punishing violent sexual
crimes. Military personnel are given in-house training
to ensure compliance with the Military Act, codes of
conduct and relevant civil laws. Violent sexual crimes
are condemned — and not condoned — by law and
practice in Myanmar.
As a State party to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, Myanmar has taken a series of steps to
eliminate discrimination and violence against women
in accordance with the Convention. Institutions set up
to oversee the issue of women have been established.
A 10-year national strategic plan for the advancement
of women (2013-2023), which includes measures to
address violence against women, is being implemented.
Another significant step taken was the 5 June 2014
adoption by the Government of Myanmar of the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, initiated by the United Kingdom. It reflects
our renewed commitment to joining the international
community in advocating on this issue.

15-3130213/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Over the past four and a half years, the reforms
in Myanmar have promoted democratic values and
opened up society, creating greater political and media
freedom. They have given civil society and international
organizations greater opportunities to work more
actively and closely with Government institutions and
local communities in protecting women. Our newfound
media freedom has also had an impact on the people as
a whole, through its creation of a better environment
in which anyone can file a report without fear about
any wrongful act in which rights are abused. With the
cooperation of the United Nations, the Government
has taken steps to raise public awareness about the
importance of gender equality and the protection
of women. In October 2013, Myanmar organized
an open day on women and peace and security to
mark the anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
event promoted greater awareness of this landmark
resolution among the people, Government officials and
parliamentarians.
In Myanmar, civil society and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) are now able to actively
participate in activities aimed at preventing violence
against women, including conducting surveys and
research in order to obtain reliable data that can
facilitate measures against sexual violence. We have
organized seminars on violence against women across
the country. We are also working with UN-Women,
the United Nations Population Fund and NGOs to
implement projects that include improving female
victims’ access to justice and developing mechanisms
within communities to respond to acts of sexual
violence. In another bold step, the Government, in
cooperation with the United Nations, has been working
hard to enact a law combating violence against women
that is now in its final drafting stage. We hope that once
it is enacted, this important legislation will contribute
significantly to enhancing the protection of women and
girls against violence.
At the regional level, Myanmar is also working with
ASEAN member States to protect the rights of women
within the framework of ASEAN’s Commission on
the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children and the ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation.
As my delegation has frequently said, the best
way to end violence against women in situations of
armed conflict is to end those conflicts. Myanmar
firmly believes that without peace and reconciliation

14/33

14/10/2015

we cannot build a developed and democratic society.
We are therefore making sincere and serious efforts to
end the conflict that has plagued our country for more
than six decades, and we are making unprecedented
progress, since almost all our armed ethnic groups
have been agreed on the draft text of our nationwide
ceasefire agreement since 31 March 2014. Tomorrow the
agreement will be signed by the Government and those
armed ethnic groups that are ready to do so. It will mark
not only a milestone in our history but also a watershed
in our peacebuilding process and in our efforts to create
an environment conducive to eliminating the violent
impact of conflict on our people. We hope that the
ensuing political dialogue will encourage more women
to participate in the process. The needs of vulnerable
groups, including women and children, must also be
given special consideration.
In our universal condemnation of acts of violence
against women, we must be sure not to encourage
exploitation of this emotive issue as a tool for one’s
own political agenda. Myanmar welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations to advance the agenda on women
and peace and security. In doing so, we believe that
the United Nations must work with Member States
by taking a cooperative approach in assisting them
with national capacity-building and helping them to
effectively address the gaps and challenges remaining
in their policies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and on arranging this open debate on the
issue of women and peace and security.
Today, I proudly recollect our sweet memory of the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
during the Bangladesh’s presidency of the Council, when
we worked to improve justice, ensuring that rape was
listed as a crime against humanity under Bangladesh’s
1973 International Crimes (Tribunals) Act, leading the
drive for a zero-tolerance approach to sexual abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping, and nurturing a culture
of peace. This was the first resolution on social issues
that incorporated a broad narrative for victims of
violence, trauma, stigmatization and rape, as well as
the illegitimate children of rape victims.

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

The main pillars of resolution 1325 (2000)
are ensuring women’s increased participation in
decision-making; their involvement in mechanisms
aimed at preventing, managing and resolving conflicts;
their engagement in peace negotiations and their
mainstreaming into peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations, with an emphasis on training and raising
awareness about sexually transmitted diseases such as
HIV/AIDS.
Fifteen years later, many credible reports state
that violence against women and girls is on the rise.
Women and girls continue to suffer most as victims
of conflicts, while they generally do not benefit from
the dividends of peace processes. Women and girls
are viewed as bearers of cultural and ethnic identities
and thus become prime targets for the perpetrators of
violence. The onus therefore lies on us to ensure that
the oppression of women and girls, particularly through
gender-related acts, is stopped forever.
It is our firm conviction that our deliberations today
will result in concrete proposals and specific guidelines
that will have an important bearing on our continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We are
all aware that poverty, deprivation, marginalization,
discrimination, socioeconomic injustices and, even more
importantly, the politics of subjugation and supremacy
lie at the heart of conflicts and violence, and that women,
unfortunately, are always at the receiving end of the
consequences of such social inequities, political games
and exhibitions of leadership ego. I therefore call on
my colleagues to make specific proposals and propose
concrete measures that will require us to take stock,
nationally and internationally, of ways to end violence
against women and the proliferation of the conflicts
that may haunt us all, create uncertainty and chaos and
have the potential to sweep away our achievements and
our sense of stability and security.
We recognize that empowering women means
ensuring that they command resources and a leadership
capability adequate to efficient management of those
resources. We therefore emphasize the importance of
meeting women’s economic needs and engaging them
at all levels and in all forms of the decision-making
process. The former can be achieved by ensuring
women’s access to and participation in areas related
to income generation and entrepreneurship, such as
microfinancing, education, vocational training and
public health; the latter through their engagement in
positions of influence, and particularly, for example, in

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

senior United Nations positions, including those at the
level of assistant secretary-general, under-secretarygeneral, special representative and so forth.
For a proper understanding of the issues, and
sensitivity to cultural, ethnic and religious needs,
recruits from countries of the South should be
considered for such positions. Secondly, for effective
coordination with staff working in the field, we should
ensure that troop- and police-contributing countries are
fairly represented, as has previously been discussed in
the General Assembly.
The principal responsibility for protecting women
falls within the purview of national Governments.
Any action taken by the international community
must therefore be consistent with national policies,
guidelines and action plans. In that context, I deem it
a privilege to make a few remarks concerning women’s
empowerment based on my national perspective.
The education of girls is a vehicle for their
advancement, and the Government of Bangladesh
has therefore waived tuition fees for female students
up to grade 12. By providing women with improved
health care, the child mortality rate at birth has been
reduced by 72 per cent and the maternal mortality
rate by two-thirds. Women have also been provided
with a door-to-door family-planning service, which
continues to guide women on sexual and various social
issues, including converting one’s house into a farm by
producing household vegetables and poultry, and on
other family welfare social benefits. It was envisaged
as a development package.
The Government is implementing a number
of projects to develop women’s capabilities. They
include a vulnerable group development programme,
collateral-free loans, micro-credit, skills training,
including computer skills, product display centres,
and so on. Women registered for a vulnerable group
development programme and hired for rural works
receive skills training and credit, or some simple
capital machinery, such as a sewing machine, so that
they can set up their own small enterprise. Many
affirmative actions have been taken that help women
in distress and old age. In order to include women in
decision-making, the Government has adopted a quota
system for women in the national legislative assembly
and in the recruitment process of all civil and police
services.

15-3130215/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

To assist women in distress, the Government has
established one-stop crisis cells in 40 districts and
one-stop crisis centres in all divisional medical college
hospitals. The Government has also set up a DNAprofiling lab and a national trauma counseling centre.
In the legal field, several laws have been enacted
to protect women. This includes the Domestic Violence
Act, 2010; the Domestic Violence Prevention and
Protection Rules, 2013; and DNA Rules, 2014. A draft
is being prepared to enact a child marriage control act.
We have also enacted the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1980.
I note that, in order to implement the Prevention of
Oppression against Women and Children Act, 2000, a
Women and Children Oppression Prevention Tribunal
has been set up in each district so that cases can be
tried rapidly.
Today, women occupy the top political leadership
in Bangladesh. Our Prime Minister, Speaker of the
National Parliament, Deputy Leader of the House,
Minister of Agriculture, the State Minister for Women
and Children Affairs are all female leaders. In addition,
the leader of the opposition is also a woman. More
importantly, for the quarter-century since 1991, both
leaders of the House and the opposition have been
women. In addition, there is a silent and comprehensive
women’s empowerment ongoing throughout the country,
especially in the rural areas. Nearby 14,000 women
have been elected in local elections and the female
participation rate in the labour market has jumped
from 7 per cent to 36 per cent. They are becoming
economically independent and the surge is helping
them to be empowered and engaged in nation-building.
The Constitution of Bangladesh guarantees equality
of men and women within the broad framework of
non-discrimination on the grounds of religion, race or
gender. The father of the nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, the founder of sovereign Bangladesh,
grounded gender equality in the basic principles of
democracy.
With regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security, we take pride in our modest
contribution of troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Our policy decision to recruit
women in police and military amply demonstrates
our commitment to women’s empowerment nationally
and in the United Nations maintenance of peace and
security. We are pleased that we have deployed two
full contingents of an all-female formed police unit to
Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am
16/33

14/10/2015

pleased to inform the Council that our all-male troop
contingents are fully briefed on the gender issue. The
good news is that none of our peacekeepers have been
involved in sexual exploitation and abuse.
We place special emphasis on promoting
and supporting women’s active and meaningful
participation in all peace processes, as well as on their
representation in formal and informal decision-making;
improving partnerships and networking with local and
international groups working in the field; and recruiting
and appointing women to senior positions. We commit
to putting forward as many female candidates as we
can in the future to serve the international community
under the United Nations system.
In conclusion, I would reiterate that we have made
our best efforts to ensure women’s empowerment and
participation in all spheres of life. We know that much
more needs to be done. We are open to replicate any
good practices in our national policy, and we are ready
to suitably share our experience with others. I hope that
the Council’s deliberations will help develop specific
proposals, a clear message and concrete suggestions
that would demonstrate its commitment to women’s
empowerment and challenge us all to achieve our goals
of gender parity and women’s engagement to create a
peaceful world for all of us.
Almost 95 years ago, our national poet, Kazi
Nazrul Islam, wrote that whatever great or benevolent
achievements there are in the world, half of them were
by women, the other half by man. Therefore, we must
be fully engaged for the good of humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their briefings to no more
than four minutes so that the Council can carry out its
work efficiently.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I am pleased to express our
appreciation to you for dedicating this open debate to the
women and peace and security agenda. I also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), as
well as the global study on the implementation of 1325
(2000).
My country accords special attention to gender
issues, as reflected in our actions leading to the adoption
and implementation of a number of plans and strategies,

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

including a women’s strategy for the period 2003-2027,
a national strategy to combat violence against women,
a national policy to empower women, and a national
plan for the advancement of women. The Government
has also established a unit to combat violence against
women and an independent human rights commission,
in conformity with the Paris Principles. Women chair
both the unit and the commission.
The Government has focused its attention on
preventing violence against women, particularly in the
camps for internally displaced persons in Darfur, Blue
Nile and South Kordofan states, in cooperation with the
United Nations Population Fund and the human rights
division of the United Nations country team in my
country. The Government has directed the ProsecutorGeneral for Darfur to investifate all alleged violations
committed since the eruption of the conflict in 2003,
particularly those relating to women and children.
Women have been basic partners in the
parliamentary and presidential elections in terms of
voting and preparation. They occupy 30 per cent of
the elected seats in Parliament. Women have held
the vice-presidency and chaired a number of main
parliamentary committees. Since the early 1950s,
women have been guaranteed the vote and appointments
to Government posts. With regard to participation in
political life, women have run for the post of President.
Currently, they occupy important leadership positions,
including as advisers to the President, ministers at the
state and federal levels, leadership positions on womenrelated issues and heads of other Government agencies.
In order to avert the dangers of human trafficking
to which women and children are subject, and given the
fact that the Sudan is a transit State through its outlying
desert, my Government has enacted a national law on
human trafficking, especially in relation to women
and children. In October, my capital hosted a regional
conference to combat human trafficking in the Horn
of Africa that was well attended by United Nations,
international and regional representatives, who adopted
and issued the Khartoum Declaration on the African
Union-Horn of Africa Initiative on Human Trafficking
and Smuggling of Migrants. It is our hope that the United
Nations and the international community will assist in
the implementation of the Khartoum Declaration by
providing financial support to the States of the region.
My Government has also signed a number of treaties
concerning protection of its borders with neighbouring
States.

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

With regard to achieving economic empowerment,
the Government has established programmes to promote
rural women’s development, including in the camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs). It has undertaken
projects aimed at women’s economic empowerment,
such as a revolving fund and a career programme
for women. In the informal sector, it has established
microfunding projects, in view of the fact that men’s
share of property and inheritance often exceeds that of
women.
Regarding the basic services, evidence and
indicators reveal that the number of girls enrolled in
higher education exceeds that of boys. Women have
access to health care services in cooperation with
the United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF;
consequently, maternal and child mortality rates have
declined.
We continue to make substantial efforts to deliver
assistance and basic services to IDPs affected by
conflict in Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan states.
While there is not enough time to enumerate all such
assistance, those efforts have been fruitful. However,
they have also been hamprered by the intransigence of
rebel movements that continue to impede the delivery
of assistance to areas under their control.
My Government, in cooperation with neighbouring
States, is striving to promote the voluntary return of
its refugees and restore IDPs to their villages. In line
with resolution 1325 (2000), I call for the adoption of a
comprehensive approach to addressing issues of women
and peace and security, taking into consideration the
need to end conflict by prioritizing and assisting
reconstruction, the repatriation of IDPs and assistance
to affected States in addressing all matters related to
that important dossier.
All restrictions that continue to impede national
efforts, such as imposed deadlines and unilateral
sanctions, must be lifted. With regard to reporting, I
call for the need to verify the accuracy of information,
which must be shared with the Government of the
concerned State before it is incorporated into reports.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Roopnarine (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago is pleased to contribute to this open debate
on the historic 15-year review of resolution 1325 (2000)
on the women and peace and security agenda. It is

15-3130217/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

symbolic that this 15-year commemoration is taking
place only three days after the global observance of the
International Day of the Girl Child. It is also noteworthy
that a few weeks ago the international community
adopted the most comprehensive universal agenda for
sustainable development.
We, the States Members of the Organization, bear
the responsibility for implementing the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly Goal 5, which mirrors
the subject of this debate — gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls. Trinidad and Tobago
is fully committed to the goal of gender equality. For
us, the empowerment of women is an integral part of
national development, as well as an essential pillar in
the maintenance of sustainable peace.
Trinidad and Tobago is committed to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, my
country introduced, and since then has been the main
sponsor of the first General Assembly resolution on
women’s participation at the decision-making level in
matters related to disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control. Since its introduction, the resolution has
received the support of a majority of Member States. It
was formulated in the context of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
General Assembly resolution 69/61 seeks to
highlight women not merely as victims of violence,
but as empowered and indispensable actors in
decision-making efforts to address the issue of
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.
Trinidad and Tobago is pleased that the language
contained in that resolution is reflective of the Arms
Trade Treaty and its provisions on gender-based
violence or violence against women and girls.
At the national level, the equal rights of women
and men are guaranteed under the Constitution
of my country. The national policy on gender and
development is the overarching framework that guides
the Government of Trinidad and Tobago in promoting
the full and equal participation of women and men in
the national development process. Equal opportunities
exist for women’s participation at the decision-making
level in matters regarding peace and security. It is
underscored by the ascendancy of women to the senior
ranks of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and the
three contingents of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence
Force.

18/33

14/10/2015

At the regional level, we have worked with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs on
initiatives to strengthen the participatory role played
by Latin American and Caribbean women in combating
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We
have also hosted a number of initiatives in conjunction
with the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, to provide disarmament and
arms-control training to security personnel, including
women.
My country pledges its commitment to continue
to work with the United Nations in advancing and
empowering women at the global level. Consequently,
Trinidad and Tobago has submitted its candidature
for the Executive Board of UN-Women for the period
2017-2019, during elections to take place within the
Economic and Social Council in 2016. We kindly
request the support of the members of ECOSOC for that
important candidature.
Finally, Trinidad and Tobago takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its commitment to the advancement and
empowerment of women. We reiterate our commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
look forward to the next 15-year review.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I, too, wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this matter before the Council
and for being a champion of this issue throughout the
year. As a country that co-sponsored resolution 2242
(2015), which was adopted yesterday, we are fully
committed to being engaged with the matter.
I also would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the other high-level briefers for their briefings of
yesterday.
We strongly believe that women’s rights and
gender equality are not only a human rights topic, but
also an important peace and security issue. Although
maintaining international peace and security is central
to our Organization and especially for the Council, today
we face far too often situations when the fundamental
norms of international, humanitarian and human rights
law, as well as other universally recognized principles,
are blatantly abused. Georgia condemns in the strongest
terms, all cases of violations of women’s rights and

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

discrimination, both in wartime and in peacetime,
whether committed by State or non-State actors.
Despite the broad understanding of the nature of
the problem and the numerous efforts made at all levels
to address them, we have yet to see tangible progress
on the ground. Women and girls continue to fall victim
to acts of violence, murder, maiming and arbitrary
detention committed by parties to conflicts across the
globe. Boko Haram’s abduction of hundreds of women
and girls in Chibok and the kidnappings in Syria and
Iraq committed by Daesh and other terrorist groups
are glaring examples of the types of gross violations
to which women in armed conflict are subjected.
The areas controlled by non-State actors and terrorist
groups, as well as territories under illegal foreign
military occupation, are zones of grave risk for women,
with imminent threats to their lives posed by actors that
operate in total denial of internationally recognized
legal norms.
We need to act adequately and make use of all
United Nations tools and mechanisms to respond to the
existing challenges. We need to embark on a elaborative,
holistic approach, but at the same time remain sensitive
to nuance and detail. We need to address women’s
rights at the international and regional levels but
simultaneously remain focused on individual countries.
As we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, Georgia has its own
story to share with the international community. By
adopting a national action plan on women and peace
and security for the period 2012-2015, Georgia became
one of 49 countries to have a separate policy document
devoted to this important issue. The Government of
Georgia plans to renew the aforementioned action
plan in the very near future. Moreover, 2015 has
been declared the Year of Women in Georgia, as we
remain committed to robust actions to reform our
domestic gender legislation, including by undertaking
a number of legislative changes and introducing new
laws, which are in line with international standards and
fully correspond to our commitments. In that regard,
the adoption of an anti-discrimination law was an
important, milestone achievement.
In 2013, the Parliament of Georgia adopted a
domestic violence action plan for 2013-2015, followed
by a national action plan on gender equality for
2014-2016, in compliance with the Council of Europe’s

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

gender equality strategy for the same years. The plan
is aimed at combating gender stereotypes and violence
against women and guaranteeing equal access to justice.
In addition, Georgia recently signed the the Council
of Europe convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence, and we
plan to ratify it in the very near future.
As this year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, I would like to reiterate Georgia’s strong
commitment to the advancement of women. Recently,
alongside 87 Member States, Georgia committed
to further improving gender equality for the full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action at the Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment.
As an illustration of our strong commitment to
the advancement of women, in collaboration with the
United Nations and the European Union, on 9 and
10 November we plan to organize an international
high-level conference on meeting gender equality
challenges and opportunities in the European
Neighbourhood Policy in Tbilisi, Georgia. We believe
that the empowerment of women stands at the centre of
sustainable development. In that regard, we once again
welcome the stand-alone and cross-cutting gender
equality Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly 70/1), adopted at the
Sustainable Development Summit last month.
Unfortunately, the human rights situation, in
general, and the situation with regard to women’s and
children’s rights and gender equality in particular,
remain a serious challenge in the Georgian territories
that are under illegal Russian military occupation.
Specifically, women in the occupied regions continue to
suffer grave violations of their fundamental rights and
freedoms, such as the freedom of movement, the right
to education in their native language and other political,
economic, civil, social and cultural rights to which
they are entitled under the Constitution of Georgia,
the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other
international mechanisms. The humanitarian situation
in the occupied territories requires immediate attention,
especially since no international organization has been
allowed to monitor the human rights situation there. We
therefore call on the Russian Federation once again to
abide by the August 2008 ceasefire agreement.

15-3130219/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to extend my gratitude
to United Nations agencies, especially to UN-Women,
for their invaluable assistance in the process of the
empowerment of women in my country. Alongside
other United Nations Member States, Georgia once
again reiterates its commitment to further promoting
gender equality and the enjoyment of all human rights
and freedoms by all women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I take this
opportunity to congratulate Spain on its initiative to
convene this important open debate on women and
peace and security, marking the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Security Council’s engagement with the
issues of women and peace and security has greatly
contributed to our common efforts to improving the
lives of women in conflict situations around the world.
The resolutions adopted by the Council have created a
comprehensive body of norms and stimulated progress
on the protection and promotion of women’s rights.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the first document of the
Security Council that reflected in detail the impact of
conflicts on women during armed conflicts and in their
aftermath, and in particular on the important issue of
ensuring the equal participation of women in peace
processes and their protection from the devastating
consequences of armed conflicts. In the context of
armed conflict, parties must respect their obligations
under international, humanitarian and human rights law
to protect civilians, especially women and girls. The
continued practice of using gender-based violence as a
tactic of war is both legally and morally unacceptable.
As we have stated on a number of occasions, wrongs
that have been left unpunished or unrecognized may
impede progress in achieving long-awaited peace and
reconciliation. Such wrongs can also play a key role in
the eruption of new conflicts and the commission of new
crimes. Our consistent focus on that particular aspect
of the problem is based on my country’s experience in
addressing the tragic humanitarian consequences of
the war unleashed against it, including mass atrocities
committed by armed enemy forces, forced population
displacement in Azerbaijan and the continuing military
occupation of its territories.
Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation of
all acts of sexual violence committed against women

20/33

14/10/2015

and girls in situations of armed conflict. There can be
no tolerance for such acts, and all necessary measures
must be taken to bring the perpetrators to justice and to
put an end to impunity. The scourge of sexual violence
in armed conflict has rightly been the subject of the
Council’s attention.
Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, have received the
attention they deserve or a response at the international
and regional levels. Measures that are more resolute and
targeted are required to end impunity in such situations.
Commitments to protection must be free of selectivity
and politically motivated approaches and preferences.
While addressing different aspects of the women
and peace and security agenda, it is necessary
to recognize the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, humanitarian responses and postconflict reconstruction. We are called upon to focus on
the importance of furthering the equal rights of women
and their right to equal participation in decision-making.
Essential work is being carried out for the
reintegration of internally displaced women into society
and the promotion of their participation in political,
economic and public life in Azerbaijan. Recently
Azerbaijan launched a regional project on the theme
“Women for conflict prevention and peacebuilding in
the South Caucasus”, aimed at strengthening advocacy
work for an increased role of Azerbaijani women in
decision-making in conflict prevention and resolution
at the national, regional and international levels.
Azerbaijan remains committed to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and is
proud to have made a contribution to the work of the
Security Council during its presidency in October
2013, including the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013).
In accordance with that resolution, an informative
and comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/716) has been issued recently. The global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
presented yesterday, is a fundamental piece of research
that deserves our high commendation and attention.
We look forward to participating in further
deliberations and activities on this extraordinarily
important topic in order to advance the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda established
by the adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000).

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I congratulate the Spanish presidency of the
Council on having organized this important open
debate on women and peace and security, marking the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). Tunisia is pleased to participate in this debate
and takes this opportunity to reaffirm its support for
the objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000), which
my country is proud to have co-sponsored.
The adoption of this resolution constitutes a
major step. It addresses not only the impact of armed
conflict on women and the importance of their active
participation in the peace process, but it also highlights
the disproportionate violence they suffer in armed
conflicts.
We are pleased to see today a growing awareness
of the multifaceted discrimination against women in
conflict, an awareness that has resulted in significant
efforts to address it. In our opinion, it is important that
women, who, together with children and the elderly, are
the first victims of armed conflict, be given a leading
role in maintaining and consolidating peace and,
even more urgent, in preventive processes, which also
deserve special attention.
Significant progress has been achieved in that
regard since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
such as the appointment of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the creation of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, the list of shame and
the deployment of advisers and experts responsible for
the protection of women in peacekeeping missions.
We also have at our disposal a more robust normative
framework for women and peace and security, which is
further bolstered by resolution 2242 (2015), which the
Council adopted yesterday and which we co-sponsored.
Other measures have been taken to improve the
implementation of the resolution at the level of the
regional organizations to which we belong, including
the elaboration by the League of Arab States of a
regional strategy on women and peace and security and
the launch of a five-year programme, in 2014, by the
African Union Commission, entitled “Gender, Peace
and Security”. However, it must be noted that, despite
the progress achieved, much remains to be done to
achieve the objectives set out in the agenda on women

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

and peace and security. Therefore, we believe that the
Security Council must remain seized of this matter and
take the necessary steps to ensure the protection of
women and their full and effective participation in the
various stages of the peace process.
That is all the more urgent in the context of the
emergence of new unconventional conflicts and the
expansion of their zone of impact, conflicts which are
related to the proliferation of terrorism and violent
extremism, where women are deliberately targeted and
their fundamental rights — indeed their rights, full
stop — are violated. In that respect, Tunisia strongly
supports the incorporation of the issue of women’s
rights violations, including sexual violence, under the
criteria triggering the imposition of targeted sanctions.
We also believe that all national stakeholders, including
civil society, should be able to actively contribute to
the promotion of the peace process, as a State can
only lay a solid foundation for a lasting peace with the
involvement and support of all its citizens.
Our own national experience, which has made
dialogue, compromise and the active participation of
civil society the modus operandi of crisis management,
has enabled us to avoid any detrimental drift of our
democratic transition process. This approach of
the Tunisian national dialogue quartet, led by the
permanent institutions of Tunisian civil society, was
recently awarded the prestigious Nobel Peace Prize in
2015. That Prize honours my country and commends
the various components of our civil society.
As mentioned in the global study on the impact
of women in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
civil society is a key partner in post-conflict situations
and can contribute significantly to strengthening early
warning mechanisms, thereby making it possible to
anticipate an escalation of violence against women
and to raise awareness initiatives in that regard. That
is why it is important to further mobilize support for
the efforts of civil society organizations in conflict and
post-conflict situations. There is also a need to maintain
a sustained dialogue with civil society organizations in
thematic debates and in the deliberations concerning
specific countries.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my country
remains available to the United Nations for any action
within the framework of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other international instruments aimed
at consolidating women’s full participation in the

15-3130221/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

decision-making process and enshrining a culture of
respect for women’s rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate. Many important anniversaries converge in the
year 2015, creating critical momentum and presenting
us with a unique opportunity to push harder, strive even
farther and achieve far more than we had envisioned
for the next 15 years. This meeting comes at a decisive
juncture in our year-long assessment of past actions,
implementation gaps, good practices and overall
accomplishments, where re-evaluating the progress
made is of vital importance and the reinforcement of
our dedication to the implementation of the set goals is
as crucial as ever.
Fifteen years ago the Council not only recognized
the urgent need to address the devastating impact
conflicts have on women and girls around the world,
but also the importance of the inclusion of wider gender
components in the peace and security agenda. It was an
official acknowledgment of women’s right to participate
in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and to be included in
decision-making bodies at all levels of governance.
The Council followed up its action on this front
with number of subsequent resolutions that build upon
international and national historic commitments to
women’s rights and gender equality, requiring a level
of commitment to their full implementation from
all major stakeholders. Responsibility, however, lies
primarily with Member States to integrate resolution
1325 (2000) and other women and peace and security
resolutions into regional and national policies and
programmes to ensure that their implementation is
coherent, sustainable and results-oriented.
At this moment, the need for stronger and more
complete implementation of the parameters of resolution
1325 (2000) and guidelines is disturbingly evident in
long-lasting, ongoing and even newly emerged conflict
around the world. It is becoming more and more
apparent that the vision and agenda of resolution 1325
(2000) needs to be constantly built and improved upon,
as even the substantial framework we have created has
been continuously confronted with new and ever-more
challenging risk factors, deteriorating humanitarian
situations in the wake of conflicts, persistent disrespect

22/33

14/10/2015

and disregard for women’s rights in a number of
countries and the continued violence against their
person, both physical and emotional.
It requires our continuous vigilance, with a sharper
focus on prevention and mechanisms that place human
rights at the core of the security, protection, political,
humanitarian, peacebuilding and socioeconomic
development work and agenda. What we note with
alarm, as pointed out in this year’s annual report
(S/2015/716) of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security, that key findings of the global
study, the report of the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and the report (S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture all identify blatant
violations of human rights and humanitarian law,
complex drivers of conflict, the involvement of a
growing number of non-State armed actors and new
technologies and transnational connections, which are
changing the nature of warfare.
It is for those reasons that we welcome the highlevel review and the global study on the implementation
of the resolution 1325 (2000), as it further underscores
the importance of gender equality, the human
rights of women and girls and empowerment being
systematically integrated into all discussions and future
actions. Furthermore, we hope it will provide for strong
and meaningful impetus for transforming efforts into
viable actions on the ground, where it matters most.
We are particularly pleased that Bosnia and
Herzegovina contributed constructively to the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and that regional consultations with the Balkan
countries, including their experiences, challenges and
recommendations, have been considered critical to
charting the way towards a future commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda.
For Bosnia and Herzegovina, gender equality
and the empowerment of women remain a priority,
both at the national and international levels. We have
created a solid legal and institutional framework for
the advancement of gender equality, in which the
State requires affirmative measures aimed at realizing
gender equality. Both the national gender action plan
for the period 2013-2017 and the system-wide action
plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2014-2017 define
priority measures for improvements and advancement
in line with the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Action and the overall 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).
That framework has been further strengthened
with the adoption of the framework strategy for the
implementation of the Council of Europe Convention
on preventing and combating violence against women
and domestic violence, with the sole purpose of
providing for consistent, high-quality and effective
implementation of that Convention in the territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We realize that much more remains to be done in
a number of identified key areas of concern, through
a stronger commitment translated into concrete action.
For that reason, allow me to recall the commitments
undertaken by the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the Global Leaders Meeting
on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment, held
in September. There must be prompt implementation
of the Framework Strategy for the Implementation of
the Istanbul Convention, which addresses three main
priority areas of concern, namely, the greater inclusion
of women and the reduction of women’s segregation
in the labour market, the prevention of domestic
violence and, finally, support for the women victims
of sexual violence in conflict. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is committed to achieving those objectives in our joint
efforts for the full realization of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Finally, allow me to commend the dedication of three
extraordinary women who have been at the forefront
of women’s empowerment and equality: Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women;
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and the lead author of the global study, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and former Special Rapporteur on violence against
women. We thank them for their ongoing tireless work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I commend the Spanish
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
open debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and to acknowledge the contributions
of the Executive Director of UN-Women and the other
representatives.

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark resolution
that rightly focused on the differing impact of armed
conflict on women and girls and their exclusion from
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
There is undoubtedly an inextricable link between
gender inequality and international peace and security.
Sri Lanka has emerged from a 30-year conflict
that left deep-seated scars in our society and torn
apart the socioeconomic fabric of our nation. Women
were major victims of that conflict. A new President
and Government were elected in January, committed
to democratic values and to Sri Lanka moving
forward as an engaged member of the international
community. We have already begun taking steps aimed
at achieving meaningful reconciliation, strengthening
democratic institutions, good governance, the rule
of law and confidence-building among communities
affected by conflict for many years. We have renewed
our commitment to gender equality and women’s
empowerment.
Historically, Sri Lanka has made strides in the area
of women’s empowerment. Universal adult franchise
was introduced in Sri Lanka in 1931. Free education
for both boys and girls and free health care were
introduced very early after independence in 1948. Sri
Lanka adopted a women’s charter two years before the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. And we
have in place a national action plan on women, which is
currently being updated.
Yet we know that more remains to be done. Sri
Lanka takes very seriously and as a matter of urgent
priority the responsibility of ensuring the promotion
and protection of the rights of women, including with
regard to conflict-related sexual violence and sexual
exploitation and abuse. Sri Lanka’s new Government
has demonstrated the political will not merely to make
international commitment statements, but also to make
time-bound national commitments with a view to their
speedy and effective implementation.
We are aware that the long drawn-out conflict has
resulted in a large number of victims — orphans, war
widows, single mothers and female-headed households.
We are committed to addressing their immediate
concerns and making them participants in all areas
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Successful
peacebuilding requires gender equality and women’s
empowerment, security, human rights and development

15-3130223/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to mesh together. Financial stability is also an important
factor in that regard.
It is also vital that we engage domestic actors from
the grass roots to the highest echelons of Government
to ensure ownership of the peacebuilding processes
and to guarantee long-term sustainability. In all those
endeavours, we are committed to including women as
essential participants in the conversation. That can be
done only by acknowledging the existence of structural
institutionalized gender bias, identifying the problems
and sincerely seeking solutions.
For over five decades, Sri Lanka has been making
modest contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts. Sri Lanka acknowledges the importance of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are
committed to purposefully including women at all levels
of those processes, including at the decision-making
and policymaking stages. We are equally committed
to including our highly trained and disciplined female
forces in peacekeeping efforts.
We welcome the formal launch today of the
publication of the global study on women and peace and
security. We congratulate the contributors and experts
and the lead author, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We
will closely review the recommendations in the global
study to further the shared goal of women remaining at
the centre of the peace process.
I wish to assure the Council that as we proceed
with our reconciliation and peacebuilding process with
the active participation of women at all levels, we will
continue to share our experiences and best practices,
especially in relation to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): My delegation commends
the Government of Spain for convening this highlevel review on women and peace and security, which
coincides with the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). We were privileged to have
had the presence of the President of Spain yesterday and
to hear insightful briefings by the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the three women representatives of
civil society organizations. We have been enriched by
their testimony.
Just 15 years ago, when the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), Liberia was embroiled in civil

24/33

14/10/2015

conflict. Our journey to peace bears testimony to the
vital contribution of women to peace, security and
conflict resolution. The positive impact of the presence
of Liberian women at the negotiations in 2003, which
led to the comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
is well documented and requires no further elaboration.
Suffice it to say, the Government of Liberia continues
to provide opportunities for women to participate
in ongoing processes of peacebuilding and peace
consolidation.
Based on our national experience, we embraced
resolution 1325 (2000) and set out to apply it within
our domestic context. In 2009, Liberia was the first
country in Africa to complete the formulation of its
five-year national action plan to give meaning to the
resolution. The plan was developed as the framework
to drive the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
at the national level. It rests upon four pillars, namely,
protection, prevention, participation and empowerment
and promotion.
Working in collaboration with UN-Women and other
United Nations agencies, as well as bilateral partners
and civil society organizations, significant progress has
been made in the implementation of the resolution in
Liberia. Such progress includes the creation of a civil
society observatory on resolution 1325 (2000) and the
establishment of the Angie Brooks International Centre
for training women in leadership, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. A Special Criminal Court E was
established in Monrovia in 2008 for the adjudication
of cases of sexual and gender-based violence. Under a
joint programme of the Government of Liberia and the
United Nations, psychosocial, medical and economic
support is being provided for survivors of rape and
sexual and gender-based violence offenses.
The economic empowerment of women and
adolescent girls continues to be supported through
microcredit, agricultural schemes and training iin
business and life skills. To complement the active
participation of women at the national level, the
Government has integrated a gender perspective
into the decentralization process, which will open
up opportunities for women to serve in leadership
positions at subnational and local levels. Clearly, much
has been achieved, but so much more needs to be done.
Many challenges persist, and are impediments to the
resolution’s successful implementation in Liberia.
Foremost among them are inadequate financial

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

resources, lack of capacity, a weak justice system and
poor coordination among the relevant stakeholders.
As we move towards achieving inclusive
development, through which we hope that women
will enjoy full participation across every sector, the
Government of Liberia will undertake the following
measures before the end of the current Administration.
First, in order to strengthen women’s protection,
the Government will ensure the passage into law of
the draft domestic violence act, which was endorsed by
the Liberian Cabinet on 15 June and which is currently
under consideration by the Liberia National Legislature.
Secondly, the Government commits to ensuring
that the outcome of the ongoing constitutional review
process will guarantee and institutionalize women’s
full and equal participation in governance and national
affairs.
Thirdly, to improve women’s access to justice
throughout the country, the Government commits to
working with the judiciary to initiate the decentralization
of Criminal Court E to all counties of the country, so
that rural-based sexual and gender-based violence
survivors may have recourse.
Fourthly, the Government commits to implement its
decision to establish gender units within each ministry
and agency of the Government.
The Government of Liberia resolves to increase
its allocation in the national budget to support the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) across
the country, with the aim of reinforcing economic
empowerment programmes and expanding their
coverage for the benefit of women and girls in rural
areas. That is critical for the achievement of the
objectives of our national agenda for transformation.
Finally, the Government, through the Ministry
of Gender, Children and Social Protection and in
collaboration with partners, is conducting a review of
the national action plan to develop a bridging strategy to
address gaps in implementation. The Government has
also embarked upon the revitalization of the resolution
1325 (2000) secretariat through the recruitment,
retention and training of staff and the provision of
funding.
As this is a critical time in Liberia’s recovery
process from the Ebola health crisis, we count on
the continuing support of international partners to

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

translate those commitments into reality. We express
special recognition and gratitude to UN-Women for the
steadfast and consistent support it has provided to our
gender equality initiatives. We believe that resolution
2242 (2015), adopted yesterday and which we were
privileged to co-sponsor, offers a new framework as
well as new opportunities for global collaboration to
achieve the goals of the women and peace and security
agenda. Liberia commits to remain engaged.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me first to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this highlevel meeting on an issue that is of central importance
to the maintenance of peace and security, namely, the
central role of women. Allow me also to express my
Government’s appreciation for the initiative launched
by the Secretary-General in the form of the global study
and for the work carried out on that study.
Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized that women and
girls are affected differently by conflict. At the same
time, they have a vital contribution to make to the
achievement of sustainable peace. The brutal conflicts
that have emerged in recent years have magnified the
already considerable challenges faced by women and
girls. Indeed, rape and sexual abuse have become
ever more common as weapons of choice in war. And
denigration or denial of women’s rights is not only a
by-product of conflict but now a war aim among some
non-State actors, such as Boko Haram and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.
Many good proposals have emerged from the
global study. We strongly agree with the assessment
that it is necessary to move from an ad hoc approach to
implementation to establishing more structure. Useful
concrete proposals include designating sexual violence
as a criterion for sanctions and establishing an informal
expert group under the Security Council to ensure that
there is information and monitoring. Including gender
experts in all sanctions expert groups would strengthen
implementation. All United Nations Special Envoy
teams should include women in high-level positions.
Financing is of course key. We have heard
proposals that at least 15 per cent of peacekeeping
funding should be directed towards the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000). From our point of view, 15 per
cent should be seen as an absolute floor, not the ceiling.
As to Iceland, over 20 per cent of our contributions

15-3130225/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

14/10/2015

towards peacebuilding in 2014 had gender equality
and women’s empowerment as their primary objective.
That is a level we intend to maintain over the coming
years, along with ensuring that other contributions
strengthen gender equality and women’s empowerment
in a significant way. In that respect, 71 per cent of
Iceland’s total contributions towards peacebuilding in
2014 had gender equality and women’s empowerment
as the primary, or at least a significant, objective.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Some progress has
been achieved over the past 15 years in the global
efforts to protect women from violence and to promote
the role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflict, and in the construction of stable and just
societies. Today we need to consider which practical
steps should be taken in order to translate into reality
our commitments on this vital agenda.

Iceland deploys civilian experts to the field through
the Icelandic Crisis Response Unit. In 2011, after several
years’ effort, we achieved gender balance, where an
equal number of experts of each gender were seconded
to the field for an equal amount of time. We are on
track to maintaining that balance. Before deployment,
all seconded personnel receive education on gender
equality and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Montenegro welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/716), which demonstrates that attention to
the issue of women and peace and security is increasing
across the board. We also welcome today’s resolution
2242 (2015), which confirms the determination of
States to make further efforts in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda.

In 2008, Iceland adopted its first national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Following a review in 2012, a second national action
plan was adopted. A third action plan will be ready
next year. That shows that implementation is indeed a
continuous work-in-progress.

The issue of women and peace and security poses a
challenging task. Armed conflicts often affect women
and children more negatively than they do men. They
lose access to basic services and to education and
economic opportunities, and, increasingly, they are
subjected to sexual violence. The harsh reality is that,
in many conflict areas today, it is more dangerous to be
a woman than a soldier.

Needless to say, the Security Council must be
the centre of the push for effective implementation.
It needs to be more active and to show political will
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). I would like
to pay tribute to those delegations on the Council that
have pushed this issue forward.

Women’s voices are distinctively underrepresented
on issues that concern them, including armed conflicts
as one of the most critical challenges that they are facing
today. Because women do not get a chance to make their
views known, the needs, interests and views of half of
the world’s population are not taken into account.

Finally, having put the spotlight on the role of the
Security Council, it is vital that other organizations
involved in peacekeeping and conflict zones also
ensure implementation. Examples would be NATO, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the African Union. The full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will require the efforts of all.

The potential of women to facilitate the process
of conflict resolution and peacebuilding is often
unrealized, thus undermining the effectiveness and
sustainability of peace initiatives. Experience shows
that female experts can provide additional lines of
communication to local communities that are not
open to male soldiers. They help in building trust and
confidence, and they can draw attention to the specific
needs of women and girls, including for basic services
and health and education.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Perović (Montenegro): Montenegro is pleased
to contribute to this important open debate and warmly
thanks Spain for this initiative and for providing a
platform for our deliberations. I also warmly thank
today’s briefers for their valuable contributions.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

26/33

We should regard women as assets, not victims. It is
crucial to involve women in peacebuilding processes as
stakeholders and decision-makers. Women must be part
of the process; that will allow them to gain ownership
of the policies that affect them and all of us.
Changing deeply rooted cultural beliefs is a
difficult task. It takes constant advocacy, education

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

and awareness-raising, and should be coupled with the
application of monitoring systems that force people
and institutions to be aware of their own biases against
women in leadership. We should renew our efforts to
ensure that in every country and every community,
girls and women are valued equally with boys and men.
They should be given the same opportunities to grow
and learn, participate and be protected from violence.
Montenegro strongly believes that women
must be leaders and key participants in political
decision-making and in the prevention and resolution of
and recovery from conflict. Promoting gender equality
and tackling violence against women, both at home
and internationally, is a priority of the Montenegrin
Government. We believe that where women live free
of violence, have equal access to education, health care
and political and economic opportunities, societies are
healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful. This is
our goal.
We must translate our collective commitments
into action, which can result in safer environments for
women and girls everywhere. Montenegro welcomes
the sustained positive trend shown in the report of the
Secretary-General, and we are committed to working
with the United Nations system, partners and other
countries to implement a reformed women and peace
and security agenda and to further improve this trend.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
commends Spain for having convened this high-level
review of the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security. In
particular, we applaud the adoption of a fittingly
ambitious resolution on women and peace and security
(resolution 2242 (2015)), which Canada was proud to
co-sponsor.
Enhancing the empowerment of women and
girls, respect for their human rights and dignity and
the promotion of their well-being have long been
priority issues in Canadian foreign policy. We see
these as elements critical to realizing safe and secure
communities, development and prosperity.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent seven
resolutions that compose the women and peace and
security agenda highlight how emergency and conflict
situations seriously exacerbate threats to the human
rights, dignity and welfare of women and girls, and the

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

vital role of the meaningful participation of women and
girls in furthering international peace and security.
(spoke in English)
Women around the world continue to face an
onslaught of violence in situations of conflict, as
we have witnessed in the deliberate and systematic
campaign of sexual violence undertaken by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram. While
these groups publicize their crimes, such atrocities also
take place in other conflicts behind a curtain of silence
and shame. Accountability, let alone true justice,
remains elusive. Women’s rights defenders, serving as
a voice for the voiceless, are themselves often targeted.
The United Nations itself has witnessed shortcomings,
with instances of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers and staff.
In response to these situations, Canada supports
projects to address the specific needs of women and
girls in conflicts and emergencies. We are mounting
a strong response to sexual violence in conflict in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Iraq
and Syria. Our programming includes providing access
to justice for survivors and holding perpetrators to
account, including through the deployment of Justice
Rapid Response experts. This work is undertaken
within the context of Canada’s national action plan on
women and peace and security.
Canada remains a staunch supporter of the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura,
whose courage and tenacity have been an inspiration
to us all. We are proud to be providing $3 million
in support of her Office over the next three years,
recognizing that financing is key to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
As we reflect on the past 15 years, the ravages of
war, displacement and violent extremism should only
push us to redouble our resolve. Canada pledges to be
relentless in our pursuit of peace, justice and prosperity
for women worldwide.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Byaje (Rwanda): I join others in thanking the
Kingdom of Spain for having organized this important
high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) on the
occasion of its fifteenth anniversary. The choice of
this specific topic demonstrates Spain’s continued

15-3130227/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

leadership and commitment to the protection and
promotion of women’s and girls’ rights in conflict and
post-conflict situations and, more importantly, of its
eagerness to move beyond rhetoric to concrete action.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, all of the high-level Government officials,
the members of the Security Council and the members
of civil society for their contribution to this debate.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as that of subsequent resolutions, was instrumental in
raising our awareness as to the human rights abuses
that women and girls are subjected to in armed conflict
as well as in settings where insecurity prevails. The
current geopolitical landscape in major parts of the
world where violent conflicts are raging, coupled with
the rise of extremism and terrorism, has worsened
the situation and given way to unprecedented, hardto-contain humanitarian crises in which women are
particular targets. They not only suffer all sorts of ill
treatment, including rape and sexual violence, but they
are also denied their rights and are routinely scorned
and abused.
This reality became self-evident for Rwandans when
violence reached its peak for the 250,000 rape victims in
the genocide against the Tutsi who were left completely
shattered and scarred for life. Nevertheless, if there is
any silver lining beyond these despicable crimes against
humanity, we can say that the lessons learned from the
genocide against the Tutsi were instrumental in paving
the way for the positive narratives experienced in
Rwanda with regard to women’s empowerment and the
advancement of their status.
Their key role in mending the social fabric in the
immediate aftermath of genocide and in promoting
peace, unity and reconciliation not only enabled the
resurgence of peace and socioeconomic development
but also contributed a great deal to the rebuilding of
a shattered nation. Today in Rwanda women have
taken centre stage in sensitizing for peacebuilding and
reconciliation programmes run by the National Unity
and Reconciliation Commission. They are also highly
involved beyond our borders in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
making the nexus between gender equality and
international peace and security an inescapable reality.
In addition, although it is believed that no country
can fully reach gender equality, Rwanda, driven by

28/33

14/10/2015

strong leadership and unfailing political will to improve
the status of women, took some ground-breaking
initiatives in the form of commitments that will lead to
tackling this ambitious goal. Indeed, enormous strides
have already been taken, ranging from breaking the
world record for the highest female representation in a
Parliament — at 64 per cent currently — and in other
organs, such as the 43 per cent in the Cabinet and nearly
50 per cent in the judiciary, but also in recognizing
women as critical actors in prevention, mediation,
protection, conflict management and resolution, as well
as in reconciliation processes.
Other than the existing political will enabling
a favourable policy climate and a gender-sensitive
Constitution that respects the principle of gender
inclusion, Rwanda now has a national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that was
launched in May 2010 by the Minister of Gender and
Family Promotion and which sought to strengthen the
capacity of women in peace and security processes. In
addition, determined to end the scourge of violence
against women and girls — the worst assaults to human
dignity — Rwanda has adopted a range of policies to
prevent and respond to violence against women and
girls, protect them and severely punish gender-based
violence offenders.
At the institutional level, Rwanda’s security organs,
in collaboration with other Government agencies, local
communities and civil society, have launched initiatives
to protect and respond to violence that targets women
and girls. The one-stop centres, which are shelters run
by the national police, offer, inter alia, a wide range
of free services for victims of gender-based violence,
as do gender desks nationwide — in police stations,
army posts and offices of the national prosecution
agency — which have been set up to offer gendersensitive services to victims.
In the international arena, Rwanda is among
the leading police-contributing countries for female
police and correctional officers in United Nations
peace-support and peacekeeping missions. These
officers actively contribute to combating and
raising awareness on violence against women in the
communities they serve. Similarly, during the 2015
peacekeeping summit, Rwanda pledged, inter alia, to
deploy an all-women police unit in the United Nations
peacekeeping apparatus. Currently, we have 198 female
officers; next week 33 more will be deployed to the
Central African Republic.

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

I would like to conclude by noting that this
landmark year of the triple review of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding together with the highlevel review of resolution 1325 (2000) will continue
spur action worldwide in fulfilling the imperative to
better protect women, especially in conflict and postconflict situations. Rwanda has already embarked on
that irreversible path and is committed to developing a
holistic approach to conflict prevention, peacemaking
and peacebuilding, mainly by ensuring the active
participation by and protection of women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
Spain for its initiative in launching this high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Portugal welcomes and greatly appreciates the open
debate format, which has allowed States — members
and non-members of the Security Council alike — and
representatives of United Nations institutions and civil
society to participate in this renewed opportunity to
further advance the women and peace and security
agenda.
From the outset, Portugal has been a strong and
consistent supporter of the women and peace and
security agenda in order to address the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and
enhance their participation in peace processes. We
were therefore very pleased to co-sponsor resolution
2242 (2015), adopted by the Council yesterday.
In 2009, Portugal adopted its first national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
and a second edition of the plan for 2014-2018 was
approved last year. During our term in the Security
Council in 2011-2012, the women and peace and security
agenda ranked high among our priorities. We were then
and remain now firm supporters of mainstreaming the
women and peace and security agenda in all Security
Council resolutions, as we are very convinced that
women should be involved in all aspects of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
processes. We also joined other Security Council
members in organizing Arria Formula meetings whose
purpose was to give voice to women’s organizations
and raise awareness among Security Council members
on women’s specific needs in conflict-affected settings.
As a current member of the Human Rights Council,
Portugal is deeply committed to addressing the plight

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

of women and girls affected by armed conflict. The
achievements over the last 15 years are significant and
should be duly acknowledged and very much welcomed,
as the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) indicates. Nevertheless, as the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) also highlights,
obstacles remain and worrying trends have emerged.
This reality requires and deserves a renewed, shared
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda.
In that regard, and to mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Portugal
commits to promoting increased participation by women
in international missions for the strengthening and
maintenance of peace and security, and for humanitarian
aid and crisis management; to continuing to actively
promote the women and peace and security agenda in
the main multilateral forums to which Portugal is a
party, such as the United Nations, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and NATO; to raising awareness in all the relevant
international forums of the importance of establishing
national actions plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000); to providing information for
the United Nations indicators in order to track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and for
relevant documents on the implementation of the
resolution; to conducting training programmes on
gender equality and violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, gender-based violence and
trafficking in human beings, for national personnel in
the field of justice and for members of the armed and
security forces assigned to international peacekeeping
missions; to including the women and peace and security
agenda in Portuguese development aid programmes;
and, finally, to continuing to engage with civil society
organizations on women and peace and security agenda
issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Deghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the
Spanish presidency of the Council for convening this
open debate. I would also like to express my gratitude
to the Secretary-General and to UN-Women for their
valuable contributions to the discussion of women and
peace and security.

15-3130229/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

14/10/2015

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), focusing on the specific effects
of armed conflict on women, the positive role that
women can play in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and the indissoluble
links between the empowerment of women and
international peace and security.

violent extremist groups and indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, including women and children. We support
the Secretary-General’s commitment to preparing and
presenting his promised plan of action to prevent violent
extremism and his intention to cite the participation,
leadership and empowerment of women as key factors
in addressing the drivers of extremist violence.

Women are a key resource for promoting peace and
stability. Research has shown that women’s participation
and inclusion make humanitarian assistance more
effective, strengthen the protection of civilians,
contribute to the political settlement of disputes and
the maintenance of sustainable peace, and accelerate
economic recovery. Today, we find ourselves at a turning
point in the cause of women and girls. The adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
of Action and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, all remind us that there is a strong, direct
relationship between sustainable peace and security
and sustainable development, and that women and girls
must be at the forefront of programmes designed to
encourage development, peace and security.

In closing, I would like to stress that my delegation
believes that organizing a debate such as this in the
Council should not undermine the work of the United
Nations bodies that are most relevant to the consideration
of women-related issues, that is, the Commission on the
Status of Women, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly.

Conflicts in recent years, especially in the Middle
East, have assumed new and abhorrent forms and
dimensions, and constitute an unprecedented challenge
to stability in our region. In some parts of the region,
women are grappling with the scourge of terrorism and
extremist violence. The spread of violent extremism
and takfiri ideology threatens the lives and rights of
women and girls in our region in an unprecedented way.
News accounts and other reports in the past few years
have shown that women and girls have suffered the
most at the hands of extremists and terrorists and have
been targets for systematic sexual violence, slavery
and rape. The international community should make it
clear at every step of the way that there will never be
leniency for those who subject women and girls to such
inhumane acts of violence, physical and mental.
At the same time, it is already evident that this
dangerous ideology and its consequences cannot
be contained in a single region and in one way or
another can easily affect other regions near and far.
It is very unfortunate that women and girls have also
been disproportionately victimized by bombings in
Yemen and violence in Syria and elsewhere. Iran
strongly condemns the barbaric acts of terrorist and

30/33

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express its appreciation to the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council for initiating this open debate
and providing an excellent concept note on the subject
(S/2015/749, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the other briefers for their valuable
contributions yesterday.
The year 2015 has been a symbolic one for the
international community, starting as it did with the
celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action (Beijing+20),
followed in September by the General Assembly’s
adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), in which gender
equality is embedded as a stand-alone development
goal, and now amplified by the marking of the fifteenth
anniversary of the resolution 1325 (2000). It is evident
that empowering women and promoting their active
participation in all spheres of public life are priorities
on the current international agenda.
Armenia has always been at the forefront of the
promotion and protection of women’s rights. With
regard to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), we would like to emphasize the importance
of implementing confidence-building measures,
including people-to-people contacts. We should also
recognize the links between resolution 1325 (2000)
and other international instruments concerning gender
equality, such as the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
and the Beijing Platform and Plan of Action. This year,
Armenia has prepared and submitted to the relevant

15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

bodies of the United Nations two important documents,
our national review for Beijing+20 and our fifth and
sixth joint periodic reports on CEDAW. They give a
detailed analysis of our country’s implementation of its
commitments on gender equality and the empowerment
of women.
At the same time, and touching on the resolution’s
comprehensive coverage of the issues, we should
stress that Armenia has already implemented or is in
the process of implementing many of its components
in the area of gender security, including through two
national action plans: a strategic action plan for the
period 2011-2015 to combat gender-based violence,
and an anti-trafficking plan, our fourth for the period
2013-2015.
As far as the international aspects of our national
plan are concerned, we have to face certain realities
and challenges on the ground. Twenty-one years after
the conclusion of the trilateral ceasefire agreement
that ended the active military phase of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict, the physical security and survival
of the people of Nagorno Karabakh is still under
threat. By the same token, the civilians residing in
Armenia’s border territory have been systematically
and indiscriminately targeted by Azerbaijani armed
forces. Armenia strongly condemns these violations
of international humanitarian law and the tragedy that
occurred at the end of September, in which three women
in Armenian border settlements were killed.
Armenia
has
always
advocated
for
confidence-building measures relating to the situation
of women living across dividing lines, particularly
in areas of conflict. Unfortunately, we have not able
to exploit the great potential of such trust-building,
given the position of Azerbaijan on the issue. The
imprisonment of Azerbaijani peace and human rights
activists involved in international projects, including
Leyla Yunus, continues to be an insurmountable
impediment to full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Armenia remains committed to addressing
the issues of women and peace and security in line
with the aspirations of the people of Armenia and its
international obligations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to respond to the statement made

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

by the representative of Georgia, while assuring the
Council that in view of the lateness of the hour I will
be brief.
We of course reject the accusations made against
us. We have repeatedly stated our position on the issue
and I will not do so again here. As I understood it, the
representative of Georgia expressed concerns about
the situation of women in Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
In that regard, we would like to propose inviting to
one of our meetings on the topic under discussion
representatives
of
women’s
non-governmental
organizations from those republics, who could provide
us with full and first-hand information on the true
situation in that area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Azerbaijan has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Rahimova (Azerbaijan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor to respond to the
statement made by the delegation of Armenia.
Armenia’s statement was full of distortions and
misinterpretations, which we utterly reject. It is yet
another attempt by Armenia to mislead the international
community, divert attention from its responsibility
arising from the occupation, mass atrocities and
other policies it pursues in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that, on 1 September 2015, Armenian forces, from
their position in the occupied territories of the Republic
of Azerbaijan, opened fire and, with full precision, they
targeted a wedding ceremony in Gapanly village in
Terter district. Three civilians, including one child, were
wounded. The direct deliberate targeting of civilians is
a blatant violation of international humanitarian law by
Armenia, which continues to commit war crimes under
international criminal law. Unfortunately, that is not a
new phenomenon.
During the ongoing aggression against Azerbaijan,
Armenia has committed numerous crimes, including
indiscriminate
attacks against, and killing of,
civilians, hostage taking and detention, inhumane
treatment, execution, the capture of war prisoners,
taking of hostages and ethnic cleansing of the occupied
territories. The most heinous of them is the massacre
of the civilian population of the town of Hodjali, in
which 100 persons died, including children, women and

15-3130231/33

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

14/10/2015

the elderly. Those crimes are not isolated or sporadic
acts, but were part of Armenia’s deliberate, widespread
and systematic policy, its practice of committing
atrocities, rooted in ideas of racial superiority, ethnic
differentiation and an expansionist policy.

our territory for the reasons just cited. Effective control
is exercised by Russia, which signed agreements with
those regimes that it itself established on Georgian soil.
Those agreements envisage full integration. This is
akin to annexation, nothing less than annexation.

The documents adopted by the international
organizations implicitly refer to the crimes committed
by Armenia as a blatant breach of international
humanitarian law. In 1993, resolution 853 (1993)
in particular condemned attacks on civilians and
bombardments of inhabited areas, and expressed
grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of
civilians on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

Georgia stands for a full, peaceful negotiated
settlement of the conflict between Georgia and Russia.
But we would reiterate once again that, in order to
materialize that settlement, Russia has to comply with
the agreement it signed with us in August 2008. That
agreement excludes any unauthorized military force
on Georgian soil. Once again, we call on the Russian
Federation to fulfil its obligations under that and
other international agreements and to withdraw all its
occupying forces from Georgian soil.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Georgia has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to take the floor a second
time in response to the statement that was just made by
the representative of the Russian Federation.
There is a lot of irony to what the representative of
the Russian Federation has just said. The point is that
Georgia is a democratic country, an open society with
a Government whose leadership changes every term
through a democratic process. We have hundreds and
hundreds of non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
We have international NGOs operating in Georgia.
The Georgian Government and the Georgian State
encourage support to those NGOs. We are now talking
about the proposal of the Russian Federation, which is
not an open society nor a democratic State, and which,
in addition to that, exercises effective control over the
occupied Georgian territories. It is not only officials
who have Russian passports, it is ethnic Russians
who run those territories of Georgia — 20 per cent
of Georgian territory. Moreover, hundreds of thousands
of Georgians, citizens of Georgia, have been displaced,
have been ethnically cleansed, from those territories.
The Russian military has been an instrument behind
that displacement.
Of course, we are open to all kinds of discussions.
We are open to different forums — Geneva, Tbilisi, New
York or other places. At the same time, what we request
and what we require from the Russian Federation is to
allow the return of the ethnically cleansed population.
Again, we are talking about the majority of the pre-war
population of the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions. We
are unable to exercise State control on that 20 per cent of

32/33

I apologize for the lengthy statement, but I think
matters have to be clarified from time to time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Armenia has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I requested the floor to
reply to the comments made by the representative of
Azerbaijan.
We reject all allegations made against my country. I
regret to note, though, that once again the statement by
Azerbaijan on the important topic of women and peace
and security fell short of addressing the real situation
on the ground related to the violence against women
in that country. Instead, comments by the delegation
concerned were full of allegations, fabrications and
lies against my country. It is well known and properly
documented that it was Azerbaijan that, more than two
decades ago, unleashed a full-scale war against Armenia
and Nagorno Karabakh, with the intention of totally
exterminating its Armenian population. The military
aggression by Azerbaijan, however, had unpredictable
consequences. As a result of that aggression, hundreds
of thousands of ethnic Armenians, the majority women
and children, had to abandon their homes and become
refugees and internally displaced persons. They
suffered unspeakable acts of violence and State terror
by Azerbaijan.
That aggression continues to this day. Due to
the indiscriminate shelling of Armenian villages by
Azerbaijan’s heavy artillery, only last month three
Armenian women — villagers from the bordering
Tavush province of Armenia — were killed. Rather
than delivering false statements and utilizing baseless
15-31302

14/10/2015

Women and peace and security

propaganda, we would strongly advise Azerbaijani
representatives to concentrate on monitoring cases of
grave human rights violations currently taking place
in their country, particularly the widespread violence
against women observed by United Nations Special
Rapporteurs and other international experts; the
persecution of women human-rights defenders and
activists and women peace advocates; the occurrence
of illegal marriages; gender-related killings of women
and girls; a very high rate of gender selective abortions,
and so on.
We could pose a very relevant question to the
authorities of Azerbaijan. Is it possible to promote the
women and peace and security agenda and achieve
lasting peace in the conflict when these authorities
systematically oppress, jail and attack their own women
human-rights activists and peace advocates?

S/PV.7533 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This statement will be even briefer than my
last. From the statement given by our colleague from
Georgia, I understand that he clearly is worried by the
presence of women from Abkhazia and South Ossetia
and their participation in any discussion. I would urge
him in future not to transcend the bounds of what is
proper. The assessments we have heard here are simply
not acceptable within the framework of a professional
discussion in the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I would
like to sincerely thank all delegations for participating
in this open debate.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

15-3130233/33
