UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/43
22 October 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3707th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 October 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 10 October 1996
(S/1996/843). It has also taken note of the letter from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the President of the Security Council of
8 October 1996 (S/1996/835).
"The Security Council notes with deep concern that no significant
progress has yet been achieved towards a comprehensive political settlement
of the conflict, including on the political status of Abkhazia, respecting
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.
"The Security Council reaffirms its full support for an active role of
the United Nations, with the assistance of the Russian Federation as
facilitator, aimed at achieving a comprehensive political settlement. In
the context of the recent visit to the region of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the Council requests the Secretary-General to undertake
further efforts and make proposals to reinvigorate the stalled peace
process.
"The Security Council stresses that the primary responsibility for
achieving such reinvigoration of the peace process rests upon the parties
themselves and calls on them, in particular the Abkhaz side, to resume
discussions and to reach substantive progress in the negotiations.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the deterioration of the
situation in the Gali region and its negative impact on the ability of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) to meet its mandated
tasks. The Council condemns mine-laying and other threats referred to in
the Secretary-General’s report against UNOMIG and the Collective

96-28411 (E)

221096

/...

S/PRST/1996/43
English
Page 2

Peace-keeping forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS peacekeeping force). The Council calls on both parties to take all the
necessary steps to prevent all such acts.
"The Security Council calls on both parties to respect the Moscow
agreement of 14 May 1994 on a Cease-Fire and Separation of Forces
(S/1994/583, annex I) and expresses its concern at the violations referred
to in the Secretary-General’s report, in particular the serious violations
which recently occurred in the restricted weapons zone.
"The Security Council stresses that the international community’s
ability to assist depends on the full cooperation of the parties,
especially the fulfilment of their obligations regarding the safety and
freedom of movement of international personnel.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the announcement made by
the Abkhaz side that so-called parliamentary elections would be held on
23 November 1996. The holding of such elections would only be possible
after the determination through negotiations of the political status of
Abkhazia respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders, within the framework of a
comprehensive political settlement, and with the guaranteed possibility of
full participation for all refugees and displaced persons. The Council
notes that conditions for holding such elections are not met at present.
It calls on the Abkhaz side to call off these elections and further calls
on both sides to refrain from any action that could heighten tension.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continued
obstruction of the return of the refugees and displaced persons by the
Abkhaz authorities, which is totally unacceptable.
"The Security Council welcomes the good cooperation between UNOMIG and
the CIS peace-keeping force and their efforts to promote stabilization of
the situation in the zone of conflict.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it closely informed of the situation."

-----
