UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-FIFTH

2

YEAR:‘..,?

nd
MEETING:

27 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2202)

. , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . , , , . . . .*.....,,,*..*...,...,...........‘
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13802) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SiPV.2202

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the OfJiinl Records qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
cjf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

2202nd MEETING

i

Held in New York on Wednesday, 27 February 1980, at 3.30 p.m.

i /

President: Mr. Peter FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic).

Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, PhilipPines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Sahak
(Afghanistan),
Mr. Bouzarbia (Algeria), Mr. RoaKouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Blum
(Israel), Mr. Filali (Morocco), Mr. Naik (Pakistan),
Mr. Mansouri (Syrian Arab Republic), Mrs. Nguyen
Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council table:
Mr. Kane (Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2202)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2, The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13802)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Indonesia and Kuwait in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
@I Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
W13801);
@) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13802)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamil (Zndonesia) and Mr. Bishara (Kuwait) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber,

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The first speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from ‘Russian):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2199th TO2201st meetings], I invite the
representative of Jordan to take a place at the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Cuba, Egypt, Israel, Morocco, Pakistan, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber; I invite the representative of the
Paiestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a
place at the Council table; and I invite the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the

4. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It must have become evident
by now that this debate is essentially a diversionary
exercise calculated to frustrate the ongoing peace
process. It is also obvious that there is a convergence
of interests between the “rejectionist” States in the
Arab camp and the Soviet Union, which seeks to
divert attention from its continuing aggression against
and occupation of Afghanistan, and all that that aggression signifies.
5. Moreover, as ‘I already pointed out, the Council’s
debates and resolutions on the Arab-Israel conflict
1

/

in recent years have been generally characterized by a
fundamental defect. It is that they have consciously
and consistently ignored the threat to Israel’s security
posed by Arab hostility and belligerency in its various
manifestations, Deliberate attempts have been made
to fragment the Arab-Israel conflict and to focus
attention exclusively on one or another of its secondary
aspects, out of context and with total disregard for
broader considerations which, from Israel’s point of
view, are crucial. Nothing we have heard in the course
of the debate thus far leads us to alter our basic
assessment of it.

their own solution, if not in one fell swoop, then in
stages.
10. The solution they advocate is essentially that of
the terrorist PLO. Certain Governments and quarters
delude themselves and try to present that organization
and its leaders as “moderates”. However, the latter,
even if they sometimes speak in muted tones, do not
generally suffer from any inhibitions. Thus, for
example, in an interview with El Mundo in Caracas,
Venezuela, on 11 February-that is, just a fortnight
ago-Y asser Arafat declared:

6. The present debate is entitled “The situation in
the occupied Arab territories”, The very formulation
of the agenda item under consideration is intended to
imply that the territories in question are nothing but
‘Arab. This in itself already reflects a biased and
slanted approach. 1 feel in duty bound to rectify this
fallacious conception. While the final status of the
territories in question is to be resolved through negotiations and agreement, it is imperative that it be clearly
understood that the Jewish people and the State of
Israel have the right in principle, as well as in law and
in terms of national security, to a permanent presence
in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District.

“Peace for us means the destruction of Israel.
“We are preparing for an all-out war, a war
which will last for generations . . . We shall not rest
until the day when we return to our home, and until
we destroy Israel. The unity of the Arab world will
make this possible.
“The destruction of Israel is the goal of our
struggle, and the guidelines of that struggle have
remained firm since the establishment of Fatah in
1965 . 6 . We know that the intention of some of the
Arab leaders is to solve the conflict by peaceful
means. When this occurs, we shall oppose it.“2

7. The inseparable bond between the Jewish people
and its homeland Eretz Yisrael-the land of Israel-is
an integral part of world history, inextricably entwined
in the cultural heritage of mankind. The right of the
Jewish people to its land was recognized as a matter
of course by the League of Nations and enshrined in
its Mandate for Palestine,’ which stressed: “ . . . the
historical connection of the Jewish people with Palestine and . . . the grounds for reconstituting”-and
I stress ‘reconstituting’--“their
national home in that
country”. The Mandatory Power was also entrusted
with the duty of encouraging “ . . . close settlement
by Jews on the land, including State lands and waste
lands not required for public purposes”.

11, That political approach, aimed at the destruction
of a nation and of a State Member of this Organization,
did not begin in 1965, as Arafat suggests, or even in
1947-1948, when the Arab States at the time vowed to
destroy the Jewish State in embryo. Throughout this
debate the Council has been treated to discourses in
which the massacre of the Jews of Hebron in 1929
has been shamelessly justified. It should be remembered that the ancient Jewish community was made
up of pious Jews, elderly, religious and defenceless.
But in this debate the bloody pogrom visited upon
them half a century ago has been casually brushed off
as a necessary and justified act.

8. Last Monday [220&h meeting], I had the opportunity to describe in some detail how Jordan illegally
occupied Judaea and Samaria in 1948, and I shall not
weary the Council by repeating what I said then. Let
me state only that the fact that the Arab States failed
‘in their armed aggression aimed at destroying Israel
does not legitimize their violation of international law.
On the other hand, that armed aggression precludes
them from invoking in any form the benefits of a
General Assembly resolution which they themselves
both rejected and destroyed by force of arms.

12. Thus the aim is to destroy Israel. It is the aim of
those States which created the PLO in the first place
as an instrument of warfare against Israel and of all
those States which are maintaining it as such by
financing and equipping it militarily and providing a
whole range of other services.
13. That is the goal of the rejectionists and of their
stooge the terrorist PLO. To implement their sinister
designs, the rejectionists have created an enormous
war machine and thus an ominous threat to peace. The
rejectionists’ strategy has been to create an “eastern
front” combining, in the first instance, the armed
forces of Syria to the north of Israel, Jordan and
Iraq to the east and Saudi Arabia to the south. The
combined military weight of these countries will be
supplemented in times of war with sophisticated
weapons available in enormous quantities from the
arsenals of other rejectionist States. This colossal
array of force will be mounted against Israel also from

9. Most of these Arab States have not changed their
fundamental attitude towards Israel, and they are now
engaged in a determined effort-of which this debate
is part-to frustrate the ongoing peace process. The
Arab States concerned reject the peaceful settlement
of the Arab-Israel conflict through negotiations, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Instead, they strive to impose
2

southern Lebanon and, if at all possible, through
Judaea and Samaria.

intentions when considering the developments in
Judaea and Samaria. Israel cannot. Not surprisingly,
some of the Arab rejectionist States, notably Syria,
and the PLO were among the first to applaud the
Soviet aggression against Afghanistan, for they saw in
it a precedent and a model for their intended aggression against Israel.

14. I shall try to give some notion of what we are
talking about. The Arab States have today 500,000
more men under arms than has the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and three times the
artillery of the combined NATO forces, They also have
3,000 more tanks and several hundred more combat
aircraft than NATO. The “eastern front” alone-that
is, Syria, Iraq, Jordan and Saudi Arabia-is currently
equivalent to NATO in manpower and tanks and
already has twice as much artillery. In terms of air
power, the Arab armies will this year equal the combined strength of the Warsaw Pact forces. They will
be double that of NATO, or three times that of the
People’s Republic of China. In terms of ground forces,
the Arab States have today almost as many tanks
as the United States and more artillery than it has.

19. The rejectionists regard Judaea and Samaria, as
well as the Gaza District and southern Lebanon, as
the most important bridgeheads through which they
might realize their dream of a war of annihilation
against Israel. A glance at the map will show why.
Before 1967,Israel at its narrowest point was less than
nine miles wide, that is, iess than the length of
Manhattan island. Half of Israel’s population is concentrated in the narrow coastal plain between Netanya
and Tel Aviv, Before 1967, all this population was
within easy reach of Jordan’s long guns. The residents
of Israel’s capital, Jerusalem, were even worse off.
The city was divided by barbed wire and hand
grenades could be lobbed across by the men of
Jordan’s Arab Legion, Snipers on the battlement of
the Walled City had no difficulty in picking off their
targets and 16ggionnaires with machine-guns could and
did wreak havoc at will. Ever since Judaea, Samaria
‘and the Gaza District have been under Israeli control,
the Arab rejectionists have tried to reconvert them
into forward bases, In this they have allocated to the
PLO a special role and set it the task of using the
territories as bridgeheads for acts of hostility, terror,
sabotage and subversion against Israel and its civilian
population.

15. And against whom, one may well ask, is this
colossal array of military power to be used? One does
not need to look very far for the answer. The leaders
of the Arab rejection& States within and beyond the
“eastern front” are only too ready to provide it.
Thus, for example, shortly after seizing total power in
Iraq, Saddam Hussein announced on 3 July 1979,
according to the Iraq news agency report of the same
date: “Iraq is preparing itself in the economic, political, social, intellectual and military fields for the
liberation of Jerusalem and all the lands of Palestine.”
16. At the beginning of this month Kuwait conducted
military manoeuvres, using for the first time Sovietmade surface-to-surface missiles. Those missiles,
which were shown on Kuwaiti television, are of the
Luna type and have a range of 68 kilometres. On
9 February the Kuwaiti Minister of Defence emphasized on television that the importance of those missiles is that they can be used from a long distance.
He went on to stress that his country was preparing
for its part in the liberation of what he called the
“occupied Arab territories”. Members of the Council
will no doubt recall that Kuwait has persistently
refused to accept Council resolution 242 (1967).

20. While the rejectionist States build up their war
machine, as they wait for an opportune moment to
launch what they call the “next round”, the PLO
continues to act. Since 1967, there have been approximately 10,000 such acts of indiscriminate violence
and terror in Israel and the territories, Six hundred and
forty-three people have been murdered and 3,425
others have been wounded in Israel by the PLO. It
has also terrorized and intimidated Arabs prepared to
negotiate peace with Israel, killing more than 350 Arabs
and injuring almost 2,000 others.

17. Then again, there is Colonel Kaddafi. I need not
elaborate on the fact, known to all of us here, that
Libya has in recent years become the major stockpile
of Soviet weaponry in North Africa and possibly in the
whole of the African continent. How then are we to
view the following declaration by Colonel Kaddafi
which appeared in the Kuwaiti newspaper .+Qabas
on 3 September 1978?I quote:

21. As part of the “grand design”, the rejectionists
would obviously like the territories leading to the
outskirts of Jerusalem, Tel-Aviv and every o’ther town
and city in Israel to be cleared of any Israeli presence
that might stand in the way of their armies. Israel
sees no reason to oblige them,
22. Once again, countries perhaps thousands of
miles away, unfamiliar with the perils of protracted
conflict and hostile neighbours, can turn a blind eye
to these harsh facts. Israel, I repeat, cannot. Other
States enjoy considerable security and strategic depth.
Israel does not. Other States have not been subjected
to the impact of four wars of aggression launched
by hostile neighbours in the span of three decades.
Israel has. Other nations do not know what it is like

“We will tear into pieces any Arab-Israeli agreement concluded against the will of the Arab nation,
whether it be signed in Jerusalem, the ‘Black House’
or the Camp David barn.”
18. Perhaps some members of the Council can take
lightly these hard military facts and declared military
3

these are not one and the same: But let us overlook
such a minor point. Instead let bslook at the substance
of the matter. In that subparagraph note is taken of
the decision of the Government of Israel to move the
settlement of Elon Moreh to a new site, in the light
of a ruling given by Israel’s Supreme Court, sitting as
a High Court of Justice. Then in paragraph 49, the
report deplores “the efforts of the Israeli Government
to side-step that decision”. Members of Council
should be aware that the Government of Israel has not
side-stepped that decision and that the decision has
been implemented.

to be ringed by countries which consider themselves
to be in a state of war and which are arming for yet
another war of annihilation. Israel does.
23. In the light of past experience and present
realities, Israel has no grounds for underestimating
the intentions and belligerent activities of the Arab
rejectionists, or what would be more foolhardy, of
ignoring them. Despite this, other States, which sit on
the sidelines, ask Israel to adopt an ostrich-like posture
and to do what no responsible State would do, namely,
to expose itself in its entirety to the immediate military
threat of an implacable foe; in brief, to put its very
existence at risk.

28. In subparagraph 41 (a), the report alleges that in
recent months large tracts of private Arab land,
totalling 40,000 dunums, have been “confiscated”
for the purpose of expanding Jewish settlements.This
is a falsehood. No such land has been requisitioned
at all. Some land has been “closed” by the military
authorities of the area for the purpose of training
without the use of live ammunition. A closure order
of this kind is temporary. It does not affect ownership,
Moreover, even while the order is in effect the owners
are able to use their land and cultivate it. If the military
activities cause any damage, the owners are entitled to
receive compensation.

Any discussion of the situation in Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza District which does not take
Israel’s fundamental right to self-preservation and
its legitimate concern for its security and defence
into account is meaningless. Similarly, any United
Nations commissions which are established without
regard to the background of persistent Arab aggression
against Israel for over 30 years are detached from
reality and lack coherence, This is all the more so,
when, as in the case of the mandate of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979), their
conclusions are determined in advance by the resolution in question.

24.

29. Subparagraph 41 (b) mentions the decision by the
Government of Israel of 16 September 1979to permit
Israeli citizens to purchase land in Judaea, Samaria
and the Gaza District. It goes on to state that the decision rescinds a previous one which, according to the
Commission, had hitherto prohibited Israeli citizens
and organizations from purchasing land in those areas.
This too is false. In accordance with Order No. 25,
promulgated by the Military Governor in 1967, andin
conformity with international law, land purchaseswere
permitted, subject to authorization by the administering authorities. The Cabinet’s decision of 16September was thus purely of an administrative nature
and did not in any way affect the provisions of the
Order of 1967.

25. The mandate of the Commission requiring it to
produce a second report, as laid down in resolution 452 (1979), was even more biased than its first
one. Resolution 452 (1979) blindly embraced the
recommendations contained in the Commission’s
first report [S/13450 and Add.1 of 12 July 19791.
Then, having reiterated in its preambular part all the
elements which predetermined the first report’s conclusions, and having added, for good measure, that
Israel’s settlement policy is bound to have “grave
consequences” on “any attempt to reach a peaceful
solution in the Middle East”, the resolution requested
the Commission to prepare another report. In short,
the shape of the Commission’s report and the nature
of its conclusions were once again determined in
advance.

30. Subparagraph 41 (c) draws attention to a decision
adopted by the Government of Israel on 14 October
1979to expand seven existing settlements.The authors
of the report were unable to conceal their bias, since,
‘\Hshenreferring to the land to be used for this purpose,
Wy found it necessirry to insert the words “allegedly
not privately owned by Arab inhabitants”. The fact is
that the land in question was not-1 repeat, notprivately owned in any of the cases covered by the
Government’s decision, All the land used was either
legally owned by Jewish individuals or was Stateowned land. The relevant decision taken by the
Government began explicitly with these words:

26. Predictably, the Commission’s second report
[S/13679 of 4 December 29791 suffers from all the
defects of the first, both on the factual level and in
terms of the conclusions drawn therefrom. It is
permeated with a wholly uncritical approach, heavily
slanted in favour of Israel’s enemies. And once again
no consideration whatsoever has been given to the
highly detailed information published by the Govemment of Israel, including the information presented
by me in the course of the Council’s debates last
March and July.

“There will be no confiscation or requisitioning
of any private land whatsoever. Any expansionof
the settlements or allocation of land to them will
be done from State-owned land, after strict and
detailed scrutiny by the Attorney-General,”

27. For example, there is the sheer ignorance evidenced in subparagraph 41 (d), where the settlement
of Elon Moreh is equated with Qaddum while anyone
who bothers to read a daily newspaper knows that
4

L

31, LastFriday [2/99rh ?neef&?l we were treated to
aturgidand confusing lecture by-Ambassador Nusei&h concerningdifferent CategOrleSof land. Anyone
whois at all familiar with land law is aware of the
dementarydistinction existing between privately
owsedlandsand State-owned lands. The laws which
apply
in Judaeaand Samaria are based on the Ottoman
legislation,
which has been m effect m the region
since
1858.Minor changes were made in that law during
thetime of the British Mandate and under the Jordanian
occupationof Judaea and Samaria, There have
beeano changes whatsoever in the law since 1967,
when
Judaeaand Samaria came under Israel’s control.

metre%whereasin a yearof drought it can drop as 10~
as 1 million cubic metresor less. In the drought year
of 1962to 1963,under the Jordanian occupation, the
springs produced only 1.1 million cubic metres of
water.

32, paragraphs41 (f) and 42 regurgitate the false
allegations
that Israel is siphoning off the water suppliesof Judaea,Samaria and the Gaza District. This is
another
striking example of the Commission’s refusal
toconsiderthe official information readily available
to it, including information which I offered at considerable
length on this topic in the debates of March
andJulylast.

37. The drastic reduction of the flow of the Auja
SPrhgS waters between July and November 1979
resulted from a drastically curtailed flow of spring
water resulting from the cumulative effect of sparse
rainfall in the three years from 1976to 1978and the
severe drought of 1978to 1979, when annual rainfall
levels were 70 to 80 per cent below average. Given
the over-all tenor of the Commission’sreport, it comes
somewhatas a surprise that those drought years were
not blamed on Israel,

33, If Israel was indeed siphoning off the water, then
howdoesthe Commission account for the fact that the

areaof irrigated land cultivated by the Arabs in the

areas in question has increased since 1967 by

160per cent? How does it explain that the number
of agriculturaltractors in use has gone up over ten
times, from 130 in 1967 to 1,750 in 1976? How does
it explainthat agricultural output has shown a growth
rateof 11per cent a year since 19671 How does it

explainthat in real terms income from agriculture has
grownmore than two-and-a-half times? All this information was laid before the Council in detail in my
statements
of 13 March [2225th meeting] and 18July
1979[2156thmeeting]. The Commission, in its partiality,haschosen to ignore it,
34, To compound the demonstratively false nature
Oftheircharge, the authors of the report describe the
conditionsprevailing in the village of Al-Auja as a
“casein a point”. According to the report, in August
lastthe villagers protested that their economy was
beingruined because Israeli wells and the water networksupplyingthe nearby settlements had drastically
depletedthe village’s water resources, As the authors
of thereport think that this is a case in point, let me
address
myself to it in some detail.

3% Thereare two villages situated in the Auja basin:
ANaFawka and Auja Takhta. The inhabitants earn
thcirlivelihood from agriculture, working their own
plotsof land or those of several landowners who
live elsewhere. Most of the water they consume
comes
from the Auja Springs and from several shallow
we11s
in the area. The Auja Springs flow from the
poundat an elevation of 20 metres above sea level,
at an annual rate of about 10 million cubic metres,
whichfluctuates radically in direct relation to the
amountof rainfall in the region. In a year of plentiful
raia*the flow can reach as much as 25 million cubic

36. The wells sunk in the area by the Mekorot Water

Company of Israel reach a depth of 190metres below
sea level, fully 210 metres below the level of the Auja
Springs, and there is no interflow or physical connection whatsoever between the two, Therefore, the
claim that the Mekorot wells affect the flow of the
spring waters is entirely unfounded.

38. The heavy rainfalls of December 1979brought
a renewed flow from the Auja Springs. If the abundant
rain which has fallen this winter continues, the spring
water will undoubtedly prove adequateto permit the
irrigation of crops as in the past. The flow has already
been renewed, and that in itself is ample proof that its
recent cessationcannot in any way be attributed to the
Jewish villages in the vicinity.
39. I could go on quoting chapter and verse to refute
the so-called “findings” of the report, but to what
purpose? Not only are the so-called findings wrong,
but the whole report is permeated with instancesof an
uncritical approach. That uncritical approach in turn
was predetermined by the Commission’s mandate.
For examples of this uncritical nature of the report,
one need only look at its paragraphs 33 and 37.
40. In the first of those paragraphs, one of Yasser
A&at’s henchmen is quoted as saying that there is
“no religious freedom in Jerusalem for Christians
and Moslems” and that accessto the Holy Places is
“still restricted”. This so-called information, given by
someone who represents an organization committed
to the destruction of Israel, is offered without comment or reserve by the authors of the report. Surely
the Commission must know the truth. Millions of
Moslem and Christian tourists and pilgrims, in addition
to Jewish visitors, have visited Jerusalem since 1967
and prayed and worshipped freely at its mosques and
churches. All those visitors can attest to the Complete
freedom of accessto and worship at the shrines holy
to the adherents of all faiths, which is unprecedented
in the history of the city.
41. Similarly, in the second of these paragraphs the
representative of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan

gogue, were wantonly destroyed and desecrated, in
the process, hundreds of Holy Torah scrolls and books
reverently preserved for generations were plundered
and burnt to ashes. In flagrant violation of the 1949
Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement, Jordan
barred accessby Jews to their Holy Placesand cultural
institutions. Moreover, Israeli Moslemswere barred by
Jordan from praying in the mosques in the Old City
of Jerusalem. They gained accessto them only in 1967,
when the city was reunited.

is recorded as having presented the Commission with
a series of documents, including one that purports to
be an Israeli plan for the seizure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the Dome of the Rock. Nothing could be more
fantastic. The authors of the report were apparently
prepared to accept this wild fantasy without demur
or reserve.
42. In the light of the above, what can be expected
of the conclusions and recommendations contained in
the report? If they were placed before any court of
law they would be disqualified as evidence and thrown
out unceremoniously.

49. Let us be candid with ourselves and see this
debate for what it really is. Let us also have the
honesty to admit that debates such as this will not
advance the cause of peace one iota.

43. Several speakers have seen fit to exploit this
debate to play on religious sentiments in order to fan
the flames of incitement, both religious and political,
against Israel. They have focused not only on Hebron,
but also on Jerusalem-the eternal capital of Israel
and of the Jewish people.

50. For 30 years there was no progress in the numerous attempts made to resolve the Arab-Israel
conflict. For the last two years we have been engaged
in a peace process that has already shown its potential
and produced the first historic breakthrough in the
conflict. That breakthrough came, of course, in the
form of the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt
which has already led to the establishment of full
diplomatic relations between our two countries, with
our Ambassadors presenting their credentials yesterday .

44. Jerusalem has known many foreign rulers during
the course of its long history, but none of them ever
regarded it as their capital. Only the Jewish people has
always maintained it as the centre and sole focus of
its national and spiritual life. The Jews of Jerusalem
have the longest unbroken historical association with
the Holy City. The city of Jerusalem has been the
heart and soul of the Jewish people since King David,
3,ooO years ago, transferred his capital from Hebron
to Jerusalem and established it as the capital of Israel.
Jews for thousands of years have prayed daily for their
return to Jerusalem as the centre of Jewish life, hope
and yearning. For the past century and a half,
Jerusalem has had a continuous and uninterrupted
Jewish majority.

51. The fact is that the only practical solution to the
Arab-Israel conflict, including the question of the
Palestinian Arabs in all its aspects, is the one outlined
in the Camp David framework for peace in the Middle
East. That framework is squarely based on resolution 242 (1967), which remains to this day the only
agreed basis for peace negotiations in the Middle East.
The Camp David framework sees the solution to the
question of the Palestinian Arab residents of Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza District in terms of granting
them full autonomy for a transitional period of five
years before reaching an agreement on the final status
of the areas concerned. To that end it was agreed to
negotiate on a principle of self-government, to be
exercised through an administrative council, for the
Arab inhabitants of the areas in question.

45. As the representative of Israel, I must therefore
state here again that Jerusalem-one, undivided and
indivisible-shall
remain for ever, as it is now, the
capital of Israel and of the Jewish people.
46. At the same time the Government of Israel has
always been conscious of the fact that Jerusalem is of
deep concern also to other faiths. Its religious and
‘cultural sites are precious to Christians and Moslems,
as well as to Jews. Israel is mindful of the historical
treasures and manifold spiritual heritage of Jerusalem.

52. Moreover, in that framework the Palestinian Arab
residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District
were invited to play an active role in shaping their
future by participating in all aspects of the negotiations. They have been invited to participate not only
in current negotiations to set up a self-governing
administrative council, but also in the negotiations
that will determine the final status of the areas they
live in and in the eventual negotiations on a peace
treaty between Israel and Jordan, in which the determination of boundaries between the two countries will
be agreed upon.

47. Israel’s policy with regard to Jerusalem’s Holy
Places is governed by the Law on the Protection of
Holy Places of June 1967. Under this law, unrestricted
access to Holy Places is guaranteed to all members of
all faiths. Respect for and preservation of the Holy
Places is also ensured.
48. In this regard it is relevant to recall again the
dismal record of the Jordanian occupation between
1948and 1967. From the outset, the Jordanian Government began to eliminate systematically every trace of
Jerusalem’s Jewish past. Fifty-eight synagogues, some
of great antiquity, like the 700-year-old Hurva Syna-

53. The Camp David framework also envisages fl
withdrawal of the Israeli military government and
its civilian administration, accompanied by a redeploy
ment of Israeli forces into specified security locations.
6

54. This solution provided for in the Camp David
framework offers the Palestinian Arabs concerned
greater opportunities than they have ever before
experienced in their history. It offers them the prospect
of governing themselves, of prosperity and of peaceful
coexistence alongside their neighbours. It offers them
8 secure future, free from terror.

ness, I admire not only the members of the Council
but primarily the members of the Commission for the
composure, the coolness and the quite manner they
have displayed in the face of the most provocative
element of linguistic globe-trotting. If we want to enjoy
semanticsor acrobatics, whether linguistic or physical,
this chamber is not the place. We know what is the
place: on Broadway, or at Lincoln Center perhaps,
which is more sophisticated than Broadway. But that
is not the case.

55. As the President of Israel, Yitzhak Navon,
remarked yesterday on receiving the credentials of the
Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt:

60. I have come here, prompted to speak on this
issue because I feel that I have a personal obligation
to do so, primarily because last March I was among
those who encouraged the members of the Commission
to undertake such a colossal duty. I was also among
those members of the Council who encouraged members of the Commission not to pay any attention to
unprovoked, unwarranted and unwelcome criticism
or harsh critiques.

“We are still confronted with problems that we
shall have to solve, but when we look back at the
ground we have already covered we are filled with
hope that those problems which still face us will be
solved in mutual understanding and peace.”
56. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The next speaker on my list is the representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

61. There is no need for me to enumerate the conclusions of the Commission. That has been done so ably
and amply by many members of the Council and
particularly by the representative of Jordan. What is
being discussed here is the essenceof the whole Middle
East problem. In a very short phrase, I would say that
it is Zionism versus the rights of the Palestinians.
I have a text here, but I shall not read it out, simply
because the issue demands more than the reading of
a text.

57. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Allow me first,
Mr. President, to express to. you the warmest congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I note
with great satisfaction the growing co-operation
between my country and yours, particularly recently
in the field of trade and economic development.
58. I should like to express to the members of the
Commission, my dear friend Ambassador Mathias and
the other two members of the Commission, my sentiment of admiration for their unflagging efforts in the
search for peace. They were given an undertaking for
a noble cause and they vindicated their judiciousness
in an exemplary manner. Objectivity was their companion. I would say to them that they should not be
discouraged by the criticism of the representative of
Israel, for they are in good company. Every commission, every body, every committee that investigates
Israeli practices or examines Israeli policies, either in
the occupied territories or beyond, is always subjected
to harsh criticism simply because Israeli policy is to
silence, suppress and eliminate criticism. Ambassador
Mathias is in very good company, the company of
many distinguished representatives of Member States,
and of others outside the Organization who have
espoused a noble cause, because that noble cause
collides fundamentally with the policy of Israel.

62. The representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, Mr. Terzi, knows better perhaps than
anybody else what Zionism means, what kind of harshness, what sorts of unconventional means have been
used for the expulsion of the Palestinians. Before
1948 terroristic methods, psychological warfare and
terrorizing ways were used to expel the Palestinians
from their land, simply because they had to make room
for the Zionist settlers coming from all over Europe
-and some from the United States. After 1948 new
methods were used, and since 1967more sophisticated,
more subtle ways have been employed: the diversion
of water, the demolition of houses, deportation to the
desert, psychological warfare to terrorize the indigenous and native Palestinians, vandalism by kids,
teenagers who have come primarily-I must unfortunately say-from Florida and elsewhere in the
United States, youngsters, fanatical Jews who went to
Palestine on the grounds that it was their own country.
Whereas our friend here, Mr. Terzi, who is the pure
product of Palestine, cannot go there. What do we call
it here? When we mention that Zionism is racism,
many Member States take issue with us. But if it is
not racism, then what is it?

59. For the last three days I have been reading
the statements of the Israeli representative. I said
last March, when Kuwait was a member of the Council, that he enjoys “linguistic globe-trotting”
12134th meering] in order to divert. He has assumed
the role of a linguistic globe-trotter. Linguistic globetrotting is an exercise which many of us are technically
capable of. But that is not the issue before the Council. Linguistic ability is not the monopoly of anyone;
it is within the capacity of so many of us. In all fair-

63. The other point that I should like to make about
this debate is that there is a new concept now, introduced by Israel. The new concept is the concept of

what I call absolutism. The concept of absolutism
means that the Israelis insist on absolute security;
7

on the absolute right-as it perceives it--to settle
anywhere in Palestinian territory. Absolutism means
even the right to divert water for the sake of the Jews
at the expense of the Palestinians; in other words,
to make the Palestinians so thirsty that they will leave
the land of their ancestors. The principle of absolutism
is based on force, on the belief that the ultimate objective is the triumph of force. The principle of absolutism
gets its strength from political support-and I shall
revert to this.
64. The principle of absolutism has given Israel the
Jewish settlements in the West Bank, as well as in the
Golan Heights--the occupied Syrian territory. The
principle of absolutism is the salient element in
southern Lebanon’s suffering. We periodically debate
here the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We talk about Major
Haddad, and about the Force’s inability to discharge
its mandate in southern Lebanon. The principle of
absolutism is involved in all that, too.
65. The principle of absolutism means absolute
security for Israel, at the expense of the security of
others. In other words, by its very nature, absolute
security means insecurity for others. It means the
absolute right for Israel to build Jewish settlements
in the West Bank and in other places, the absolute
right to import adventurers from Florida and elsewhere, the absolute right to vandalize Palestinians,
the absolute right to live-where? In the city of AlKhalil (Hebron). And their grounds for claiming the
absolute right to live in that city are that Jews had
lived there until 1929. If those grounds are valid, what
about the right of the Palestinians? The Palestinians
lived in their country for thousands of years, until
1948, when they were forcefully and forcibly expelled
by the terror of Israel,
66. That is what we call the principle of absolutism.
It is based on State gangsterism. It is based on the
conviction that force will triumph. In a nutshell, that
is Israel’s policy-notwithstanding
all these long
lectures to which we have been subjected in regard to
peace and the possibility of future signals on the
horizon for accommodation.
67. What encourages this principle of absolutism?
Political support from the United States. My dear
friend Ambassador McHenry just came back from our
area, We were honoured to receive him in my country.
I am sure he was well aware of the feelings there. This
principle of absolutism is propped up by the uninterrupted support given by the United States to Israel.
It is generated and given its strength by this political
support by the United States.
68. Let us call a spade a spade. The other day
President Carter-and I have the greatest respect for
his integrity-said that under his Administration the
United States had given Israel $10 billion. I well
understand the motivation for that statement. Presi-

dent Carter also pledged hi$imorsil and political sup.
port for Israel. All this was reported in The Nenl Yurk
Times of 26 February. What a timely SQtementit
was-or, rather, an untimely statement, for, whether
we like it or not, it has affected the current debatein
the Council. IL has encouraged Mr. Blum and hi8
Government to display this total contempt for the
Council-and one cannot blame them for taking
advantage of the statement. When the Presidentof
the United States makes that kind of statement in the
very midst of a debate in the Council on Jewish
colonization of what is left of Palestinian land, that
debate is bound to be adversely affected and influenced. It is the reason for this Napoleonic spirit that
we see in Mr. Blum’s speeches. It is a Napoleonic
spirit that is derived from such statements by President
Carter. And it is unfair.
69. Mr. McHenry went to our area of the worldin
the aftermath of what we in that area call President
Carter’s doctrine. President Carter’s doctrine was
addressed to my area-1 am a product of the Gulf,
That doctrine is that the United States will confront
and repel any Soviet threat to or invasion of our
area, I want to say, on the record and very frankly,
that as a Kuwaiti I am not afraid of the rumblingof
Soviet tanks, because I do not believe that the Soviet
Union will touch our area. What we are afraid of is,
not the rumbling of Soviet tanks, but the instability
caused by Israeli policy.
70. In a nutshell, what has been presented to usasa
doctrine for our protection is really counter-productive
because it does not confront the real issue--the right8
of the Palestinians. So long as the Palestiniansare
unable to exercise their rights, so long as Palestinians
like my friend Mr, Terzi-this elderly man, with al!
his serenity-are unable to go home, so long asPalestinians in my country or in Lebanon or in Syriaare
unable to fulfil their aspirations, our area will be
unstable. And that will not be because of the rumbling
of Mr. Kharlamov’s tanks; it will be becauseof the
insensibility and intrasigence of Israeli policy.
71. And what is Israeli policy? In a nutshell,
Mr. McHenry, it is to expel all Palestinians. Israei
calls them “unwanted” and “nuisances”, The Israelis
act as though the Palestinians existed by accidentin
their own country and must therefore be deportedto
the desert. And where is the desert? Saudi Arabiaand
my country. So long as Palestinians continue to be
deported, they will be receptive to radicalization,And
radicalization means instability. That is the dangerto
my country, not the Soviets in Afghanistan-although
I would remind the Council that I made what I would
call one of the most militant statements in the General
Assembly against the Soviet presence in Afghanistan.
72. But one shouid be fair. One should confront
the issue. One should heal the wounds wherethey
exist. The cause of the instability is not the Soviet
threat to the Gulf. It is not the terrorism, as theytail

it of the PddJV~ ,Liberation Organization-and
1iould saythat I an?prepared to engage in a debate,
although
not at this Junc;tpre, on who is the terrorist.
Thecauseof the instability is the senseless,insensible,
brutalgangsterismof modern Israel, modern Zionism,
Thatjs the r&on d’f?rre of the instability in our
area.

somethingthat we herein the Council should emulate.
He said:
“If You see the outrageous,you have to resist it
with action; if you cannot with action, then with
words; if YOU cannot with words, then in your
heart-and that is the feeblest form of resistance.”

73, The Palestinians are restless, yes; restive, yes; 79. I know the Council cannot resist the outrageous
&&isfied, yes. And why? Because they are not with action. But I expect the Council to resist the
treatedas human beings. They are treated as sub- outrageouswith words. I hope that the Council will not
humanbeings. A Jew travelling from the comforts of resist the outrageousmerely in its heart, becausethat
BeverleHills to Israel could immediately go to the is the feeblest form of resistanceand we do not like the
home0PMr. Terzi and his relatives and occupy it as Council to be reducedto the lowest form of resistance.
hisown home. But not only are these Palestinians I hope that it will confront the outrageous,not necesnotallowed to do that, they are gunned down. And sarily with action-because we are aware of the
theirintellectuals who speak out are gunned down. situation-but at least with words.
Theirmilitantsare gunned down. And they should be
militant;if I were a Palestinian I would not be satisfied 80. Mr. MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico) (inrerpretation
withmakingstatements here.
from Spanish): We have convened here to examine
the second report of the Commission established
74. Wetalk to them and blame them when they find under resolution 446(1979).The membersof the Comrefugein despair, but we do not pay attention to them mission accepted the task with a keen sense of
whentheyfind refuge in tranquillity. We ignore them responsibility and have fulfilled that task with objecwhenthey are tranquil; we blame them when they are tivity and good balance. The data contained in the
violent.I amone of those who blame them. Mr. Terzi report, as well as its conclusions and recommendaknowsthat during the last two years when I sat in the tions, are correct and impartial. They therefore deCouncilI calmed him down; I told him that here we serve the Council’s recognition and support.
hadto practise the art of the possible, not of the
impossible.It is the art of accommodation, not the 81, My delegation wishes to stressthe value that we
language
of the gun. He understood it, so much so that think should be attachedto the work of commissions.
hehasbecomean “outmoded revolutionary”.
In the terms of Article 29 of the Charter, the Council
may establish such “subsidiary organs as it deems
75, This is a very serious debate, and because of necessaryfor the performance of its functions”. The
thatwe cannot treat it in the usual ritualistic way. We mandategiven to a commissionrepresentsthe delegacannotbe satisfied with sitting here debating the tion of power to exercise functions which are the
essence
of Zionism versus the right of the Palestinians. Council’s-in this case investigative functions. The
commissionstherefore act on behalf andin the name of
Wecannotbe satisfied with reading out statements.
the Council and when we invite MemberStatesto make
76. Whatcan the Council do? We know the Council’s up commissionswe place our full trust in them.
limitations,and it is unfair to fix our sites on the peak
of themountain. We have to be realistic. I think that 82. We wish to express appreciation to the reprethebestway to proceed is to tell those poor Palestin- sentativesof the Governmentsof Portugal, Bolivia and
iansunderoccupation that the Council and, through it, Zambia for having accepted and diligently fulfilled
worldpublic opinion are aware of their ordeal. In my their mandate. The counterpart to the commitment
they entered into and the difficulties they faced should
view, it is enough, The Council should tell those Palestinians
who have been under occupation, who have befirm support for the report that they have submitted
beenforced since 1967 to endure the tribulations of to USand endorsementof their recommendations.
occupation,that it is aware of their ordeal, aspirations
aadpredicament, That is the best thing the Council 83, We deplore the fact that Israel has refused to cooperate with the Commissionin its work, and it would
cando.
he incongruous for the Council passively to accept
77, Israel invites sanctions; but, unfortunately, Israel such obvious violations of the Charter by a State-any
alwaysgets what it does not deserve and gets away State Member. The resolution we adopt should include
Withwhat it is not entitled to. That is in the nature of measurescommensurate with the seriousnessof that
things;and, as I said earlier, that is derived from the fact, which is so significant and which in and of itself
renders meaninglessany argument against the report
Principle of absolutism, suppol-bd by-1 shall not use
anunflattering adjective-United States policy. Let that we are considering.
usbefair. That is the problem.
84. We wish also t0 state our COnCern at SOme
78. I am always accused of coming with quotations. features of this debate which are degrading to the
I have one from the Prophet Mohammed, who said dignity of the Council. Consideration of the report
9

IY

Palestine. No nation can expect of another the recognition of a right which it itself denies to that other
nation.

entails further elucidation of the facts included in it.
Instead of this, yesterday we witnessed a round of
insults and accusations foreign to the subject under
consideration and addressed to States whose behaviour
was not on the agenda.

90. Despite the partial solutions which have been
found so far, we shall not attain peace and security
for the region as long as the conflict between the
Iewish and the Palestinian nations is not settled. With
the approval of the United Nations, the former constituted a State over 30 years ago. The Palestinian
people, which has affirmed its identity through a life
of deprivation and common hopes, has the right, like
so many other nations, to constitute itself politically
with all the attributes of a sovereign State. While in
this conflict both nations maintain that their survival
is at stake, the truth is that the colonization of
occupied territories only objectively affects the rights
of the Palestinian nation.

85. The Commission has reached two major conclusions. First, the policy of Israeli settlements in the
occupied Arab territories continues systematically
in disregard of General Assembly and Council resolutions. Secondly, from all the indications available, this
attitude is part of a deliberate strategy aimed at
creating irreversible situations which, given their
emotive content and their political implications,
impede a prompt, peaceful and just solution of the
Palestinian problem.
86. We are faced with a case in which fundamental
principles of our Organization are affected and, at the
same time, objectives pursued by the international
community are undermined. Hence the legitimate
interest which all States have in this problem, because
we all care about compliance with the basic rules which
make coexistence possible and because the situation
obtaining in the Middle East continues to constitute
the most serious threat to international peace and
security.

91, In the Middle East, channels of understanding
have begun to open up. Never in the last three
decades have we been closer to real peace. The conditions are there thanks to which, by courageous
decisions promoting the advent of the Palestinian
State, harmony can be restored. The friendly relations
which exist between Mexico and all the States and
peoples of that region enable us to appeal to them, at
this crossroads, to adopt decisions of a scope commensurate with the dimensions of the problem and not
sacrifice the future through measures which, like those
we are analysing in this debate, are inspired by narrow
objectives and are irrevocably doomed to failure.

87. The violation of principles such as the territorial
integrity ofstates, the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force and the right of peoples to selfdetermination affects all nations but, in particular, it
affects developing countries, which find in those principles the best guarantee of their own independence.

92. Many decisions and much of the world’s stability
depend today on peace in the Middle East. The sharper
the tensions in that region, the more reasons or pretexts will there be for accentuating bipolarity, for
reducing the margin for independent action by States
and for succumbing to the temptation of resorting
to force.

88. What is taking place in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip is unacceptable. Changing the pattern of
land ownership, altering the demographic structure
and exploiting the natural resources in a manner
detrimental to the Palestinian people are actions
contrary to universally accepted principles and resolutions. In this case we find particularly applicable the
principle of international law, which has been known
as the Stimson Doctrine, to the effect that conquest
confers no rights. The practices we condemn seem in
fact to have been conceived of in accordance with a
typical model of colonial behaviour according to which
the occupying community assumes the right to appropriate territories, to subjugate populations and to
extract wealth, while the colonized community is
deprived of its most basic rights.

93. The focal point of a deep conflict that for three
decades has pitted two significant sources of civilization against each other, a region which provides
and produces an important part of the energy available
to the world, the Middle East continues to be a major
axis in the disputes and ambitions of our times. Hence
the importance we attach to abiding by the decisions
of the Council and to the solution of the problem which
they address.
94. Not long ago, in this same chamber, we heard
appeals for strengthening the credibility of the United
Nations and for increased trust in its decisions. In this
case, too, we believe it necessary to find appropriate
measures consistent with the powers of the Council
which may assure effective respect for law and the
restoration of peace.

89. The problems which arise in the Middle East are
part of a single web and must be approached from a
global standpoint. They will be solved only if we
effectively guarantee for all States of the region that
they will live in peace and security through the recognition of the right of each of those States to exist
independently. Israel cannot validly demand recognition of that right for itself if at the same time it does
not recognize the right of the Palestinian people to
establish a national home by constituting a State in

95. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (inferpretalion front
The obstinacy of the facts, themselves
engendered and rendered more serious by the obsei-

French):

10

nacy of a State which finds. amusement in defying the
international community and all its peace-keeping
institutions, has again brought us here to this prestigious chamber to discuss the attitude of Israel in the
region.

100. If I have dwelt at length on that aspect it is
because we find the attitude of the Israeli authorities
particularly revealing. As is well known, Niger, as a
Sahelian country that has recently suffered from
many years of drought, is one of those countries
which are very familiar with the place and the value
water has in the life of all living things and for the
prosperity of the human community. We therefore
cannot imagine any greater deprivation than the one
which Israel is currently inflicting upon the Arab populations, which it is methodically striving to break up
and drive out after having confiscated a good part of
their lands,

96. Indeed, a new phase in the Israeli settlements
Policy, which has already been amply denounced in
the conclusions of the Commission established under
resolution 446 (1979), once again shows that Israel
remains deaf to the injunctions of international
opinion, deaf to the resolutions of the United Nations
and the decisions of the Security Council, deaf to the
after all well-meaning and urgent advice of those who
have always been its friends and its most determined
allies,

101. How then could we allow Israel to pursue its
annexationist policy, extend its settlements to all the
Arab lands it covets in the area, and implant Jewish
families in the very heart of certain cities, as it has
recently done in Al-Khalil?

97. Now it is the Arab city of Al-Khalil in which
Israel has chosen to show the world that it is not
only pursuing its systematic and determined process of
seizing Arab lands but is also planning to expand its
poiicy of establishing new Jewish settlements both
on the most fertile tracts of the West Bank and in the
most homogeneous Arab agglomerations, despite the
protests of the whole Arab world, despite the courageous resistance of the indigenous populations and
despite the opposition of Israel’s High Court of Justice,
which is timidly endeavouring to ensure a certain
degree of protection against the arbitrary seizure of
coveted lands.

102. Niger denounces that policy and strongly
opposes any presence of the Jewish entity in occupied
lands. It therefore demands that Israel should return
to its frontiers prior to the 1967 war, dismantle the
Jewish settlements and immediately ceaseall forms of
oppression and deprivation which the Jewish State is
currently inflicting on the Arab communities.
103. The policy of force, frustration and arrogance
has never given rise to anything but condemnation. It
has always led to discontent and revolt. It will succeed
only in jeopardizing harmony and peaceful coexistence
between countries and peoples. The present policy
of Israel in no way reduces tension in that dangerous
region of the Middle East, where already weapons are
used more than tools, and our speciesis becoming more
and more intolerant and is disobeying God, who has
frequently manifested there his deep love for mankind.

98. Some aspects of official Israeli policy recall
another policy that has been internationally condemned, the policy of South Africa which is based on
the principle: nothing for the blacks and everything
for the whites. In any event, it is becoming increasingly
clear that in the Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, including Jerusalem, it is now: everything
for the Jews and nothing for the Arabs.

104. While continuing to defy the international community in this manner, while using its force and
perhaps the overt or covert support it receives from
others in order to continue to occupy land contrary
to international law, while striving to wipe out populations by persecution and exactions, and while continuing to profane Jerusalem, although its religion
prescribes veneration of that city just as the Moslem
and Christian religions do, Israel cannot but be aware
of the fact that it is acting against world peace and
the moral law of nations, In so doing it is acting as a
fomenter of tension; it is deliberately pushing the
region nearer, nearer to an explosion.

99. That is the case,for example, with the traditional
sources of water, which Israel is exploiting intensively
and exclusively for the benefit of its own population
and the Jewish settlements which it has arbitrarily
organized, established and imposed. A passage in the
commission’s last report strikes us as being particularly poignant. Let me quote it.
“According to a study on water resources in the
West Bank made available to the Commission,
Israel pumps away some SO0million cubic metres
of the West Bank’s total annual supply of 620 million
cubic metres by means of artesian wells drilled
within its 1948 borders. The traditional water
sources, such as wells and springs, are also being
depleted through the use of modern drilling equipment to drain off water for the Israeli settlements in
the occupied areas. As the water level continues to
drop because of excessive Israeli consumption, the
Israeli authorities have resorted to restrictive measures on the use of water by the Arab inhabitants,
such as the prohibition of drilling new wells on the
western side ofthe West Bank.” [S/13679,para. 42.1

105. We are in duty bound to denounce that state
of &airs, to prevent Israel not only from resorting to
the law of the jungle in the Middle East, but especially
from isolating itself in its arrogance and imagining that
it can from now on conceive and execute any plan with
impunity, since its weapons are always at the ready
and the international community does nothing to
counter its acts or claims. We must induce Israel to
recognize and respect the Arab entities of the region,
to renounce once and for all its aggressive settlement
11

policy, to take account of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and to accept the representativeness of the Palestine Liberation Organization, with
which it should agree immediately to discuss the real
substance of the problem of the Middle East, that is to
say, the constitution of a Palestinian State, free to
organize and develop in full security. In the absence
of such action, tension in the region will never slacken
and we shall be in danger of going from crisis to crisis,
from one meeting of the Council to another, in which
we shall continue indefinitely to discuss and deplore
catastrophic and increasingly uncontrollable outbursts.

114. The PRESIDENT (iqeypretufion from Russian): I call on the representatiye of Portugal on a point
of order.

,.‘4
115. Mr, MATHIAS (Portugal) (interpretution from
French): On 5 January [ibid.], my delegation in the
Council voiced our reservations about hearing a representative of the present powers in Kabul. We
reaffirm those reservations.
116. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the representative of China on a point
of order.

106. It is true that the means available to us are
very limited, but the Charter provides for action and
measures which have not yet been proved to be
ineffective. We certainly shall have to resort to them
one day, and on that day, Niger will not be found
wanting.

117. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): During the debate in the Council in January
on Soviet aggression against Afghanistan, the Chinese
delegation made the following solemn statement concerning the participation of the representative of
Afghanistan in the meetings:

107. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of hfghan-

“In the view of the Chinese delegation, the permission for the representative of Afghanistan to
participate in and address today’s meeting can in no
way be interpreted as acquiescence in the situation
created by Soviet armed intervention in Afghanistan.” [Ibid., paru. 43.1

istan. I invite him to take a place at the CounciI table.

108. The representative of the United States has
asked to speak on a point of order. I give him the
floor.
109. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): On a
point of order, I should like to reiterate what was said
in the Council by the United States on 5 January
[218&h session] with regard to statements by representatives of the authorities in Kabul. While we have
made no objection to acceding to the request of
Afghanistan to participate in the current discussion in
the Council, the United States is in no way according
status to the regime that has been installed and maintained in Afghanistan.

118. With regard to the permission given today to
the representative of Afghanistan to participate in the
debate on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, the Chinese delegation continues to maintain
the position it has already stated.
119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): I call on the representative of Bangladesh on a
point of order.

120. Mr. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): The Council’s
decision with regard to the invitation extended to the
representative of Afghanistan to address the Council
does not in any way prejudice my delegation’s position on the situation in Afghanistan, Our position
remains the sameas stated on 5 January in the Council

110. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russiun): I call on the representative of the United Kingdom on a point of order.
111. Mr. ANDERSON (United Kingdom): The
position of the United Kingdom delegation remains as
stated in the Council on 5 January [ibid]. My delegation has raised no objection to the invitation to Afghanistan to participate in this debate, but this should not
in any way be taken to imply that the Government of
the United Kingdom recognizes the new regime in
Afghanistan as the Government of that country. We
do not.

12185th meeting].

121. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the representative of the Soviet Union
on a point of order.
122. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I have not
been at all surprised by the hostile statements against
the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan made by
representatives of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) bloc, and by China, which has been
described by the former Commander of this bloc as
the sixteenth member of that organization. It is the
right of every country to recognize or not to recognize
the Government or regime that has been establishedin
Afghanistan. That is an internal affair of each country,
and each country must decide for itself.

112. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): I call on the representative of Norway on a
point of order.
113. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): The decision to hear
‘the next speaker in this debate does not have any
implication for my Government’s view of recent
events in Afghanistan as stated both here in the Council [ibid.] and in the General Assembly.3
12

123. our country w&s I# recognized by the United
Statesfor 16 years. Thai .did not alter anything. We
lived, we built, we. overcame
our difficulties, we
.
strengthened
our socnalistrkgime, we became a strong
Stateguaranteeing world peace. Nothing will happen
to the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan or its
Governmentbecause some do not want to recognize
it; it will not suffer because of that.
124, I repeat: there is nothing surprising in the statementswe have heard. They are one more demonstration of the hostile policies of those States vis-&vis
theAfghan people and its decision to build a new life
andconsolidatethe gains achieved by the April revolution 0f1978.

125. I am not going to talk about what is being done
againstAfghanistan by people who want to “help” it.
Weshallsimply take note of the statements that have
beenmade.
126. Let us now hear the representative of the
DemocraticRepublic of Afghanistan.
127. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian):I call upon the representative of Afghanistan.
128. Mr. SAHAK (Afghanistan) (interpretationfrom
Russian): Mr. President, I am particularly pleased to

greetyou, the representative of the German DemocraticRepublic, a country with which the Democratic
Republicof Afghanistan enjoys close bonds of friendshipand co-operation, in the post of President of the
Council.I should like to thank you for allowing me to
addressthe Council.
129. The delegation of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistanfully supports the initiative that has been
takenby the Islamic States in calling for an urgent
meetingof the Council to examine the extremely
serioussituation obtaining in the Arab territories
occupiedby Israel. The Government and people of
the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan are linked
with the Arab peoples by close cultural, historical and
religiousbonds, and they staunchly support their just
strugglefor the full elimination of the consequencesof
Israeliaggression.
130. The Government and people of the Democratic
Republicof Afghanistan express their solidarity with
thefraternal Arab people of Palestine valiantly fighting
for the fulfilment of their inalienable rights under the
guidanceof their sole legitimate representative, the
PalestineLiberation Organization. As was stressedin
thepolicy statement made by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan on 1 January
1980[S/13734,nnnex I], Afghanistan
‘4* * 6expands its fraternal and Islamic ties with nonaligned, Islamic and Arab nations and their working
Peoples and decisively supports the liberation
_ movementsof the heroic people of Palestine.”

131. Afghanistan believes that a just and lasting
Peace in the Middle East can be reached only if all
Israeli occupation troops are unconditionally withdrawn from the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem,and if the national rights of
the Palestinian people, which have been trampled
underfoot, including their right to create their own
national State, are restored to them. We are convinced
that the Palestinianproblem is at the core of the whole
Middle East question and, until it is resolved, a just
and lasting peace in that region cannot be attained,
Therefore any hope of settling the Middle East conflict
by flouting the legitimate rights and interests of the
Arab Palestinian people, behind their backs and
without participation by their legitimate representatives, is unrealistic and doomed to failure.
132. The Camp David agreementsand the so-called
peace treaty between Israel and Egypt run counter to
the interests and rights of the Palestinian and Arab
peoples and violate the relevant United Nations resolutions and the decisions taken by the non-aligned
movement. Therefore we cannot agreewith the assertions to the effect that a separatepeace treaty brings
us any closer to lasting peace in the Middle East. As
the facts show, that treaty has only encouraged the
Israeli aggressorsfurther to entrench their positions
in the occupied Arab territories with a view to their
ultimate annexation. In this respect I should like to
thank the members of the Council Commission for
having provided an objective and thorough report
which shows how Israel is seizing Arab lands and
annexing them.
133. As we see clearly from the report, since the
matter was taken up by the Council in the summer of
last year, Israel, far from abandoning, has in fact
further expanded its illegal policies of creating settlements on the Arab lands it hasexpropriated. Recently,
according to information supplied by the Commission,
the Israeli occupation forces confiscated more than
40,000 dunums of private Arab land in order to build
Israeli settlements in the West Bank. Israel is intensively implementing a plan whereby 46 new settlements will be constructed in the next few years. The
Israeli authorities have seized natural resources,
including water resources,in the occupied territories,
thus depriving the Arab inhabitants of the wherewithal
for maintaining life.
134. All this shows that Israel is pursuing a systematic planned policy of colonization and annexation
of the expropriated Arab lands and that the expropriation of Arab lands is accompaniedby arrests, expulsions and other forms of massrepression by the Israeli
occupation authorities against the indigenous Arab
population. Obviously, the aim of Israel’s policies is
to change the legal status,the geographical nature and
demographic composition of the occupied territories.
135. The United Nations has many times roundly
condemned the policies and practices of the Israeli

authorities in the occupied Arab territories and
demanded the complete liberation of those territories.
Afghanistan fully supports those decisions. As a member of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Afghanistan
actively advocates the speedy implementation of the
recommendations of that Committee, which would
permit the satisfaction of the legitimate demands of
the long-suffering people of Palestine and enable them
to return to their national homeland.

to convey my congratulations to you, Mr. President,
since our two countries enjoy the best of relations.
142. I should also like to extend my deep appreciation
to all the Council members for granting my delegation
the opportunity to take part in the debate.
143. Once again the Council has convened to deal
with an issue that increasingly seems to expand in
scope in spite of varied efforts on the part of the international community to deal with it forthrightly and
justly. We are speaking of the continuing Israeli policy
of annexing Arab lands, as manifested by a number
of decisions over the past six months to allow Israeli
citizens to purchase land in the occupied West Bank
and Gaza and to expand existing settlements in the
West Bank. This latest series of actions culminated,
early in February, in a decision by the Israeli Cabinet
to support the settlement by Israeli citizens in the Arab
town of Al-Khalil.

136. As a participant in the Sixth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Havana, Afghanistan supported the Political
Declaration4 that was adopted there, in which the
Conference noted with deep concern that since the
signing of the Camp David accords between Egypt,
Israel and the ‘United States, Israel has intensified
its policy of confiscating Palestinian lands in the
occupied territories, establishing Zionist settlements
and installing new military posts, in addition to
annexing Jerusalem and turning it into a Jewish city.
The Conference condemned Israel and demanded the
halting of that policy, the immediate dismantling of
existing settlements and the restoration of the Arab
character of Jerusalem, in compliance with resolution 452 (1979) of the Council.

144. In the decision on Al-Khalil, the international
community has been presented with the latest example
of Israel’s true intentions, and therefore it is opportune
for the Council to be taking up the situation in the
occupied Arab territories in response to two requests,
one from the delegation of Jordan and the other from
the delegation of Morocco, acting on behalf of the
42 members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference .

137. But Israel continues its gross violation of the
Charter, the principles of international law and the
many resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. Israel’s actions are an open
defiance of the international community.

145. The latest Israeli decision is not only a manifestation of its defiance of the authority of the Council
and the expressed wishes of the international community, but also another step in a long series aimed at
annexing and colonizing the West Bank. This act is
clearly in contravention of resolution 452 (1979), which

138. The delegation of Afghanistan vigorously condemns the acts of provocation by the Israeli authorities against the vital interests and basic rights of the
Arabs and Palestinians, as well as their disdain for the
religious feelings of Moslems, and considers that the
policy and practices of Israel in the occupied Arab
and Palestinian lands constitute a serious threat to
international peace and security.

“Culls upon the Government and people of Israel
to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including JeruSalem”.

139. The delegation of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan expresses the hope that the Council will
carry out the responsibilities entrusted to it by the
Charter and take all necessary measures to prevent
the annexation of Arab lands by Israel and to preserve
the vital interests of the Arab peoples from encroachment by the Israeli aggressors and their protectors and
thus to promote the establishment of lasting peace
and security in the Middle East.

146. The Israeli action has had the further effect of
imposing severe hardship and suffering on the Palestinian inhabitants. Israel’s exploitation of the water
resources of the occupied territories has had a detrimentat effect on local farming. The Israeli occupation
has also led to violations of the human rights of the
Palestinian inhabitants and the uprooting of those
people from their lands.

140. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of Indo-

147. The second report of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) sets forth in a
striking manner Israel’s illegal actions in the occupied
territories and calls attention to Israel’s continued
refusal to co-operate with the Commission. The Commission succinctly states the motive behind that
refusal, when in paragraph 46 of its report it says
that Israel is still pursuing its systematic and relentless
process of colonization of the occupied territories and

nesia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
141. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia): Allow me, Sir, to
associate myself with previous speakers in expressing
my pleasure at seeing you serving as President of the
Council for this month. It is especially pleasing for me
14

that this is evidenced by the stated policy of constructingadditional settlements and by the expansion
of others already in existence.
148. The majority of the Council members have
&ays spoken out strongly against Israeli practices
andpolicies aimed at changing the physical, cultural,
demographicand religious character of the occupied
.Arabterritories. NOW, with the new decision on AlKhdil, the international community, through the Council, must seek concrete and effective measures to
expeditethe termination of the illegal Israeli presence
in the Arab territories. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that the international community, particularly the Security Council, should follow closely
developmentsin the occupied territories, since the
processof colonization of those territories will not
onlyjeopardize the very survival of the Palestinian
peoplein their homeland, but will also lead to a
deterioration of the existing fragile situation in the
region.
149. As the Ambassador of Morocco stated five days
the policy of Israel can only
leadto a further deterioration of the situation in the
occupiedArab territories and is also a violation of the
rulesof international law as well as an affront to the
dignityof the Islamic community as a whole,
ago [2199th meeting],

150. It is the considered view of my delegation that
theCouncil should take the necessary steps to put an
endto this grave situation and to prevent Israel from
further violating the resolutions of the United Nations
concerningthe situation related to the settlements in
theArab territories occupied for the last 13years, and
requestthe immediate withdrawal of the Israeli forces
of occupation from those territories.
151. A policy of annexation and installation of more
settlementswill definitely not advance the cause of
peacein the Middle East. A policy of subjugation
of the people of the West Bank and Gaza is not the
wayto achieve the peace that Israel claims it is seeking.
Suchpolicies, if anything, increase the threat not only
to peacein the region but also to greater global peace
aswell. A lasting peace can be brought about only by
Israel’swithdrawal from the occupied lands and by the
Palestinianpeople’s exercise of their right to selfdetermination and to their own homeland. Any solution must also entail Israel’s withdrawal from Jerusalemandthe termination of its actions aimed at changing
the statusof that city.
152. This proposal for solving the situation in the
Middle East, as representatives here know, has been
repeatedad infinitum these past years in the Council
andelsewhere. But truly, this remains the only solution that will ensure lasting peace in the region.
153. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian):The next speaker is the representative of Jordan,
to whom I give the floor.

154. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): It was sickening,
indeed, for me-as it must have been for all who
believe in international law and justice-to hear the
foremost self-confessed aggressor and enemy of
mankind, not only of the Palestinians or the Arab
world or the African continent (in collaboration with
racist South Africa) speak about aggression, having
been itself engagedin aggressionfor the last 13 years
on end.
lS.5. Not satiated with their crimes and plunder or
with four fifths of occupied Palestine under the premeditated and notorious Delep plan-and preempting the resolution of 1947by which the United
Nations would have created a PalestinianArab State
far larger than the West Bank, a Statethat would have
dwarfed Jerusalem and Gaza-Israel has today, this
afternoon, through its representative before the Council, conceded and publicly declared its determination
to seize,retain and colonize the whole of the occupied
territories on the spurious grounds of security,
156. Representatives must all have heard of the
stockpile and arsenal of nuclear armamentsthat tiny
Israel, this poor Israel, has been accumulating by
means most foul-in every sense-over the years, as
acalculated policy startingin 1950,andnot by accident.
It was done by design as far back as 1950,when Ben
Gurion established his Atomic Energy Commission
with instructions to go ahead with the development
of atomic energy. And yet it wants to retain the tiny
remnant that remains of the Palestinianhomeland on
grounds of security. Poor Israel! It makesone cry.
157. A few days ago I read a despatchpublished in
the Israeli newspaper. That report stated
that the Begin Government and the Knesset would
shortly decide to apply Israeli laws to all the occupied
territories, having done so in Jerusalem on 22 June
1967. The only difference between the Israeli Government and the Knesset was the question of who should
take the initiative. The problem had not been resolved
until today. Evidently both Begin and the Knesset
have decided to assign to the Israeli representative
the task of announcing Israel’s long-predetermined
design to annex the whole of the occupied territories.
He has declared it officially and publicly today. We
were convinced of it all along. Our people there had
been telling us all along: “Do not expect anything;
they are determined to take it over”.
Ha’aretz,

158. In a statementto the Council I said that, instead
of trying to reconcile the irreconcilable, the Israeli
representative should tell the Council what his Government’s designs and plans were. He obliged this afternoon by making his announcement. I respectfully
urge the Council to show the seriousand deep concern
about this Israeli announcement which should be
shown. That announcement today marks the formal
turning point. I say “formal” because the turning
point had actually already been reached. This is a
watershed in the history of our region and of the entire

166. The figure for colon&d
land has jumped from
27.1 per cent to 3 1.4 per ,cent of the total area of
Jerusalem and the rest of theWest Bank. And this is
an ongoing process, relentless and Self-confessed, If
the Israeli representative disputes this awesome figure
-and it is an objective, not a subjective evaluation,
resulting from what is right there on the landscapeall he has to do is admit the Council Commission and
allow it to ascertain, on the scene, who is right and
who is wrong.

world, and in the history of the United Nations. Down
with General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) and 194
(III)! Down with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973)! Well, we shall act and react
accordingly. Henceforth we shall behave accordingly.
159. Gur peoples are adamant in their determination
to turn their eyes away from alleged dangers from
beyond our region and to look at real and imminent
dangers. We know who is determined to bring about
our perdition. We are aware of this every day and
every night, No amount of diversionary propaganda
will blur our vision or shake our conviction.
160. The colonizing and annexationist policies and
practices of racist and exclusivist Israel have been
exhaustively discussed. They are fully comprehended.
We have had the privilege of presenting to each member of the Council a dossier demonstrating the magnitude of Israeli colonization. I repeat, therefore, that
al1 of this is fully comprehended, notwithstanding the
Israeli representative’s
obstructionist
and diversionary tactics in reading out abusive and irrelevant
attacks-prepared
in advance-against each and every
member of the Council, against any State which
deplores Israeli illegitimacy and violations of all the
rules and precepts of international law, as well as of
Council decisions.
161. Israel evidently is determined to use a gunsilencer on any statements and considered judgements
which reveal and lay bare their foul deeds. And we
hear all these statements from the spokesman of the
so-called foremost democracy in the Middle East-a
phrase which we constantly read in the mass media,
which Israel controls.

167. The representative of the racists has maligned
the members of the Commission. As a matter of fact,
my delegation is convinced that, while the Commission
did a most commendable job, it did not do the total
job. That is not the fault of the Commission itself.
It was unable to do the total job because it was denied
access to scene of the crime, where it could have seen
for itself what has been happening. We ourselves are
at fault because we did not present all the available
data and evidence in time for the Commission to
include it in its report. Therefore, what appears in the
report, commendable and truthful as it is, is a great
understatement
of what is actually going on. That
observation is not intended in any way to denigrate
the integrity of the Commission’s
report. All I am
saying is that, while we blame our adversary for
refusing to admit the Commission to the occupied territories, we blame ourselves also for not updating the
information in time and informing the Commission
that the colonization figure has jumped from 27.1 per
cent to 31.4 per cent.
168. The same kind of strangulation is taking place
in regard to the water and other meagre resources
upon which depend, in the broadest sense of the world,
the lives and livelihood of the Palestinian people in
their homeland and in their exile.

162. Israel continues to carry out its acts of national
genocide against the Palestinian people and their very
existence. And yet we are expected to sing its infallibility and its glory-its
infamous glory-as a racist
State.

169. The Israeli representative has referred to the
Springs of Auja. Now, the Springs of Auja have been
a source of water for thousands of years. It is true
that every once in a while, when there is a drought,
there is a decline in the water supply. But that in no
way affects the basic information that has been given
to the Council by its Commission on how much water
the Israeli usurpers have been taking from the West
Bank for the use of Israeli settlements, as well as from
Palestinian land occupied by Israel since 1948. It is true
that this year we have had floods all over. Even the
dry valleys are overflowing. The level of the Dead Sea
has risen by 1.2 metres-which
represents an increase
of 1.2 million cubic metres in the volume. But that does
not absolve the Israelis of their crime of stealing the
basic water resources of the West Bank. What will
happen over the next six or seven years? Drought?
Starvation? Emigration?

163. Does the Israeli representative seriously think
that his silencer-censorship-can
silence the indomitable Governments, peoples and statesmen that make
up the overwhelming majority of mankind‘? Does he
seriously think that he can delude the members of this
Council, with their great intelligence and powers of
discernment? What a tragedy that a Government like
that of Israel should live in such a make-believe world,
especially when it is dealing with so formidable a body
as the Security Council!
164. The Israeli representative has already felt the
sting resulting from his cavalier and abusive way of
dealing with the Council. The statements of the past
few days have certainly made that clear. His aides
have, I am sure, already entered these statements in
their computerized files of abuse of Member States.

170. The “grand jury” of the world community,
represented by the Council, has commendably and
categorically voiced its conclusions and convictions.
But that very same world community,
not just the

165. The real questions of which the Security Council is seized are the following.
16

victimizedPalestinian people; is awaiting the verdict
sndits application. Nothi@ short of the application of
ChapterVII of the Charter will tell the Israeli aggressorsthat enough 1~enough. We are not going to
acceptour own obliteratton. It must be borne in mind
that31per cent of the occupied territories has already
beencolonized and we have been stacking up resolutions,year after year, month after month, to no avail.
lt is time that we thought of human beings, of a people
facedwith destruction.
171. On many occasions in the past the verdict has
consistedlargely of condemnations. We deeply appreciatethosecondemnations, because at least they show
thegreat and high integrity of the membership of the
Council.But the present situation cannot be remedied
by further repetition of censure and condemnation.
lf the Council is to remain a viable instrument of
peace-as was intended under the Charter-the only
answeris unhesitatingly to apply the powers vested
in it by the Charter. Either we mean business or we
regardthe Council as a debating society. God forbid!
If that cannot be done, then I sincerely advise all
aggrievedpeoples throughout the world to look elsewherefor their salvation.
172. I want to assure the representative of the Israeli
aggressors
and racists that, should our struggle last for
decadesor 100 years, we shall continue this struggle
by all possible means, notwithstanding Israel’s
accumulationof atomic arsenals-which, to state a
banalfact, is not an Israeli monopoly.

173. The Palestinians will return to their hallowed
lands,in spite of Israeli fanaticism and United States
blind support with tens of billions of dollars over the
pastthree decades.We shall seeto it that that happens,
for otherwise life would not be worth living.
174. We vehemently reject the so-called self-rule
plan, which is intended merely to subjugate and
eventually obliterate the Palestinian people in their
ancestralhomeland,
175. If Israel’s kingdom lasted for 70 or 80 years, the
Palestinianpresence has lasted for thousands of years.
Let the Israeli fanatics never forget that fact. If for a
few score years Jerusalem was the capital of Israel
-from 70 to 80 years-Jerusalem has for thousands
of years been more precious than a capital; it has
alwaysbeen our soul, our legacy, our eternal city, the
focalpoint of our spiritual existence and our historical
Past. It was founded by Jebusite Palestinian Arabs
sOme5,000 years ago. Inscriptions found recently on
threetablets unearthed at Ebla, in north Syria, refer
tc Arab Jerusalem as Ola Salema, the name which
PrimitiveHebrew tribes adopted when they infiltrated
thatgolden city.
176. Today, acts of destruction and desecration are
continuing unabated, as the maps that we have distributed to the members of the Council show. The

entire Al-Haram AlSharif area, sacred to 900 million
adherents of the Islamic faith, has been undermined
by digging to a great depth, endangering its very
foundations. The holy Al-Ibrahimi Sanctuary in ~1.
Khalil (Hebron) has virtually been converted into a
synagogue. This intolerable situation will surely come
to an end, becauseit is unjust and in flagrant violation
of international law,
177. I need not go into all the other petty distortions
and irrelevancies which the Israeli representative has
tried to present to the Council.
178. I take this opportunity to apologizefor the length
of my third statement before the Council, in which
I have described, with abbreviation but in some detail,
the lands, the locations, the areas andall the misdeeds
that Israel has perpetrated over the past years.
179. I reserve my right to make a more detailed
statement later on.
180. The PRESIDENT (inrevpretation from Russian): I should like to inform the membersof the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon, in which he requeststo be invited to
participate in the discussion.In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consentof the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.
181. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from RusThe next speaker is the representative of
Lebanon. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

sian):

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Tue’ni
{Lebanon) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

182. Mr. TUBNI (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset
to thank you, Mr. President,and the other members of
the Council for allowing me an opportunity to express
myself on the issue before the Council, despite the
length-often unwarranted-of the present debate.
Indeed, Mr. President, the patience and wisdom with
which you have guided the deliberations are worthy
of the highest appreciation.
183. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere congratulations and my country’s
appreciation for the tremendous work accomplished
by the Council Commission and, in particular, by
its Chairman, Ambassador Mathias.
184. I did not want to add to the length of the debate,
which the Arab Group had agreed to keep restricted
in the interest both of dignity and of economy. HoWever, since my country has been mentioned more than
once, I feel compelled to clarify a few points without

189. Such is our rejection of the situation that we
sometimes wonder how much longer the Council will
tolerate the maintenance of a United Nations peacekeeping force, created under the auspices of the
Council, to perform not the duty assigned to it by
international law but probably the very opposite,
Constantly harassed and often treated as an enemy,
the Force is gradually being transformed by Israel
into what Israel wants it to be, namely, a de facto
defence of its occupation of my country.

this necessarily being an exercise of the right of reply,
since I do not intend to enter into any useless polemics
on issues that are not on the agenda now before the
Council and which have been used as pretexts to evade
the real issue.
185. My first point deals with the consequences of
Israeli practices in the West Bank for the Lebanese
situation. By its determination to deny the Palestinians
legitimate national rights, Israel is creating a Palestinian Diaspora in many parts of the Arab world but
more particularly in Lebanon. Everything Israel is
doing seems to be aimed at forcing the Palestinians
in Lebanon to become established there not as a
temporary Diaspora-a people in exile-but as people
living in some sort of substitute homeland. We know
that the Palestinians reject that as strongly as we do.
We also know that both the Lebanese and the Palestinians are thoroughly convinced and united in their
belief that there can be no peace in the Middle East
that does not recognize the Palestinians’ inalienable
right to return to their country. Indeed, there can be no
peace in the Middle East without the establishment
of a sovereign Palestinian State on Palestinian soil.

190. I want to conclude by saying that, when the
Security Council
“Culls upon the Government and people of Israel
to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the Arab
territories” [resolution 452 (1979)],
it is not so alone as the representative of Israel makes
it appear.
191. It is reassuring that, while the Council’s debates
have not been reported by the media and have hardly
been noticed, The New York Times should this very
morning have published a letter to the editor under the
title “How Most Israelis Feel about the West Bank”.
In that letter, two articles of The Jerusalem Posf are
quoted. The first, by Mr. Abba Eban, says:

186. My second point, which stemsdirectly from the
first, is that Israeli practices in the West Bank are part
and parcel of a general Israeli policy which, as a
minority of one, Israel follows towards the United
Nations in every respect.

“Among all the concessions that could improve
the national position without any sacrifice of national
interest, the most urgent is the abandonment of
‘settlement’ projects in the populated Arab areas
which squander the nation’s resources at home
and its dignity abroad without the slightest service
to any authentic Zionist purpose.”

187. Though there is yet no Israeli settlement in
southern Lebanon, Israel has been continually defying
Council resolutions concerning southern Lebanon and
also constantly seeking to raise issues that fall exclusively within the domain of relations between Lebanon
and its brother Arab countries. Not only has Israel
prevented the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon from discharging its mandate but it has also
twisted the very objectives of resolution 425 (1978)
in a manner that prevents the Force from being the
instrument of the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty.
In Israel’s view, the Force must become-and probably is-Israel’s other line of defence against so-called
threats to its security, whereas Israel itself has been
and still is the invader, Through occupation by proxy,
Israel is creating in southern Lebanon an instrument
of destabilization which has prevented the legitimate
Government from exercising its authority and reactivating, in accordance with Council resolutions, the
Armistice Agreement which would re-establish the
international rule of law and order on our borders,

The other article, by Mr. Ian Black, speaks more
specifically of the settlement in Arab Hebron, saying
that it could “derail the autonomy talks, destroy the
chances of a durable peace and deepen the already
yawning chasm between the two peoples”.
192. We are keen to see that the chances of a durable
peace should be preserved and enhanced. But we
think that Israel’s determination to pursue its present
course will only be conducive to more tragedies
and, indeed, to another war. My country, which has
been a casualty of war, refuses, as do the Palestinians,
to become a casualty of peace as well.
193. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from RusI shall now make a statement in my capacity
as the representative of the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC.

sian):

188. Such action by Israel has created the objective
conditions that will ultimately lead to the south’s
being amputated from the Lebanese body politic and
part of that south being granted the dignity of being an
accessory to Israeli strategic imperatives. This is a
situation that the Lebanese Government and people,
and more particularly the people of the south, refuse
and will oppose by every possible means,

194. For several years now the policies of Israel in
the occupied Arab territories have been discussed in
United Nations bodies. Many documents condemn
these policies and call upon Tel Aviv again and again
finally to heed reason and halt its aggressive actions
18

sgsinst the Arab people of Palestine and the populations in the territories of neighbouring
States that
have been occupied by the Israeli occupationist forces.
195. It is with profound concern and natural human
anxiety that we hear about and read reports of more
sad more cases of terrorist confiscation of Palestinian
property and the planned changes in the demographic
structure of these regions. The evidence contained in
the reports of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) is absolutely irrefutable. The systematic ousting of the Arab population is the avowed
aim of Israel’s occupationist policies. Related to that
are the recent decisions taken by the Government of
Israel, which are such that even their closest ally has
publicly declared that it officially rejects them.
196. No one in the world can endorse the position
adopted by the Israeli annexationists. It has been and
continues to be decisively refuted in the Security
Council as well. Therefore, one can say quite definitely
that the aggressive policies of the ruling circles of
Israel are short-sighted.
197. The following question is often raised. What is
it that makes it possible for Israel to violate the basic
principles of the United Nations for such a long time
and in such an aggressive manner? One of the fundamental reasons for the continuing and even growing
threat to peace and security in the Middle East was
pointed out by the representative of Kuwait in his
address to the Council on 19 July last, when he said:
“What encourages Israel is the fact that the
Security Council is unable to face up to the challenge
Israel’s policy poses. Because Israel knows that
sanctions against it cannot even be contemplated,
owing to the protection it gets primarily from our
friends in the United States, it has indulged in a
policy of territorial expansion.”
[2157th meeting,
paru. 25.1
198. The fact that the Israeli aggressor has for
decades been protected, financed and equipped with
the most sophisticated weapons by United States
imperialism is well known to the world community,
far beyond the confines of the area of the Middle
East. At a time when the forces of peace throughout
the world had been doing a great deal over a period of
several years for detente and for the improvement of
international relations, back in 1977 the ruling circles
ia the United States openly deviated from the policy
of achieving a comprehensive, just and peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
199. The Israeli extremists hope that, behind the
screen of the military hysteria spread by influential
forces in the United States, they can intensify their
actions in the Middle East. The Camp David accords
ostensibly serve the cause of peace, but their true
significance for the peoples of the Middle East is
becoming increasingly clear. Those agreements have

been constantly exacerbating the situation from the
very day they were concluded.
200. The representative of Jordan by adducing many
facts, convincingly corroborated the evidence of the
terrorist colonial policies of Israel in the occupied territories contained in the report of the Council Commission. Taking refuge behind the Camp David
accords and demagoguery about so-called autonomy,
Israel is establishing further settlements and continuing to expel the indigenous Palestinian population
from its lands. Together with the usual purchasing
and selling methods of the capitalist market economies, methods of forcible expulsion and expropriation
are also being used. The so-called autonomy for the
population has been invented so as to perpetuate
Israeli occupation. The policies of colonialism are no
mere chance phenomena. They are an inherent component part of the implementation of a policy of global
imperialism to ensure domination in the Middle East.
201. In this respect, the recent Conference of Arab
States noted the ominous increase of tension by
imperialist forces and condemned the quest for military
bases. The German Democratic Republic fully shares
the concern of the Arab States, especially since
practically at the very same time as imperialist troops
were increasing their military presence in the Middle
East, a serious attack on peace in Europe was taking
place with the adoption of the decision by the Council of NATO to produce and station United States
medium-range missiles in Europe, a decision that
would thus present a new military threat for the Middle
East region as well. The missiles intended for southern
Europe can be launched directly at targets in the
Middle East.
202. These adventuristic plans are contrary to the
overall aspirations of peoples for detente, security,
the right to make sovereign decisions regarding their
own affairs and they further complicate a comprehensive and lasting peaceful settlement in the Middle
East. The solidarity of all Arab, Islamic and nonaligned countries is necessary to rebuff the new
imperialist threat in the Middle East.
203. Much has been said about peace and people
continue to talk about it. One is entitled to ask, however, what sort of peace we are talking about. IS it
the so-called peace whereby the Israeli occupying
forces are allowed to deprive the inhabitants of the
occupied territories of their means of livelihood and
to carry out cold-blooded annexation, or are we talking
about genuine peace, which would allow people to
exercise their right of self-determination, including the
right to establish their own sovereign State?
204. We reject the unjust peace of the OCCUpierS
and we advocate a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, Therefore, the German Democratic Republic
calls for an unconditional withdrawal by Israel to its
borders before the 1967 war, as well as participation

tion of the Algerian Government, which is contained in
the record of yesterday’s Council meeting.

on an equal footing for the Palestine
Liberation
Organization, as the sole and authentic representative
of the Arab people of Palestine, in all negotiations
to bring about a just settlement of the Middle East
conflict.

211. For its part, the Algerian delegation expects
specific responses to be made and decisions to be
taken by the Council to find a solution to the situation,
which is increasingly a cause for concern. My delegation would be careful not to acquiesce in a sterile
policy or subject our exchanges of views to a fallacious
procedure aimed not at settling the matter but at
diverting the attention of the members of the Council
to marginal questions. In the view of the Algerian
delegation we must retain a sense of responsibility in
this chamber where dignity and sobriety must be
equally maintained. Before concluding I should like to
say that the Zionist delegate has by his astonishing
remarks before the Council once again succeeded in
closing the ranks against him. By his statements he
has given us a clear image of the entity he represents.

205. As in the past, so in the future, the Arab peoples
in their just struggle can confidently
count on the
solidarity of the German Democratic
Republic. The
General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the
Socialist Unity Party of Germany and Chairman of the
State Council of the German Democratic
Republic,
Erich Honecker, on a State visit to the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen, stated the following
on this subject:
“We actively support the right of Arab peoples
and States freely to choose their future and to take
their natural resources under their sovereign control. We respect the cultural and historical achievements and humanistic principles of Islam and value
the contribution by the Islamic States to the cause of
peace. ’ ’

212.

Mr.

Rus-

213.

Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal) (interpretation from
The Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) has done its utmost, in carrying out
its mandate, to obtain co-operation from the Government of Israel, and I had the honour to emphasize in
the Council why and for what purpose we sought it.
As we know all too well, we were denied that cooperation. That fact alone makes any allegations that
may be formulated by the representative of Israel on
this subject completely valueless. We reject them.
The Commission’s report will be judged by the Council,
and that judgement will be sufficient for us.

208. The representative of Algeria has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
French):

from

French):

207. I shall now resume my function as PRESIDENT
of the Security Council.

209.

(interpretation

of Portugal has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply. I call upon him.
V

206. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic supports decisive measures to implement
the Council resolution on this subject, which were
advocated by the Sixth Summit Conference of NonAligned States in Havana. We are in favour of
extending the mandate of the Commission established
under resolution 446 (1979).

from

The PRESIDENT

sian): The representative

214.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz
from RusI call on the representative of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization,
who has asked to make a
statement in reply.

sian):

BOUZARBIA
(Algeria)
(interpretafion
Mr. President, I thank you for allowing
the delegation of Algeria to speak again. We had not
intended to speak a second time. I can assure you that
my delegation does not intend to delay the conclusion
of the work of the Council; my statement will be very
brief.

21.5. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The Camp David accords have been cited as the
beginning of a new cycle. But not only do they deny
the Palestinian the right to return to his home and
property; also by virtue of those accords, the Palestinian is denied a burial place in his country.

210. The Algerian delegation believes that the aspects
of the problem submitted to the Council for consideration are very clear. I mentioned them here yesterday [220!st meeting]. In general terms, they are the
following: first, the behaviour, which has been unanimously condemned,
of the Zionist entity in the
occupied Arab territories and the process of intensifying the settlements in those territories, which are
the logical outcome of the Camp David and Washington agreements; secondly, the inadequacy of the
Camp David accords and the Washington treaty in the
search for a solution to the Palestinian
problem;
thirdly, the question of Palestine, which is at the very
.heart of the Middle East crisis; and fourthly, the posi-

216. This morning I had a call from an American
citizen in Brooklyn. He spoke a few words in Arabic,
and then he continued in English. A very long time ago
his father emigrated from Al-Mara’a
Al-Sharqiyah,
near Jerusalem. He died a couple of days ago. Reading
in his will that his last desire and will was that he be
buried in his village, his children called on the Israeli
Consul General and asked for permission to transfer
the remains. They were denied that permission, and
they were told that if they so desired they could
transfer the remains to Amman and apply for the
admission of the body from Amman.
20

,

217. It turns out that that same family lost another
relative, again another American citizen, three years
sgo, and they transferred the body via Amman. But
upon their arrival at the bridge, the coffin was opened
sad the body was desecrated-for
security reasons,

used as a commodity to buy votes in the electoral
campaign. They tell us this is an election year. I ask
you: in the United States what year is not an election
year, what day is not a day for electioneering?
222. The Commission was denied permission to carry
out the task assigned to it by the Council. The resolution was rejected. But, of course, the other day Ambassador McHenry was visiting my country under
occupation, and I think that he heard about Hebron
and I understand that he expressed a desire to talk
to the Mayor of Hebron. Hebron was about half an
hour’s drive or so away, but that was denied even to
Ambassador McHenry. So not only are the Palestinian people under occupation taken as hostages,
but they are kept in seclusion in solitary cells.

218, The son of the deceased asked me what he
rould do. You know what it means to grant a human
being’s last desire and will. So I suggested that since
he is an American citizen, the best thing for him to
do would be to reach the State Department and ask
them to intervene. Just a little while ago I received
wcrd that even the State Department had turned him
down. They would not intervene on behalf of an
American citizen whose last desire was to be buried
in his own country. SO not only do the Camp David
accords deny the living the right to return; they also
deny the right of the dead to be buried in their own
country, on their own property. I thought I would
bring that to the attention of the Council. The
bereaved family is in a fix; they do not know what
to do.

223. We know that in the United States Congress
there are many decent people, and some of them have
now suggested to their Government that all the aid it
gives to Israel should be cut by an amount equivalent
to that utilized by Israel in the settlements. We know
the destiny of that move, of course. But anyway
it was really nice and I should like to express my
appreciation of the fact that there are people in the
United States Congress who are opposed to that policy
of Israel. And they are not only in Congress; the
United States Department of State, on 8 February
1979, sent a report to the Committees on Foreign
Relations of the United States Senate and the House
of Representatives in which-Mr.
Mathias might be
happy to learn-the
United States Department of
State said:

219. The item we are discussing here is “The situation in the occupied Arab territories”.
That very title
reveals that we are dealing with an illegal occupation
and, consequently, with the applicability
to such
territories of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12August 1949s. The basic issue is occupation and the
subsequent derivatives. One such derivative is the
racist Zionist settlement policy that has placed the
Israeli Government in a minority of one. Again, the
issue is the applicability
of the Geneva Convention
to the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied by
Israel. The issue before us is not merely the extent
of the damage; it is the damage itself.

“Israeli settlement activity in the occupied territories has adversely affected the livelihood of some
Arab residents, particularly through expropriation
of lands for individual settlements. Arab residents
have found it difficult to challenge land expropriation, partly because most settlements are first established as paramilitary installations. Expropriation
for such settlements is thus justified initially on
military or security grounds, even though most
have been transferred to civilians over time.”

220. Of course Israel must have had a reason for
denying the Commission admission to the territories
to investigate. It must have had a reason to reject
Security Council resolutions. But, believe me, crimes
cannot be permanently
hidden, And the reason is
simple. There is an inherent tendency in the Zionist
doctrine to infringe on the rights of others, to perpetrate crimes against humanity, and to survive, like a
leech, on the blood of its victims. And, furthermore,
in this case there is the certainty that the Zionists
receive moral, or rather immoral, and financial and
military support from the Government of the United
States. One must not exclude the military support.

The report continues:
“Many existing settlements continue to grow
steadily both in size, through further expropriations,
and in population.”
Here I may comment that this is what we call the
“creeping” thing. Furthermore, the report says:

221. After all, this is an election year, and we have
witnessed all the contenders, especially the incumbent,
cspitalizing on their denial of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, in the hope that they can gain
s few more votes, moral values notwithstanding. We
just talk about moral values; we see the Statue of
Liberty, or whatever it is. When learning history we
are taught that there are moral values, but when we
face reality it is entirely different. The destiny, the
future and the fate of 4 million Palestinians is being

“A further problem results from the exploitation
of a part of the West Bank’s limited water resources
for the use of Israeli settlements, which in some
cases caused Arab wells to dry up and has had
detrimental effects on Arab agriculture.”
I wonder whether the experts in the Department of
State are also big liars or just do not know what they
are talking about.
21

224. What has happened in Hebron, has, of course,
ramifications. According to the Agence France-Presse
of today’s date, 27 February:
“Tension mounted today in the West Bank town
of Halhoul with local residents charging that the
vandals who last night shattered the windows of
over 40 cars were from a nearby Jewish settlement.
“Early this morning”-that
is, 27 February“Israeli troops” -not police or security forces, but
troops, and maybe paratroopers; who knows?“reportedly resorted to tear gas to disperse the
angry Arab population while the mayors of neighbouring
Arab towns, including Fahd Qawasma,
hurried to Halhoul.
“Mr. Qawasma”-who was denied permission to
respond to your kind invitation-“described
tonight’s incident as a further step in intimidation
by Jewish annexationist movements.”

in United

Nations,

New

York

The meetitzg rose at 7.15 p.m.

NOTES
I Official
Stcpplemetlt

Records

af the General

Assembly,

Second

Scssiorl,

No. II, vol. II, annex 20.
2 See S/13872. distributed on 2 April 1980.

225. The situation is really tense and demands
immediate action by the Council. I am sure that the
Secretary-General must have received a copy of a

Litho

telegram sent by the mayors because I learnt that
telegrams were also sent to him concerning the situation. But the situation is really tense and might lead
to further confrontation and bloodshed and, as was
stated here, there is but one way of remedying it, The
remedy lies in Israel’s immediate withdrawal from all
the occupied territories because under occupation
resistance is engendered, and that resistance means
bloodshed. So I think that the Council should shoulder
its responsibilities for defending, protecting or maintaining international peace and security by eliminating
a cause of trouble that might lead to confrontation,

00400

3 Official
Records
af the Generul
Asscvnbly,
Sixth
Special Sessiott,
Plenary
Meetings,
2nd meeting.
4 A/34/452,
annex, sect. I.
5 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

$X3.61462-August

Etner~etwy

1986-2,425
