UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

CONTENTS
Page

... ... ... .. .... ... .. ... ... ... ... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution384(1975)(S/12011)
.. ... .. ... ... .. ... .... .. ... .. .... ... ... . ...

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l912)

S/PV.1912

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1912th MEETING
Held in-New York on Tuesday, 20 April 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. HUANG

Hua (China).

cedure. Accordingly,
pursuant to the usual practice,
I propose, if I hear no objection,
to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite the representatives of
Guinea and Mozambique
to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
usual understanding that they will be invited to take
places at the Council table when it is their turn to
address the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l912)

of the agenda

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/1201 1)
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Camara
(Guinea) and Mr. Lobo (Mozambique) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption

4. The PRESIDENT
(translationfrom
Chinese): The
first speaker is the representative
of Mozambique,
whom I now invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Mr. President, first of
5. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique):
all I should like to thank you and the members of the
Council for allowing the People’s Republic of Mozambique to participate in the debates of this particular
series of Council meetings concerning the act of
aggression committed by Indonesia against the Democratic Republic of East -Timor.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)
1. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Chinese): In
accordance with the decisions taken earlier [190&h,
1910th and 1911th meetings], I shall now invite the
representatives of Australia, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Portugal and Saudi
Arabia to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.

6. Please accept my highest and most sincere
expression of my gratitude for your brilliant performance during these meetings as well as on many
other previous occasions when you have presided.
It is with great satisfaction that we see a representative of the People’s Republic of China presiding over
this particular debate, because the People’s Republic
of China has a very glorious tradition of fighting against
foreign invasion and domination as well as of fighting
for the liberation of all oppressed people. The historical
example of the People’s Republic of China has inspired
many people around the world in their struggle to put
an end to oppression and exploitation
imposed upon
them by unscrupulous aggressors and foreign invaders.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anwar Sani
(Indonesia)
and Mr. Galvao Teles (Portugal)
took
places at the Council table and Mr. Harry (Australia),
Mr. Fernandes (Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Singh (Malaysia), Mr. Yango (Philippines) and Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Chinese): In
addition, I should like to inform members of the Council that letters have been addressed to the President
by the representative
of Mozambique
and by the
representative of Guinea which contain requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the question
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of pro-

7. In the same way that the Chinese people heroically
resisted the invasion of the Japanese during the Second
World War as a part of their struggle for national
independence, so today the people of East Timor are
also engaged in a valiant and heroic struggle against
1

Indonesian aggressors who would like to deny them
their right to freedom and national sovereignty.

12. This is the formula .of colonialist,
fascist and
expansionist-minded
regimes when faced with the
resistance of the people. This was the formula used by
South Africa in Angola, and this is the formula used
by Indonesia in East Timor. It is interesting to note
here that these two instances occurred in former Portuguese colonies. Was this a mere coincidence? It is even
more interesting to know that in both instances the
aggressions were committed in the name of restoring
order and preventing chaos in those territories and of
helping the people of the ex-colonies.
Are the
aggressors suggesting that the local populations were
happy with the Portuguese colonial rule which enslaved
the people for long centuries? If not, then why did
they not help during the Portuguese domination, when
help was needed? Regimes like these do not act only
in a cowardly manner but also irrationally,
at the
command of the international
imperialists.

8. The People’s ReI ublic of Mozsmbique is a product
of a very long and arduous armed struggle against
Portuguese
fascism and colonialism
for national
liberation. During the years of our resistance against
the fascist Portuguese oppressors, very deep-rooted,
friendly relations were established with all progressive
forces around the world, and particularly
with the
peoples under the same Portuguese colonial yoke.
Among this last group were the combatants of East
Timor, who in spite of very difficult circumstances
were still able to create the conditions necessary to
carry on their struggle for national liberation
and
eagerly to destroy the Portuguese colonial system in
their country. In this common cause against Portuguese colonialism, the Timorese and the Mozambican
peoples forged a most profound, militant and longlasting friendship.

13. On 28 November
1975, FRETILIN
[Frente
Revolucionriria
Timor Leste Independente],
the sole
legitimate representative of the people of East Timor,
took upon itself the responsibility for the future of that
people and solemnly declared independence and the
formation of the Democratic Republic of East Timor.

9. To support the Timorese people in their continuing
struggle for freedom is today the sacred duty of the
Mozambican people, for, just as the people of Mozambique experienced
the most brutal and inhuman
manifestation of a colonial and fascist regime during the
very long centuries of Portuguese domination
and
exploitation,
so, also, have the people of East Timor.

14. The People’s Republic of Mozambique
believes
that the proclamation
of the independence of East
Timor by FRETILIN
stands out clearly as part of the
vast movement for the emancipation
of oppressed
peoples all over the world and falls within the historic
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), adopted in
December 1960. For these reasons, the Democratic
Republic of East Timor deserves our support.

10. Some of the sufferings in East Timor today stir
up horrible memories of Portuguese fascist atrocities
committed against our own people, atrocities which
are still too fresh in our minds to be ignored. This
suffering is being inflicted on the people of East
Timor by Indonesian forces which invaded that country
last December. The People’s Republic of Mozambique
cannot remain indifferent in the face of reports of
human atrocities being committed by the Indonesian
Government in its efforts to recolonize Timor. From
this debate we have learned that about one tenth of the
East Timorese nationals have been exterminated by the
Javanese army.

15. The People’s Republic of Mozambique, a product
of a victorious armed struggle by the people of Mozambique against Portuguese colonialism and imperialism,
recognized the Democratic Republic of East Timor
from midnight of 28 November 1975, the very day of
the proclamation of independence.
16. The Central Committee
of FRETILIN,
the
revolutionary
vanguard of the people of Timor, took
the important and drastic step of declaring independence because it realized that the Portuguese colonialists, who had dominated the lives of the people
of East Timor for many centuries, would not engage
in any serious, honest and constructive
dialogue
leading to national independence for the people. So
independence had to be declared and taken, since it
would not be granted. Unfortunately,
it was not only
the Portuguese who were conspiring to deprive the
people of East Timor of their sovereignty. There was
also a conspiracy of silence and a total lack of support
on the part of the major capitalist Powers. Indonesia
had by this time organized a campaign to denigrate
FRETILIN
and to intimidate
the people of East
Timor. It had already concentrated a huge military
force along their common border. Yet the people of
East Timor were united in support of FRETILIN,
their vanguard party which had heroically proclaimed
i
independence.

11. The Mozambican
people’s legacy from the dark
era of colonial experience has taught us that any
colonialist,
any exploiter,
any oppressor and any
expansionist aggressor will stop at nothing in the drive
to maintain his crime against the colonized victims.
Colonialists
and expansionists
are people with no
scruples whatsoever as to behaviour.
In order to
achieve their morbid goals they will not hesitate to
bribe their victims if necessary. To accomplish their
objectives, the colonialists will buy off those leaders
who have no integrity and make them as much as
possible their puppets. Also, it is a general technique
of colonialists, expansionists and aggressors to spare
no effort in order to confuse public opinion by distorting
the facts to their own advantage whenever they are
given the chance. Finally, the last resort of these
wicked and dehumanized creatures is open military
aggression and the indiscriminate
massacre of resisting
people, with the ultimate intention of terrorizing and
intimidating
the masses which they wish to subjugate.
2

17. The achievement of independence by the people
of East Timor under the leadership of FRETILIN
is
the culmination of a long history of foreign domination
by Portuguese colonialism
and fascism and of resistance by the East Timorese to that domination.
In
the early part of this century a nationalist fighter,
Dom Boaventura, provided leadership and inspiration
for the resistance movement in Eastern Timor. During
the Second World War, the;.people of East Timor
struggled valiantly against the Japanese imperialist
.\
invaders.
I
18. FRETILIN
alone enjoys the support of the people
of East Timor, because since its formation it has been
able to articulate and address itself to the most deeply
felt needs and the most profound aspirations of the
*,
people of east Timor.
19. At the time of independence,
the Democratic
Republic of East Timor was a country which had been
looted by fascists and disrupted by colonialists,
a
nation which lacked schools, hospitals and the basic
economic means for development.
However,
the
people of FRETILIN
looked to the past of the people
of East Timor and to their history of heroic resistance
and triumph over the political legacy of colonialism
to find inspiration for building a new Timor. A new
Timor would have to be constructed from scratch, and
under the leadership of FRETILIN
it would develop
the economic and social base necessary for the
development
of the country and the progress of the
people in a way which would bring peace in that part
of the world.
20. Yet, despite the important
and difficult tasks
they faced, the people of East Timor were not to be
allowed to concentrate their energies on national
reconstruction.
Even before independence,
manmuvres began which caused difficulties for the people of
East Timor.
Some insignificant
and pretentious
political groups-one
called APODETI
[Associu@o
Popular Democra’tica
Timorense],
a small gang of
people taking part in a sell-out; another, UDT [Unia’o
Democra’tica
de Timor], a small group of latifundia
owners; and the so-called anti-communist
movement,
which as its name suggests is nothing more than a
bunch of irresponsible loafers on the payroll of intemational imperialism-were
organized to enable outside
forces to continue dominating East Timor. For a time
some
of these counter-revolutionary
elements
collaborated
with reactionary Portuguese forces to
orchestrate a position of supposed willingness on the
part of the people of East Timor to remain under
Portuguese colonial bondage, but it was not long before
these individuals were denounced by the East Timorese
people themselves.
Finding they were no longer
welcome, these counter-revolutionary
elements left
East Timor and joined their bosses across the frontier
in Indonesia.
1.
21. The Indonesian
thereafter, realizing

i‘ascists entered the scene shortly
that if they wanted to control

East Timor, there was no alternative but to invade
the young republic openly. So, with tremendous
military might, they launched an attack on the Democratic Republic of East Timor, taking along with them
their political puppets, whom they soon ordered to
form a so-called Provisional
Government
of East
Timor. Many countries openly deplored this Nazilike invasion and demanded that Indonesia pull out
all its forces immediately
and unconditionally.
The
United Nations itself in this very Council has already
taken a strong stand on this matter.
22. Nevertheless,
Indonesia continues to refuse to
honour and respect the most elementary principles of
the Charter of the United Nations or Council resolution 384 (1975), which calls upon the Government
of Indonesia to withdraw without delay all its forces
from East Timor. The Indonesian Government
has
defied every recommendation
made by the United
Nations through the Council in relation to the case of
Timor. The presence of the Indonesian delegation in
this room is meant to challenge all the efforts made by
the international
community
with
regard
to
guaranteeing peace and security in the world. These
actions stand as insults which are directed not only
against the freedom fighters of East Timor but against
all peace-loving people in the world.
23. From the time of our armed struggle against
Portuguese colonialism
to the present days of our
national reconstruction,
the people of Mozambique
have always placed a very high degree of confidence
in the fairness of the Security Council and its ability
to find adequate solutions for all the problems brought
before it. Encouraged by this impressive past, my
delegation
has confidence in the Council, whose
majority consists of countries which at one time
gallantly fought with weapons in hand for their own
independence against colonial Powers and at other
times against fascism or nazism, in addition to helping
other peoples to fight and liberate themselves from
those reactionary forces.
24. Bearing in mind that spirit, my delegation is very
confident that in the Council there is no country
which would be willing to betray the very historical
realities of its noble and dignified past to associate
the people it represents with the criminal, reactionary
and irresponsible acts of aggression against the people
of East Timor committed
by the fascist and expansionist regime of Indonesia.
25. On the contrary, if the United Nations and the
entire international
community do not want to see a
wave of wars of aggression and pretexts for more
annexations of small countries by other regimes like
that in Indonesia, they should take the present case
very seriously and find a proper and adequate solution
so that nations seeking to exploit or annex weaker
neighbouring countries will see clearly that the international community of nations, acting through the United
Nations, will not allow such aggression to take place.

26. The Security Council should take all the necessary and adequate measures to assure the world
that the kind of drama and the barbarous acts reported
here by the delegation of the Democratic Republic of
East Timor are vigorously and thoroughly investigated
and halted and that the Indonesian forces go back to
where they belong and leave the people of East Timor
alone, free to determine their own political,
social
and economic future in the same way as Indonesia
was given the opportunity and chance to be what it
chose to be.

tionary factions in thei country proclaimed on 18 December the creation of a government
which automatically disqualifies itself because it calls for the
integration of Timor into Indonesia.
32. In our statement of December 1975, we drew the
attention of the Indonesian leaders to the serious error
which they would commit should they fail to abide
by the sacred principles of the Bandung Conference.
That Conference, as ,we ail know, was a point of
reference for all the independent African and Asian
countries which have emerged since 1955. Selfdetermination
and inriependence were the concepts
most extolled, and this in the very heart of a progressive and militant
Indonesia,
the focus of the
admiration of the peoples of the third world. The fundamental error of the Indonesian Government is to have
failed to live up to the confidence we had placed in it
with the certainty that as a champion of decoionization it would give all necessary assistance to enable
Timor to throw off the shameful Portuguese colonial
yoke.

27. The Council should reiterate its condemnation
of Indonesian
aggression against the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. Also, adequate measures
should be taken to permit the creation of the conditions necessary to consolidate the independence of the
people of East Timor and to ensure respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. Just last month I had the
opportunity to be the spokesman of my people and my
Government in condemning South Africa’s aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola. At the end of
the discussion the Council adopted a resolution condemning the aggression.

33. Instead of intervening as a saviour, it is intervening as an executive
agent of imperialism.
FRETILIN
could never have resisted Indonesian
aggression without popular support. One can perceive
the extent of the organiiation
set up in East Timor by
FRETILIN
from an article by Robert Aarse published
in Le Monde diplomatique
of 11 March 1976:

28. My delegation is very confident that this time too
the Council will again know how to interpret the most
profound sentiments of all of humanity by adopting
the correct measures which will force the unpopular
regime of Indonesia to curb its puppets, to withdraw
all its forces from the Democratic Republic of East
Timor, to respect the territorial
integrity and the
sovereignty of this young nation and to let peace and
freedom flourish in East Timor.

“The political programme of FRETILIN
is simple:
independence,
free elections and new economic,
social and political structures based on village cooperation.
From the moment
of its creation
FRETILIN
sent militants into the villages. The
number of members of the movement went from
1,000 at the beginning of September 1974 to 80,000
in one month.

29. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative
of Guinea.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

“Education
is one way of raising the political
consciousness of the population.
FRETILIN
is
constructing in the villages its own schools made of
straw and clay and whatever materials are available.
Men and women are enrolled in elementary courses.
Co-operatives
are being formed; roads are being
built; land is being cleared.”

30. Mr. CAMARA
(Guinea) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, allow me first of all to convey
to you my delegation’s
congratulations
on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April.
31. The situation in Timor which we are now discussing deserves particular attention because it has
become so serious, for long months have elapsed
without full implementation
of resolution 384 (1975).
While paying a tribute to the Secretary-General
for
having implemented paragraphs 5 and 6 of that resolution, my delegation notes with regret that the appeal
to Indonesia has not been heeded. Indeed, in a subtle
manceuvre the Indonesian occupation troops have been
described as volunteers in order to evade the provisions
for their immediate withdrawal. Overstepping all its
rights Indonesia is supporting a pseudo- “Provisional
Government”,
which indeed represents no one.
FRETILIN
proclaimed the independence of Timor on
28 November
1975. To create confusion, the reac-

34. The events which gave rise to resolution 384
(1975) have once again been set forth {!908rh meeting]
in the brilliant statement of Mr. Hot-ta, the Minister
for External Relations and Information
of the Democratic Republic of East Timor. This clear statement
unquestionably
revealed that the allegations of socalled crimes. perpetrated by FRETILIN
are entirely
false.
35. The administering
Power, which in conformity
with paragraph 3 of resolution 384 (1975) was to cooperate fully with the United Nations to permit the
people of Timor freely to exercise its right to selfdetermination,
did make an effort along these lines,
4

and the statement made by‘: the representative
of
Portugal [ibid.] strongly incriminates Indonesia as an
aggressor. The question of Timor is a question of
military strategy on the one hand, and of economic
interest on the other.

of Guinea reiterates its complete and militant
with it.

solidarity

42. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative
of Portugal,
on whom I now call.

36. The existence of a democratic,
and therefore
progressive, republic in. the region inconveniences
the imperialist interests the& which are seeking at all
costs and by all possible means to muzzle the peoples.
Indonesia unfortunately
has allowed itself to be led
astray by the assistance it receives from reactionary
Powers in whose view a people’s republic in Timor
is a threat to peace in the region.

43. Mr. GALVAO TELES (Portugal) (interpretation
from French): As this debate continues, one gains the
impression that some of the statements have been made
not with the aim of really contributing to the solution
of the problem, but rather to enable the people making
those statements to vindicate themselves. That vindication has been unduly subjective, even aggressive,
but it has always revealed profound contradictions
and difficulties.

37. What is more, the search for oil in Timor, particularly offshore, has revealed the existence of this
black gold in the region. According to the magazine
The Petroleum Economist of March 1975, prospects
are good for both oil and natural gas. If Timor became
Indonesian,
the powerful company Pertamina,
the
Indonesian state oil company, would be able to get its
hands on all those riches. This explains the ferocity
with which imperialism
is hastening to tear apart the
people of Timor.

44. The Portuguese delegation, in its first statement
[ibid.], made a realistic and constructive
effort. It
did not attack any of the parties to the conflict. That
did not mean that we could refrain from condemning
the presence of Indonesian
armed forces in East
Timor, a presence confirmed in the report before us
and recognized by the Council itself. Nor did it mean
that we could refrain from drawing the attention of the
international
community
to the grave humanitarian
problems of the inhabitants of the Territory, problems
which have a very serious impact on my own country.

38. The delegation of the Party-State of Guinea,
faithful to the long tradition of friendship which unites
our people with that of Indonesia, repeats its appeal
to the Government in Djakarta to cease sullying the
heroic name of Bandung and to cease playing the
game of the imperialists, who have no concern for the
peoples and who will only lose when confronted by
the popular will.

45. That is why the Portuguese delegation deeply
regrets that the Indonesian delegation in its statement
should have made certain accusations against my
country. We regret that primarily for three reasons:
first, because the accusations are unjust; secondly,
because they are not relevant to the issue before the
Council; and thirdly, because they contribute nothing
to a solution of the problem.

39. Our delegation
encourages
the Portuguese
Government
in its thorough rehabilitation
vis-a-vis
its past and asks it to do everything possible to ensure
that the 500 years of colonization
of the people of
Timor ends in true independence. We have the firm
conviction that the Security Council will be able to
take all the necessary steps to ensure that the people
of Timor, led by its people’s Government,
can consolidate its welfare in peace and progress.

46. The Portuguese delegation, for its part, does not
have the slightest intention of contributing
to the
useless prolongation of the debate, nor do we intend to
divert the Council’s attention from the grave and
urgent problems it is discussing. However, we should
like to clarify certain aspects of the main issues that
have been raised in the course of the debate. But we
shall do that without failing to keep our commitment
to a realistic, constructive, objective and dispassionate
approach.

40. Our delegation asks that all States respect the
territorial integrity of East Timor as well as the inalienable right of its people to self-determination
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
We strongly urge the Indonesian Government
immediately and unconditionally
to withdraw its troops,
and we request the Secretary-General
to take all the
necessary steps, including the dispatch of a mission
to Timor, for the effective implementation
of the
resolutions of the Security Council.

47. From the beginning Portugal’s decolonization
process has followed the same principles whatever
the Territory in question. Contrary to what has been
asserted here, that applies equally to Timor and to the
exercise by its people of the right to self-determination
and independence.
Portugal has always felt that it
‘was up to the people of each Territory to determine the
political style of its independence; that is to say, it
was up to the people to decide the kind of society
that they wanted, the form of government
they
preferred, the organs of government and their composition, and so forth. In no instance has Portugal
imposed any model of society or government, nor has

41. Finally, we ask all neighbouring States and all
concerned parties to co-operate fully with the United
Nations in order to reach a peaceful solution of the
problem of East Timor. The people of Timor deserve
ail our sympathy in. these moments of difficult trial
against injustice. ‘The delegation of the Party-State
5

,

it exported such a model. It is the people of each
Territory, through their chosen representatives,
who
have always determined
their own future, In most
cases, the process began with a just war of liberation.
Indeed, that is what happened in Guinea-Bissau where,
after a struggle which lasted for several years, the
PAIGC, as the legitimate representative of the people
of Guinea-Bissau, finally set up an independent State.
Similarly, in Mozambique,
independence was won by
FRELIMO,
the truly
representative
liberation
movement of the people of that country. The same is
true with respect to Cape Verde and Sao Tome and
Principe, Territories in which there was a liberation
movement internationally
recognized by the United
Nations or by the Organization of African Unity as
representatives of the people concerned. In all those
cases, therefore, Portugal merely accepted the will
of the people already expressed through the liberation
movements that had conducted the struggle against the
colonial situation.

are responsible for the situation now existing in the
Territory, a situation in which the people of the Territory are not in a position freely to exercise their right
to self-determination,
a right recognized in resolution 384 (1975).
$1. In these conditions,
and considering the real
situation in the Territory,
what could Portugal do?
Nothing except what it did do: it remained neutral in
the face of the various factions that were fighting.
We refused to recognize...any unilateral attitude and
to legitimize any foreign intervention. That is why the
Portuguese Government did not recognize the Govemment of FRETILIN
when’that party dominated the
capital, and that is why ‘we now maintain the same
position vis-a-vis the so-called Provisional Government
of East Timor. Parenthetically,
I may say that that is
why we have been attacked from all sides; we have
been attacked because my Government has maintained
a position of complete impartiality,
and that position
is, as a matter of fact, that of the United Nations
itself, because neither the General Assembly nor the
Security Council has recognized that any party has the
least right to speak on behalf of the people of Timor
to the exclusion of other parties. It is impossible at
the present stage of decolonization honestly to consider
that the statements that have been made-either
on
the question of whether the Territory
should be
integrated into the Republic of Indonesia or on the
question of the legitimate representatives of the people
of TimorAndicate
that a real choice has been made
by the majority of the people of East Timor.

48. In Angola and Timor, however, the situation was
not the same, not only because it was different from
that of the other colonies, but also because there were
differences within each of those Territories.
49. In fact, in Angola there were three liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations. Therefore, and independent of ideological options, Portugal decided to
hear the three in order to determine what process
should lead to self-determination.
That is what was set
up by the Alvor agreements, and in spite of subsequent
problems, my country has always abided by the spirit
of those agreements.

52. It is also completely wrong to say that Portugal
has supplied FRETILIN
with weapons. It has never
done anything of the sort. What happened is this. At
one point in the conflict, local troops decided to fight
on one side and left, taking some of the weapons with
them. ‘The Portuguese Government and the drastically
reduced Portuguese military contingent then stationed
in the Territory never abandoned their position of
neutrality. It is obvious that if they had at any point
stopped being neutral, violence would have increased
considerably
in Timor and international
peace and
security would certainly have been seriously affected.
But the Government
of my country, aware of its
responsibilities,
preferred not to become involved
in the conflict and did not lend its support to any of
the parties in the struggle. That is why we had
recourse to the Security Council and urged the United
Nations to ensure free accession to self-determination
for the people of Timor.

50. There was not even one liberation movement in
Timor when Portugal expressly recognized the right
of that colony to self-determination.
The political
parties which are now shouting about their status as
legitimate and exclusive representatives of the people
of Timor have all been.created since 25 April 1974-that
is, ‘since the Portuguese revolution.
Portugal was
determined
to abide faithfully by the principles of
decolonization,
which it adopted most sincerely, and
it entered into talks with all the political forces in the
Territory. We did this so that the act of self-determination of the people of Timor could be Carrie-d out in
accordance with the will of its legitimate representatives. That is what the Portuguese Government tried
to do when it brought together all the existing political
parties to engage in a dialogue. Thus it was, with the
unjustified absence of FRETILIN,
that the Macao
conference took place. Later on, before the events
which gave rise to these meetings of the Security
Council, my Government once again, as the Council
has seen, undertook as a matter of greatest urgency
to involve all the political parties of Timor in the
process of decolonization.
But this time it was a lack
of interest on the part of UDT and APODETI
that
impeded our efforts. In the meantime, the different
political forces began to fight with each other, They

53. Portugal does not wish to impose itself as the
administering
Power of East Timor. The Portuguese
Government .does not view that status as a right but
as a heavy responsibility,
one it does not intend to
abandon through a unilateral act. We wish to exercise
that responsibility
in close co-operation
with the
United Nations, to the extent that the international
community ensures the necessary conditions. As long
as we exercise those responsibilities;lmy
Government
6

firmly intends to accept some form of exercise by the
people of Timor of the right to se&determination
in
conformity with the principles of Portuguese decolonization and in keeping with the general policies of
the United Nations. My country is therefore open to
any solution which might help bring about the proper
kind of decolonization
for Timor. We are even willing
to entertain suggestions as to the role we are playing
now. In the circumstances;iPortugal’s
position cannot
be used as an excuse for the mistakes or ambitions of
third parties. To each his particular responsibility.
‘j!
54. In spite of what I ha%e just said, one cannot
deny that the Portuguese Government has a right to
express its serious concern over what is happening in
Timor-not
only because the people of the Territory
have been victims of crimes and atrocities but also
because of the deprivation, the isolation, even the lack
of freedom of many Portuguese nationals there. My
delegation wishes once again to draw the attention of
the Council to the regrettable fact that, four months
after adoption of resolution 384 (1975), my Government
is still unable to obtain any information
about the
status of Portuguese citizens in Timor. We cannot get
that information
even from the International
Red
Cross, which is still not allowed to pursue its humanitarian activities in the Territory.

prevented the people of the Territory from exercising
their inalienable right to self-determination.
That was,
I believe, the main purpose we all had in mind on
22 December when we adopted resolution 384 (1975);
it remains the main purpose at present.
57. The Special Representative,
Mr; Winspeare
Guicciardi,
overcoming
great difficulties
and often
acting at personal physical risk, has fulfilled his mission
and submitted his report to the Secretary-General
[S/12011, ‘annex]. The report gives us a prima facie
view of the situation in the Territory and provides us
with some insight into the respective positions of
the Governments and parties concerned, together with
a conclusion that can be taken by the Council as a
useful general guideline in regard to what our next
step could be. I wish to avail myself of this opportunity
to congratulate the Special Representative
and his
assistants for their excellent work and to thank them
for the most valuable contribution they have made to
our deliberations.
58. I wish also to express the appreciation of my
delegation for the open-mindedness
shown by all the
parties concerned in their contacts with the Special
Representative
and for the co-operation which was
extended to him by all the Governments of the countries he visited during his tour of duty. In that connexion I should like to mention in particular the
efforts made by the Portuguese authorities in ensuring
to the Special Representative the communication
and
transportation facilities which he would have needed to
reach certain areas of East Timor and complete his
assessment of the over-all situation in the Territory.
Even if that part of the visit failed to materialize,
owing to the insurmountable
difficulties
existing
on the ground, we welcome the fact that the Portuguese
Government
does not wish to shirk its remaining
responsibilities and continues to feel directly involved
in the action taken by the Council to allow the people
of East Timor to exercise their right to self-determination. We welcome that fact because, as I said in my
statement to the Council on 22 December [1869th
meeting], we are firmly convinced that in order to
ensure juridical continuity between the colonial status
and the future political and social order of the Territory, the participation
of Portugal in the transition
process is necessary.

55. It is only natural that Portugal should be concerned about the status of its 23 soldiers detained in
Timor without justification.
No charges, whether
military or non-military,
can be brought against them,
since they only performed their military duties as part
of the Portuguese armed forces. For that reason my
Government
believes their detention is quite unjustified, and we are categorically opposed to their being
used as a political weapon. Without abandoning its
principles or responsibilities,
Portugal has done all
it could, and will continue to do what it can, to obtain
their immediate and unconditional
release. Humanitarian concerns of the highest importance are at stake,
and no Government or country can afford to ignore
those humanitarian considerations unless it wishes to
expose itself to the severest condemnation
from the
international
community.
56. Mr. VINCI (Italy): When the Council met last
December to consider the question of East Timor,
there was general agreement among its members that
our knowledge of the local situation was not comprehensive enough to enable this body to take proper
action under the responsibilities
bestowed upon it by
the Charter. That is why we asked the SecretaryGeneral to appoint a special representative with the
task of establishing contact with all the parties concerned and of reporting to the Secretary-General
the
results of his fact-finding mission. In carrying out his
mission, the Sepcial Representative
did not fail to
assess at the same time what possibilities existed of
peacefully reconciling
the differences between the
political
parties .in East Timor-those
differences
which, being at the. basis of the conflict, have so far

59. The situation prevailing in East Timor is certainly,
not a simple one, as can be clearly seen from the report
of the Special Representative,
and the Council’s task’
is not easy. Indeed, the stilldiffering
views and
even accusations exchanged by the representatives of
the political parties regarding the terrifying number of
victims on one side or the other have not thrown
further light on the ‘situation as we understand it from
the objective report of Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi.
However, under the surface of the conflicting positions
we detect some grounds for hope. It is our duty to
build on the “common
assumption”,
however
“slender” -to use the expression used by the Special
7

Representative in the last paragraph of his report-in
order to hasten a peaceful solution of the problem in
accordance with the principles and the purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations. The co-operation
given by all the parties to Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
to facilitate his mission is one of the reasons at the
back of our hopes. Another one, it seems to me, is
the continued attendance at our meetings of all the
Governments and parties concerned, without exception. I think that is a significant sign that they all
recognize the essential role the Council can play in
bringing about a peaceful settlement of the problem and
that they share our hope that our decisions will mark
a step in that direction.

pointed out, opinions vary about who should take
part in the. negotiating process which might produce
such a settlement, and how popular approval should
be sought. Our main task at this stage cannot be other
than to try to reconcile these differences, which seem
to originate in both personal feelings and a variety
of approaches to the problem. We see no better way
to lead the parties to co-operate with the Council in
tackling the substantial aspects of the problem. A basic
condition for the success of such action will obviously
be that all the parties get involved in these negotiations at one time or the other, if not through the
whole process; the lack of contacts with any of themas well as with any of the States concerned-might
seriously undermine the final outcome of the process
we envisage.

60. All this enhances, if that is possible, our responsibility towards the 600,000 inhabitants of East Timor,
to whom, as I pointed out in my statement of 22 December, we owe the establishment of the conditions
required to allow them to exercise their right to selfdetermination.
Upholding one of the basic principles
enshrined in the Charter, and giving it the respect due
to its universal character, is the only way, in the view.
of the Italian Government,
to settle durably the
problem confronting the Council.

63. Now that the existence of some essential elements
of a possible solution has been ascertained, we share
the view of the Secretary-General
that the Council
should recommend the promotion of further contacts
between the Special Representative
and the parties
concerned. The final objective of these contacts should
be to bring the parties together and work out a solution
on the basis of some fundamental
guidelines to be
established by this Council. The guidelines could in our
view be the following ones: all the parties should
pledge to refrain from armed violence during the
negotiations; they should take part in these negotiations with a sincere will to reach a peaceful solution;
and such a solution will in any event be subject to the
approval of the people of East Timor, whose right to
self-determination
cannot and must not be jeopardized
by any settlement
negotiated without their direct
participation.

61. In that connexion, we share the view expressed
by many delegations at all our meetings on this item,
including those of today, that an essential condition
for the normalization
of the situation in East Timor and
for the free exercise of the right of self-determination
by its people is the withdrawal from the Territory of
all foreign armed forces. We appreciate the assurances
given the Council by the representative of Indonesia
that the withdrawal has already started, and we firmly
urge that this process be completed.

64. We deeply hope that the Council will move in that
direction and that the parties will agree on such a line
of action. We believe, in fact, that this is the only way
to bring about a reconciliation
among the opposing
sides and to establish the conditions for the people
of East Timor to live in a normal and stable political
and social order and rebuild their shattered economy.

62. We were, on the other hand, favourably impressed by the conclusions drawn by the Speical
Representative
in his report-namely,
that all the
parties concerned concurred in principle that any
agreement on the settlement of the problem should
be submitted to the people of East Timor and approved
by them. It is true that, as the Special Representative

The meeting

8

rose at 5.10 p.m.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LRS PUBLICATTONS DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente darts ies librairies et 4esagencas dCpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen5ve.
KAH

IIOjIYVEiTh

H3AAHEiH

OPI?AHH3AI&HH

OE%EAHHEHHhfX

HAuHH

%iJnaHHII
OpraRAJaqHH
06’beAUHeHRblX
Haqd
YOXCHO K,TlHTb
B XHUJKEibIX
Hal-aJHHax
H areHTCTBaX
a0 XCex
paBOHaX
bmpa.
HaBOAHTe
CUpaBXH
06 HJAaHHXX
B
BauIeI6
XHH?XAOM
rdara3UHe
Xm
mivni~e
no anpecy
: OpraHHJaWfR
06'heAaHeHHb~X
Haqd.
Cexum
no nponaxe
H3AamR.
Hbm-mOpX
Xm >KeXeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NAClONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas par& del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00300

83+0801-AUg~st1984-2,200
