58

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

in the planning, implementation and evaluation of programmes and projects,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Children's Fund continues to remain alert and responsive to the emergency needs of children and mothers,
1. Recognizes the important role that the United
Nations Children's Fund is in a position to play in
helping to achieve the objectives of the Second United
Nations Development Decade, having regard to the
decisive contribution that the present generation of
children could make towards the future achievement
of the economic, social and cultural progress of the
developing countries;
2. Endorses the policies and programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund to aid countries to
protect and prepare the younger generation within the
larger context of national development;
3. Commends, in this connexion:
(a) The emphasis that the United Nations Children's Fund is placing on the "country approach",
whereby aid is given on the basis of the priorities of
the developing countries concerned;
( b) The increased attention being given by the
United Nations Children's Fund to the promotion of
integrated services for children within comprehensive
social and economic development schemes;
( c) The growing support being provided by the
United Nations Children's Fund in the training of national personnel of the developing countries, particularly within their own environment and at the middle
and lower levels;
4. Recognizes that the United Nations Children's
Fund would be in a position to meet more of the vast
unsatisfied needs of children and young people if more
resources were available to it;
5. Appeals to States Members of the United Nations
and other donors to make every effort to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2583 (XXIV). Question of the punishment of
war criminals and of persons who have
committed crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946
and 170 (II) of 31 October 1947 on the extradition
and punishment of war criminals, its resolution 95 (I)
of 11 December 1946 affirming the principles of international law recognized by the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, Nuremberg, and the judgement of the Tribunal, and its resolutions 2338 (XXII)
of 18 December 1967 and 2391 (XXIII) of 26 November 1968 on the punishment of war criminals and
of persons who have committed crimes against humanity,
Recalling also the Declarations of 13 January 194223
and 30 October 1943,24 and the 1948 Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, providing for the extradition and punishment of
28 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. 144 (1952), p. 1072
(Declaration of St. James's).
24 U.S. Department of State Bulletin (Washington, D.C.),
vol. IX, No. 228, p. 310 (Moscow Declaration on German
Atrocities).

war criminals and of persons who have committed
crimes against humanity,
_Convinced that the thorough investigation of war
cnmes and crimes against humanity, and the detection,
arrest, extradition and punishment of persons responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
constitute an important element in the prevention of
such crimes, the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the encouragement of confidence, the
furtherance of co-operation among peoples and the
promotion of international peace and security,
Noting that a number of States have already signed
the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory
!-,imitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity,

1. Calls upon all the States concerned to take the
necessa_ry measures for the thorough investigation of
war cnmes and crimes against humanity, as defined
in article I of the Convention on the Non-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity, and for the detection, arrest, extradit_ion and p~nishmen_t of all war criminals and persons
gmlty of cnmes agamst humanity who have not yet
been brought to trial or punished;
2. Invites States concerned which have not yet
signed or ratified the Convention to do so as soon as
possible;
3. Expresses the hope that States which were unable to vote for the adoption of the Convention will
refrain from action running counter to its main purposes;
4. Again calls upon States which have not yet
become parties to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide to do
so as soon as possible;
5. Draws attention to the special need for internati~:mal action in order to ensure the prosecution and
pumshment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity;
6. Requests all States Members of the United
Nations or members of specialized agencies to submit
to the Secretary-General information on the measures
taken by them in implementation of the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session a progress
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to give priority at its twenty-fifth session to the question of further measures to ensure the
extradition and punishment of war criminals and of
persons who have committed cri::nes against humanity.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2584 (XXIV). Adoption of an international in•
strument for the control of psychotropic
substances not yet under international control

The General Assembly,
Considering the responsibilities exercised by the
United Nations in regard to the prohibition of the use
of narcotic drugs and similar substances by virtue of
Chapter IX of the Charter of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the increasing and improper
use of psychotropic substances not yet under inter-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

national control, especialJy those of the amphetamine
type which tend to stimulate the central nervous system,
Convinced that these non-medical practices, and in
particular their rapid increase, constitute a great danger
for the international community as a whole,
Considering that immediate and effective action to
combat this threat to the health of people everywhere
requires the necessary co-operation of Governments,
Bearing in mind the reports of the Economic and
Social Council and of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs issued in 1966,25 1967,26 196827 and 196928
and the work of the World Health Organization,
Recalling its resolution 2433 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, Economic and Social Council resolutions 1293 (XLIV) and 1294 (XLIV) of 23 May
1968 and 1401 (XLVI) of 5 June 1969, and World
Health Assembly resolutions WHA 18.47 of 20 May
1965, WHA 20.42 and WHA 20.43 of 25 May 1967
and WHA 21.42 of 23 May 1968 urging controls on
psychotropic substances not yet under international
control,
Noting with satisfaction the considerable amount of
work achieved by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
and the Economic and Social Council in the preparation of an international instrument for the control of
psychotropic substances not yet under international
control,
Noting further the decision of the Economic and
Social Council to call a special session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 29 and also the fact that this
session will be held from 12 to 30 January 1970 at
Geneva,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to call
upon the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its special
session to proceed without delay to complete the draft
protocol for the control of psychotropic substances not
yet under international control.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2585 (XXIV). Advisory services in the field of
human rights

The General Assembly,
Noting the section of the report of the Economic
and Social Council relating to the advisory services in
the field of human rights, 30
Taking note of the international Seminar on Special
Problems Relating to Human Rights in Developing
25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6303); Official Records of the
Economic and Social Council, Fortieth Session, Supplement
No. 2 (E/4140).
20 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6703); Official Records of the
Economic and Social Council, Forty-second Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/4294).
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Supplement No. 3 ( A/7203); Official Records of the
Economic and Social Council, Forty-fourth Session, Supplement
No. 2 (E/4455).
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603 and Corr.I); Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Forty-sixth Session,
document E/4606/Rev.1.
29 Resolution 1402 (XLVI) of 5 June 1969.
30 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603 and Corr.1 ), chapter IX,
section L.

59

Countries, held at Nicosia from 26 June to 9 July
1969, the regional Seminar on the Effects of Scientific
and Technological Developments on the Status of
Women, held at Iasi from 5 to 18 August 1969, and
the regional Seminar on the Establishment of Regional
Commissions on Human Rights with special reference
to Africa, held at Cairo from 2 to 15 September 1969,
Welcoming the interest shown by Governments in
the United Nations activities concerning seminars in
the field of human rights,
Acknowledging the important role of regional and
international seminars in the promotion of human
rights,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Cyprus, Romania . and the United Arab Republic for
their offers to act as the host countries for the seminars,
their co-operation with the United Nations, which ensured the success of these seminars, and for the generous
hospitality extended to all participants;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and his assistants for the able organization of
the seminars held in 1969;
3. Invites the competent United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies concerned and the regional intergovernmental organizations to take into account, as
appropriate, the discussions and recommendations of
the seminars mentioned above;
4. Expresses the hope that the United Nations, in
co-operation with Governments, will continue to promote its activities in this field.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2586 (XXIV). Promotion of respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms during the Second United
Nations Development Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2027 (XX) of 18 November
1965 relating to the need, during the United Nations
Development Decade, to devote special attention at both
national and international levels to progress in the field
of human rights, and to encourage the adoption of
measures designed to accelerate the promotion of respect
for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
Recalling further resolution XVII on economic development and human rights, adopted by the International Conference on Human Rights on 12 May
1968,31
l. Considers that, in the elaboration of the strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
the final aim must be the attainment of a rapid and
sustained rate of economic and social development,
especially in developing countries, and also the wellbeing, freedom and dignity of all human beings, and
the enjoyment of all the civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights recognized by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and guaranteed by the two
International Covenants on Human Rights;
.
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee for :the
Second United Nations Development Decade to take
3l Final Act of the International Co11,e1t·me 011 llutnan
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 14,
