S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6363rd meeting
Wednesday, 21 July 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Nortern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Kaudel
Ms. Marinčić
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Mr. Kassianides
Mrs. Ntyam-Ehya
Mr. Arima
Mr. Khachab
Ms. Posada Otero
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Dizdar
Mrs. Kafeero
Ms. Scott
Mr. Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-45934 (E)

*1045934*

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I would like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Ecuador and Iceland, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is my honour to address the Security
Council at this important meeting under the presidency
of friendly Nigeria. I would like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, the Under-Secretary-General, for his important
briefing to us this morning.
My delegation thanks you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate, which comes at a very
critical and dangerous time for the Middle East, when
opportunities for peace and stability are receding and
opportunities for threats, war and aggression are on the
rise. All of this is a result of Israel’s feverish race
against time in its efforts to erode all that remains of
the hopes of resuming the peace process. Israel
continues to work for the Judaization of Jerusalem, to
build a racist separation wall on occupied Palestinian
territory, to intensify settlement activity there, to
occupy the Syrian Golan and to blockade Gaza. It has
attacked the freedom flotilla ships and murdered the
international peace activists they carried, in flagrant
defiance of the international community and in
violation of international law and the basic values and
principles of humanity and civilization.

2

This meeting is being held in the sixth year since
the International Court of Justice adopted its advisory
opinion confirming the illegitimacy of the separation
wall, and long decades since Israel first occupied Arab
territory. That is indeed the crux and the fundamental
reason for the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is by its nature a
provocative, unjust offence whereby Israel has violated
all relevant rules and international resolutions and
committed every kind of war crime against the
Palestinian people: killing women and children;
violating the sanctity of places of worship; inflicting
collective punishment; closing border crossings;
detaining tens of thousands of civilians and
democratically elected Palestinian officials; and
pursuing a racist, expansionist occupation accompanied
by cancerous, declared and undeclared settlements in
the occupied Arab territories, especially Jerusalem, in a
manner that targets the very existence of that city and
its Islamic and Christian character.
Such settlements have devoured around 42 per
cent of the lands of the West Bank, according to reports
by the Israeli organization B’Tselem, in clear violation
of international law. We should recall that Israel
continued to pursue these policies until a few days ago.
After the meeting between President Obama and Israeli
Prime Minister Netanyahu, Israel announced the
construction of 32 new settlement units in East
Jerusalem.
Syria, along with other Arab countries, has
worked, through the adoption of the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, to achieve peace and all that peace entails:
the restoration of all Arab rights, including Israel’s
total withdrawal from all occupied territories to the
line of 4 June 1967, and the settlement of Palestinian
refugees as set forth in General Assembly resolution
194 (III) of 1948.
The Israelis’ rejection of this is clear; they
disdain all such decisions. Committing crimes against
the Palestinian people is not enough; their crimes have
extended to peace activists of other nationalities who
tried to deliver humanitarian assistance to Gaza on the
freedom flotilla. Israel’s terrorist aggression killed nine
civilians whose only crime was to try to help the
people under blockade and whose suffering could not
be alleviated by all the resolutions and decisions
adopted by the international community.
That was Israel’s true response to the proposals
for peace in the Middle East, a response that we have

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

sought to remind the world of throughout the decades
since Israel first occupied our lands. Israel defies not
only international law, but its own bilateral relations
with important countries within and outside the region,
in a manner that threatens the region’s stability and
embarrasses its closest allies.
Around two months ago, this Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/9) in which it
called for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards; for
the immediate release of the convoy ships; and for the
delivery of their humanitarian assistance to besieged
Gaza. Today more than ever, the Security Council must
move beyond the mere condemnation of such acts; it
should translate its resolutions into practical steps
commensurate with Israel’s terrible actions, so that
they do not meet the fate of other, previous resolutions
on Israel that remain dead letters.
I would like to note here that Mr. John Ging, the
Director of Operations in Gaza of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), stated today that all Israeli
claims to have reduced the effects of the blockade and
allowed the entry of some basic goods into Gaza are
totally incorrect. We also recall that the General
Assembly has approved the recommendations of the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48), which included
conclusive evidence concerning Israel’s violations of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international humanitarian law during its aggression
against Gaza. Such violations are tantamount to war
crimes and perhaps even to crimes against humanity.
Every United Nations body has called for the
implementation of the report’s recommendations.
Thus, we call today on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility to hold Israel’s officials
responsible for their acts and to punish them for their
crimes in Gaza. We also call on the Council to press for
the immediate lifting of the unjust blockade imposed
on the Palestinian people in Gaza, to open all
crossings, and to begin to reconstruct Gaza, which was
destroyed by Israel’s aggression.
After 43 years of Israel’s unjust occupation of the
Syrian Golan Heights — and despite all the resolutions
concerning its international illegitimacy, including
resolution 497 (1981), and the call by a majority of the
countries of the world to put an end to that occupation,
as well as their condemnation of Israel’s oppressive

10-45934

practices and violation of so many laws and resolutions —
Israel still refuses to accept these appeals or to
implement any resolutions. On the contrary, after
occupying the Syrian Golan, Israel declared its
annexation, in clear violation of the principles of
international law and its obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Since that occupation, Israel has
employed every possible means to attempt to expel the
citizens of the area, impose colonizing settlements on
them and import foreign settlers, preferring them over
the indigenous people of the Golan, whom they have
incarcerated in detention.
Recent Israeli military exercises in the Golan
Heights have destroyed 5,000 dunums of fertile land.
On 12 July, Israeli forces used force to enter the home
of a Syrian citizen in the village of Mejdel Shams.
When villagers attempted to face them, some
25 persons, including women and children, were hurt
as a result of the tear gas munitions used by the Israeli
forces, and some were hit by rubber bullets. Mr. Lynn
Pascoe referred to this incident today.
My country’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, in
identical letters dated 4 January 2010 addressed to the
President of the Security Council and to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/4, annex), referred to Israeli violations
in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, where Israel is
planning to Judaize and control even more Syrian
territory in the Golan, in steps that send a provocative
message to Syria and other States that are seeking
peace in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. And, yet, in flagrant defiance of the will of
the international community, the Israeli Knesset, just a
few days ago, on 9 July, adopted, after a first reading, a
resolution stating that any agreement on withdrawal
from East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights should be
subject to a referendum requiring the support of 80 per
cent of Israelis. This decision is in clear defiance of the
entire world and a rejection of peace. All that has been
said by Israeli Government representatives is just
manoeuvring and manipulation: there is no real Israeli
partner for peace. The clear reality, as His Excellency
President Bashar Al-Assad has said, is that peace has
never been an obsession of Israel; Israel’s obsession
has always been its own security, in the narrowest
sense. This can be realized only at our cost in terms of
peace and rights.
It is illogical and unacceptable that we, the Arabs,
should be required to continue proving our sincere
desire for peace, even though we have declared it

3

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

repeatedly, especially since the Madrid Conference in
1991. It is for the Israelis to prove that they want peace
and to manifest in a pragmatic and realistic way that
they are seeking peace and justice. They have to try to
convince us, the Arabs, that they want peace. It is they
who occupy our land. It is they who attack our people.
It is they who displace millions of our people. It is not
the other way around. It is they who commit all of
these actions, and yet they call for protection and
guarantees, resorting to false pretexts to engage in
blackmail and gain further concessions.

organize a conference or special training session for
the representative of Israel and Israeli decision-makers
to help them understand the definition of aggression as
stipulated in the Charter and in United Nations
resolutions. The lecturers should, preferably, be the
special rapporteurs on human rights and those who
have chaired the many inspection teams and factfinding missions formed since 1948 to investigate the
repeated crimes of Israel. It would do them no harm to
recall the spirit of Count Bernadotte and to attend such
a training session.

The representative of Israel referred to the
alleged smuggling of arms to the Lebanese resistance.
She forgets that Israel has been mentioned hundreds of
times in United Nations reports — reports of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, reports of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and reports by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to Lebanon. All of
these reports mention, hundreds of times, that it is
Israel that violates resolution 1701 (2006) and violates
the sovereignty of Lebanon around the clock. She
forgets that Israel is the most heavily armed of the
parties, with conventional as well as nuclear weapons:
Israel is armed to the teeth. Since 1950, certain
countries have assured Israel of its military superiority
over all its Arab neighbours combined. She is also
oblivious to the fact that Israel uses that military
arsenal to perpetuate its occupation of our land, to
continue committing its acts of aggression and to
commit acts of piracy against the activists of the peace
flotilla. Indeed, Israel deploys submarines capable of
carrying weapons to the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea,
and issues threats of war every day. It violates
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Charter of the United Nations all at once on a daily
basis. Israel is known to be one of the largest importers
of weapons in the world. It is also the world’s fourth
largest weapons exporter.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

The problem with Israel’s representative here and
its policymakers and decision-makers is that they have
not yet understood that occupation is one of the worst
crimes of aggression, as defined in General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX). They have not yet grasped
that they have exhausted this Organization after hours —
years — of meetings on how to bring their occupation
of our land to an end.
One solution could be for the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) to

4

Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
should like to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this important and timely debate. I also
congratulate you on your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month. Undoubtedly, today’s
debate is a welcome opportunity to underscore once
again the importance of finding a solution to the
situation in the Middle East and, in particular, the
question of Palestine.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. I also take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
this morning.
Today’s debate takes place against the backdrop
of the tragic events of 31 May 2010, when Israeli
forces attacked a humanitarian aid flotilla headed for
Gaza, demonstrating Israel’s contempt for international
law, and therefore deserving condemnation in the
strongest possible terms. The Israeli military assault on
the aid flotilla clearly has a negative impact on the
search for a lasting solution to the challenges
confronting the region and results from the continued
illegal blockade of the Gaza strip.
In reaction to this incident, we recalled our
Ambassador to Israel for consultation and also
summoned the Israeli Ambassador to South Africa to
register the South African Government’s strongest
protest at the Israeli Government’s attack on the
flotilla.
The South African Government therefore calls for
the blockade of Gaza to be immediately lifted. This
blockade, which has brought untold hardships to the

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

ordinary people of Gaza, has subjected Palestinians to
subhuman conditions and is both unconscionable and
unsustainable. South Africa, while noting Israel’s
recent steps towards a shift in policy on Gaza,
unequivocally supports the Secretary-General’s call for
an end to the blockade so that humanitarian assistance,
commercial goods and persons can flow through
functioning land crossings. The continuance of this
blockade deprives ordinary Palestinians of their rights
to cross-border trade and movement, limiting the
extent to which they can exercise their social and
economic rights and inflicting untold suffering and
collective punishment on the citizens of Gaza. The
illegal blockade of Gaza further serves to seriously
undermine the creation of an economically viable
Palestinian State.
My delegation has always stated that a long-term
solution to the challenges facing the region can be
achieved only through negotiations. For this to happen,
it is essential that a climate of mutual trust and peace
be created. South Africa notes that the internal
committee set up by the Israeli Government to probe
the Israeli attack has concluded its investigations.
Although it admits that mistakes were made by the
Israeli military, no further action was recommended.
However, South Africa reiterates its call for any
investigation to be prompt, impartial, credible and
transparent, in line with the United Nations
recommendations, and, as this action had international
ramifications, to be conducted by independent
international investigators. South Africa therefore
strongly supports the proposal of the Secretary-General
for an international investigation that would involve an
independent panel and include representatives from
Israel and Turkey to investigate this incident.
The international community cannot allow such
serious violations of international law to go
unpunished, which would only serve as a license for
further acts of impunity on the part of Israel. In this
regard, the Security Council must ensure that Israel
upholds its legal obligations under international law.
Such actions on the part of Israel, in our view, would
build the trust necessary for taking negotiations
towards a permanent solution.
My delegation notes with concern that, despite
Israel’s restraint policy, settlement construction
continues in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We
therefore reiterate our call on Israel to immediately
cease the building and expansion of settlements and the

10-45934

continued demolition of Palestinian houses in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, which constitute a violation
of international law, relevant Security Council
resolutions and Israel’s obligations under the Road
Map.
My delegation remains convinced that the only
viable solution to the challenges confronting the region
is a political solution based on the creation of a
permanent State of Palestine and Israel coexisting
peaceably side by side on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as its capital, and the implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as the Quartet
Road Map.
In this connection, my delegation is of the view
that the proximity talks between the parties should
result in credible negotiations with the objective of
finding a lasting solution to all permanent status issues.
The search for a lasting solution will require
demonstrable action on the part of all parties, and
Israel in particular as the occupier, in taking the
process forward and to achieve a lasting peace and
security in the region. Current Israeli action does little
to build confidence and has ironically served to further
frustrate
attempts
at
achieving
meaningful
negotiations.
My delegation is deeply concerned over Israel’s
ongoing violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and calls
for the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
My delegation also calls on Israel to implement
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) with regard to
the Syrian Golan Heights. Only through a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East
that also addresses the Syrian and Lebanese tracks will
a durable and just peace in the region be achieved.
In conclusion, South Africa, as a product of the
solidarity of the international community, believes that
the international community owes it to the Palestinian
people to deliver them from the illegal Israeli
occupation. The resolution of this issue by and large
remains a question of political will. It will warrant
difficult decisions to be made and implemented,
particularly on the part of the Security Council. And if
the Security Council is to meet its responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security, its
members must be prepared to take those difficult
decisions and, more important, to implement them. It

5

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

can no longer be business as usual when generation
after generation of Palestinians are being denied peace,
stability, freedom and respect for their human dignity.
This body must carry out its Charter obligations on the
maintenance of international peace and security and
decisively deal with this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Madam President, I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.
Once again, the Council is meeting to take up the
conflict in the Middle East and Israel’s continued
occupation of the Palestinian territories and of Arab
territories in the Syrian Golan and South Lebanon. The
Council is meeting at a time of intensive United States
efforts, with major international support, to create an
environment conducive to the relaunching of direct
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israel in
order to achieve the two-State solution through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, coexisting in peace and
security with the State of Israel and all other States of
the region. We in Jordan support these efforts and call
on Israel to respond positively to them by resuming
direct negotiations as soon as possible from the point at
which the previous negotiations stopped, and to
address all final status questions, including Jerusalem,
refugees, security and borders.
Such negotiations must be clearly time-bound and
subject to strict criteria to monitor the fulfillment of
obligations. All parties must evince their seriousness
by matching actions with words. Any demonstration of
a commitment to peace ipso facto requires a halt to all
unilateral Israel actions in the occupied West Bank —
the heart of which is East Jerusalem — including
forced migration, deportation, the seizure of property
and land, and the policy of demolishing the homes of
Christian and Muslim Palestinians and evicting them.
There also must be an immediate stop to all
excavations and tunnels beneath and around the
Christian and Islamic holy sites.
Needless to say, such actions, over and above
being illegal and illegitimate, violate the norms of
international law and international humanitarian law
and constitute a flagrant breach by Israel of its

6

obligations as the occupying Power and of scores of
resolutions of this Council and hundreds of resolutions
of the General Assembly. These actions also hinder the
United States and international efforts.
The two-State solution is the only solution to the
question of Palestine, which is at the core of the ArabIsraeli conflict. Attainment of such a solution and of
comprehensive peace in the Middle East in accordance
with established international terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative is of vital interest not only to
the nations and peoples of our region but to the entire
world. It also commands international unanimity.
Similarly, the Arab Peace Initiative — adopted in
2002 by the Council of the League of Arab States at the
Beirut Summit and reaffirmed in all subsequent Arab
summits, most recent of which was the Sirte summit,
held last March, and also endorsed by the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) at the summit level
and the ministerial level — reflects the depth of the
Islamic and Arab commitment to an even-handed,
comprehensive, permanent and just peace. Regrettably,
that important initiative has not been received with
commensurate acceptance or positive reaction by
successive Israeli Governments. It is high time for
Israel to respond positively to this balanced, committed
and significant initiative, which would create a winwin situation for all parties.
That is because Israel’s acceptance of the Arab
Peace Initiative would guarantee the end of its
occupation of all Syrian territories occupied since 1967
and the remaining Lebanese territories occupied in the
same year and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
because it would guarantee an agreed resolution of the
issue of Palestine refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) and would secure for
Israel peace agreements with all Arab States and
normal relations with 35 other Islamic States.
Moreover, Israel’s acceptance and implementation of
the Initiative would put an end to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and guarantee the security of all States and
peoples of the region, including Israel. It would
integrate Israel into the region, replacing its recourse to
a citadel mentality, which does not bring about
security, stability, peace, good-neighbourliness or
cooperation.
Hence, we affirm and underscore the importance
of a holistic solution and of seeking as soon as possible

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

to resume negotiations on the Lebanese and Syrian
tracks from the point at which the previous
negotiations stopped, within a frame of reference based
on the established peace process terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Allow me on behalf of my country to emphasize
the severity and gravity of the scope and implications
of the absence of peace and security in the Middle
East. When His Hashemite Majesty King Abdullah II
Bin Al Hussein consistently affirms the centrality of
the question of Palestine and its priority and
precedence over all other questions in the region, he is
proceeding from the firm conviction that the two-State
solution and the peace process constitute the only
approach that will enable us to effectively and
efficiently address the region’s other challenges and
problems, including the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and manifestations of
intolerance, extremism, terrorism and violence.
In view of the uninterrupted historic role assumed
by His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein and
Jordan as custodian of sacred Christian and Islamic
holy sites, I would like to acquaint the Council with the
gravity of Israeli actions in Al-Quds, which are
intended to create new realities on the ground and to
eradicate religious monuments, in particular Christian
and Islamic sites. This constitutes a flagrant breach of
international humanitarian law, which obliges the
occupying Power to preserve cultural, historic and
religious sites and not to undermine or demolish them.
The Council realizes that Israel’s continuation of such
actions offends the feelings of hundreds of millions of
Christians and Muslims, not only in the region but all
over the world. Therein lies the real threat to the
international peace and security provided for in the
United Nations Charter.
The notable economic and security achievements
of the Palestinian Government in the Palestinian
territories are threatened by Israel’s continued policy of
isolation, roadblocks, separation walls and closure.
Hence, this policy and these practices must be stopped,
and the Israeli blockade of Gaza must be ended
immediately.
Moreover, until the full and prompt lifting of its
blockade in accordance with its legal obligations and in
support of lofty humanitarian values, Israel must deal
positively with international attempts to extend a
helping hand to the Gaza Strip. The recent Israeli

10-45934

aggression against the freedom flotilla is evidence of
Israel’s discriminatory and widely denounced approach
to the values of humanitarian relief, which bring
together humankind, regardless of religion, race,
culture or civilization. We call for a guarantee that such
denounced acts of aggression will not be repeated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): My thanks go to you,
Madam President, for convening this very important
meeting. I would like thank Lynn Pascoe for his
valuable insights. But unfortunately, what we are
looking for — something new to work with — has not
been forthcoming.
At the outset I would like to associate myself
with the statements made by my friend the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the representative of Syria on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
The situation in the Middle East is as old as the
United Nations. It has been debated in the Security
Council for many years, and we have passed countless
resolutions and presidential statements calling for a
settlement. Even today that settlement eludes us, and
unfortunately, the plight of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories under conflict and violence
remains.
We are now in the seventh decade of our
collective failure to enforce peace in the Middle East. I
call for collective action to facilitate a long-term
political settlement, which must create a viable
Palestinian State. We may prioritize this action into
two areas.
First, we must unequivocally call upon Israel to
end what most here consider a repressive policy of
occupying forces — repressive because those forces
have converted the Palestinian land into a maze, a
myriad of checkpoints, road blocks, military siege and
separation walls. It has started to look more like a
Times crossword puzzle.
The Middle East Quartet statement of 21 June
2010 has called the next important aspect, the blockade
of Gaza, “unsustainable, unacceptable and not in the
interest of any of those concerned”. Now that is a key
point. We are thinking from both sides. The recent
measures by Israel to ease the blockade of Gaza are
what are unfortunately categorized as a little too late

7

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

and far too little to work with. The outside world and
the freedom-loving people of the world find this
unacceptable.
The situation in occupied Jerusalem is not much
different. Illegal separation walls, settlements and
checkpoints even here block the integrity and unity of
this age-old city — a city where, I may add, the
Muslim Turkish sultans, when acting for the Muslim
world, invited the much troubled Spanish diaspora of
the Jewish nation to return and take a seat on the
council of Jerusalem so that they could participate in
the working of Jerusalem. That remains something
outside the purview of the recent and current Muslim
minority of that city.
Second in priorities is the requirement to stem the
continuation of settlement activity. It is not only
considered contrary to international law; it also a
departure from the pledges made by Israel from time to
time on the issue. This settlement activity is seen by
much of the international community as a way and
means for a major provocation. Settlement activity of
recent times has accrued numerous patterns, the most
worrying of which is the trend around East Jerusalem,
where the status of centuries-old prayer places,
mosques, churches and cemeteries of the Palestinian
people is being altered in the name of excavation and
creating new housing space.
I would say proudly here that when the last Jew
left my city of Karachi in Pakistan and sold the
synagogue for a condominium, a lot of us got together
to stand and protect, until today, the Jewish cemetery
in Karachi and ensure that none of it is ever violated.
Nobody asked us to do that, but we feel a commitment
to do it.
Only last Tuesday, Israel destroyed at least six
Palestinian buildings in East Jerusalem. That is
violence, and it continues with encouragement to some
of the more enthusiastic settlers, who continue many
forms of offense without any check or culpability. The
recent self-imposed hiatus in settlement activity, which
was never observed by Israel itself, is ending in
September. That is hardly helping the cause of peace in
the region. In itself the threat of settlements continues
to cast a shadow on any meaningful peace process.
The plight of Palestinian people must end. The
world cannot be a bystander to their miseries. Many
international experts of the region have noted that the
constituency for peace among the Palestinian

8

population is constantly shrinking. It is being pointed
out that more and more Palestinians see little
justification in pursuing unequal peace with an unequal
partner.
The present Israeli policies of blockades,
separations and checkpoints can lead to the
imprisonment of the entire Palestinian population as
and when that may be deemed necessary. That
continues to kill the peace process, as peace cannot be
achieved between a prison guard and a prisoner. Israel
must seize the fleeting opportunity for peace and
convert the ongoing proximity talks into direct and
meaningful negotiations with the aim of reaching a
two-State solution.
I will take this opportunity to express concern at
the lack of credible independent investigations of the
Israeli aggression against the freedom flotilla in
international waters of the Mediterranean Sea. Those
people had embarked upon a noble mission, and,
beyond all that has been said, that flotilla could have
been escorted into an area where it could have
disembarked peacefully and peacefully given up the
goods that had been brought on board. We have no
doubt of the humanitarian nature of that convoy, and to
cast aspersions on its noble intentions is misleading.
I believe that the Turkish people, who were most
of those affected, have been friends to Israel in the
Muslim world and have worked hard to try to break
this impossible impasse. For them to suffer such a
consequence is, in my mind, unfortunate and, to say
the least, not in the interest of friends who try to help.
It is a very simple thing: power knows no
limitation. Normally, in the law of the jungle, when an
elephant prevails and becomes overpowering and
becomes an absolute killer, it is called a rogue
elephant. No matter what one call it, the jungle moves
away from it. Nature is divided; nature cannot bring
together its forces of peace, harmony and existence.
That is what is essential to understand — that power by
itself must not be the goal of all means possible. In a
civilized world it must be expressed in a way that is
beneficial and not destructive.
I conclude by reiterating Pakistan’s support for a
lasting peace for the Arabs, Israelis and all the
inhabitants of the region. We have a strong
commitment to the realization of an independent,
promised sovereign and viable State of Palestine, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living in peace with

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

all its neigbours. We hope that, despite its reputation,
this Council will bring us nearer to that objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
group of members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC). The thirty-seventh session of the
OIC Council of Foreign Ministers, held in Dushanbe,
Tajikistan, on 18 to 20 May 2010, once again stressed
that the situation in the Middle East will remain tense
as long as Israel persists with its illegal policies and
practices and hinders the peace efforts, and until a just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement of all aspects of
the question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict
is achieved. Such a settlement will be achieved only by
ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967, and by enabling the Palestinian
people to establish their independent, sovereign and
viable State based on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital. In that regard, the OIC again calls on the
international community, including the Security
Council, to intensify its efforts to accelerate the Middle
East peace process based on its responsibilities under
the Charter.
While we meet to address issues related to the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East, including Israel's attack on the freedom flotilla
and its blockade of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip,
Israel is undertaking other illegal and provocative
actions in the holy city of Jerusalem. These actions
include the recent Israeli decision to build new
settlements in occupied East Jerusalem and to demolish
Palestinian homes in several neighbourhoods in order
to alter the character, status and demographic
composition of the city.
In addition to Israel's illegal colonial settlement
activities, construction of the separation wall and
demolition of Palestinian homes, it has revoked the
residency rights of Palestinian Jerusalemites, including
four elected members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council in order to deport them from Jerusalem.
Moreover, Israel is continuing its illegal activities in
the occupied West Bank, including imposing
restrictions on the movement of persons and goods
through numerous checkpoints, carrying out military
incursions and illegally arresting Palestinians. Illegal

10-45934

Israeli settlers also continue to carry out provocations
against the peaceful Palestinian population. These
actions are illegal, discriminatory and provocative, and
constitute flagrant violations of international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law.
The international community, including the
Security Council, should act immediately and
effectively to compel Israel to cease its illegal actions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly in
East Jerusalem.
The illegal and inhuman blockade imposed by
Israel, the occupying Power, on the Gaza Strip for
more than three years constitutes collective punishment
of the Palestinian civilian population, violates
international law and qualifies as a crime against
humanity. More than 1.5 million Palestinians living in
the Gaza Strip under the blockade continue to suffer
from a scarcity of food, electricity, medicine and
construction materials. They await the day when the
international community will take prompt action to end
their tragedy and suffering by compelling Israel to
immediately and fully lift the blockade and open all
border crossings to allow for the free movement of
persons and goods to and from the Gaza Strip.
In response to the unjust Israeli blockade, the
international flotilla of civilian activists set sail for
Gaza to deliver humanitarian supplies and to break the
blockade. However, Israel, with disregard for human
rights and innocent lives, carried out a military attack
in international waters against the peaceful
international convoy, killing and injuring innocent,
unarmed international peace activists.
As Council members realize, tinkering at the
margins of the ongoing crisis in the Gaza Strip is not
enough. The time has come to end the plight of more
than 1.5 million Palestinians, lift the blockade and
enable the people to live with dignity. Undoubtedly, the
military attack on the freedom flotilla demands a
prompt, full, impartial, transparent, independent and
credible investigation conforming to international
standards, based on the Security Council’s presidential
statement of 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9) and the
resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council on
2 June.
The OIC is deeply concerned by Israel's ongoing
air and land violations of Lebanon's sovereignty, in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on Israel to
withdraw fully from the remaining occupied Lebanese

9

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

land in the Shab'a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the
northern part of Al-Ghajar village.
The OIC also supports the position of the
international community reaffirming that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan or its
institutional structures, as well as Israeli measures to
impose its jurisdiction and administration there, are
null and void and have no international legal effect.
The OIC demands that Israel abide fully and
immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and fully
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines
of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
The OIC group reiterates that peace in the Middle
East will be achieved only by ending the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian and Arab territories that
began in 1967 and by establishing the independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and by achieving a just solution to the plight of the
Palestinian refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
It is incumbent upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to shoulder its legal
and moral responsibilities and take prompt and
decisive actions and measures to implement relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. We must
confront the challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I give the floor to
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

the

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset I wish to thank you, Madam, for having
convened this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. The issue under discussion is of
paramount importance, and this meeting is all the more
important in the light of recent negative developments
at the regional level. Those developments have again
highlighted persistent practices to deny the Palestinian
people the exercise of their rights to self-determination
and to live free from the fear of the occupation and
tragic suffering resulting from the ongoing siege of
Gaza and the West Bank and the recent attack on the
humanitarian flotilla of ships bound for Gaza.
The flotilla attack happened at a time when our
memories were still fresh of the crimes and atrocities

10

committed by the Israeli regime in its all-out attack
against the people of Gaza in Operation Cast Lead,
during which thousands of besieged innocent
Palestinians, including women and children, lost their
lives or were injured, and civilian infrastructure and
facilities were willfully and systematically targeted.
According to various reliable sources, in the course of
that operation the Israeli army did not hesitate to use
internationally prohibited and restricted weapons
against civilian targets. Since then, the Israeli regime
has continued to defy the will of the international
community, while its inhuman policy of continued
blockade against the Palestinians has caused an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) was an
important step forward towards remedying the
violations of the Israeli regime in Gaza. The report,
when issued, brought hope of swift action by the
relevant bodies of the United Nations, including this
Council, to put an end to the culture of impunity for
Israeli war crimes. So far, this hope has not been
realized. If criminals were brought to justice, perhaps
the barbaric attack on the humanitarian convoy would
not have happened. Impunity for perpetrators of grave
crimes, including war crime, occupation and crimes
against humanity, is in itself a cause of and incentive
for further atrocities.
It is regrettable to witness that the inaction or
weak reaction of relevant responsible United Nations
organs in dealing with the Israeli regime’s illegal
policies and practices have emboldened that dangerous
regime to continue with its crimes and cruelty against
the defenceless Palestinian people, especially innocent
women and children. The blatant support of certain
Powers for the Israeli regime is one of the bitterest
realities of our world today. By blocking any single
action against the inhumane policies and acts of the
Israeli regime in this Council and using various tactics
to undermine efforts in other United Nations bodies to
hold it accountable, these criminals enjoy a merciless
impunity in violating the internationally recognized
human rights and humanitarian law.
Despite strong international condemnation, illegal
settlements are being expanded much faster than in the
past, and one tangible consequence is that the land of
the Palestinians is shrinking and more and more
Palestinian houses are being demolished, to be
replaced by illegal settlements. This Monday alone, the

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

Israel regime, in defiance of global calls for halting the
destruction of Palestinian shelters, levelled tents used
by Palestinians as their homes in the northern West
Bank. Israeli soldiers entered Al-Farisiya village and
ordered the residents away before knocking structures
down. The occupying forces also knocked down nine
agricultural structures on the pretext that they had been
put up without permits. The resumption of demolition
work came as the international community strongly
called for an end to the Israeli demolitions, describing
them as illegal under international law.
We believe that the fundamental problem of this
long-standing crisis is not in the lack of peace plans,
which have arisen from time to time, one after the
other, but is rooted in the continuation of the
illegitimate occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories and in the Israeli regime’s intransigence to
any single principle of international law. All these
plans were doomed to failure because they all failed in
one way or another to tackle the Palestinian problem at
its root causes, including the occupation itself.
Furthermore, the Israeli regime, since its unblessed
inception, has attempted to cite external elements as
factors in its failure to move to advance the so-called
peace processes. These failed attempts have been
manifestly aimed at diverting attention from the
principled causes of the crisis and at evading
responsibility for the crimes committed in Palestine.
In line with this policy, Israeli officials, instead of
answering to world public opinion for their
unparalleled record of non-compliance with all
humanitarian and human rights principles and their
long and dark history of crimes and atrocities,
including occupation, aggression, militarism, State
terrorism and crimes against humanity, have always
made inflammatory remarks and baseless allegations
against other countries. Now, it is widely recognized
that the Israeli regime’s clandestine development and
unlawful possession of large stock of nuclear warheads
and its constant threats to use them against certain
countries pose a uniquely grave threat to regional and
international peace and security.
The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
and expansionist policies towards Lebanon by
constantly violating the latter’s land, sea and air space
and refusing to withdraw from Lebanese occupied land
in the Shaba’a, the Kfar Shuba Hills and the northern
part of Al-Ghajar village. It also continues its
occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan. That regime

10-45934

should immediately and fully withdraw from these
occupied territories in compliance with the most basic
principles of international law and the United Nation
Charter.
Attaining a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative to the realization of
a comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. In our view, a lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible only through
justice and an end to discrimination and to the illegal
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab occupied
territories. Today, we need to act collectively to
demonstrate our all-out support for the cause of
Palestine and to rally to the assistance of those who
have been deprived of their rights. Let us hope that
oppression and occupation will end and that justice and
freedom prevail in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made to my country by the representative of
the Israeli regime. I would like to place on record once
again that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations and distortions made in this Chamber that
have been repeated so frequently that they have
become a practice by the Israeli regime to distract the
attention of the international community from its
nuclear arsenal and its criminal policies and abhorrent
atrocities in the region, including its recent heinous
crimes against the people of Palestine in Gaza and
against freedom-loving people in international waters
near Gaza.
The President: I call on the representative of
Cuba.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to express the Cuban
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you, Madam, preside
over the Security Council and to commend you for the
manner in which and your team have led the work of
this organ this month.
I also affirm Cuba’s full support for the statement
made by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in the Middle East remains complex
and characterized by continued instability and
insecurity. The ongoing illegal Israeli occupation of
Palestinian and other Arab territories remains the
principal obstacle to a just and lasting peace in the
region.

11

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

The international community cannot stand idly by
in the face of the untenable situation in the Gaza Strip.
The imposition by Israel of road blocks and restrictions
on the freedom of movement and on access of persons
and goods, including humanitarian and medical
supplies, have made the recovery and reconstruction of
the area virtually impossible and have compounded
even further the already precarious standard of living
of the population.
Cuba reiterates its demand that Israel
immediately, fully and unconditionally lift the cruel
and illegal blockade of Gaza in order to allow for the
free movement of supplies as well as permanent
humanitarian access.
Cuba condemns the criminal attack perpetrated
by the special forces of Israel in the early hours of
31 ay against a flotilla of boats in international waters,
delivering humanitarian aid to the Palestinian people
living in the Gaza Strip, causing the death and injury of
a number of members of that flotilla. Likewise, Cuba
supports the request of the Human Rights Council for
the immediate carrying out, under the auspices of the
United Nations Secretary-General, of a full, impartial,
credible, transparent and independent international
investigation into the Israeli attack on the humanitarian
maritime convoy.
Israel cannot be allowed to continue to commit
grave and flagrant violations of international law with
impunity. The international community, including the
Security Council, must demand that Israel comply with
its international obligations.
Israel’s settlement activities in the occupied
territories, even after the partial and temporary
moratorium announced in November 2009 have
continued unabated. At present, more than 3,700
dwellings are being built, and more than 200
Palestinian dwellings have been demolished in order
for those illegal activities to proceed.
Cuba expresses its profound concern at that
continuing Israeli demolition of Palestinian dwellings
and eviction of Palestinian families in East Jerusalem,
as well as other illegal acts of incitement, provocation
and aggression carried out by extremist settlers against
the Palestinian population and the Holy Sites. That
now makes the situation very volatile and dangerous.
The enormous physical, economic and social
devastation caused by those illegal and destructive
settlement practices profoundly impairs the peace

12

process and may jeopardize the outcome for an
agreement on the final status of Jerusalem.
Such measures and policies undertaken by Israel
constitute grave and flagrant violations of international
law, of the United Nations Charter, of many United
Nations resolutions, including Council resolution 497
(1981), of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 9 July 2004.
The Security Council must urgently act in
response to those dangerous illegal measures taken by
Israel, which are geared to hindering and negating
peace initiatives in order to continue to consolidate its
illegitimate occupation of Palestinian territory and de
facto to annex more Palestinian territories.
I wish to conclude by restating once more Cuba’s
position in support of a just and lasting peace for all
the peoples of the Middle East, one that puts an end to
the occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
in 1967 and that guarantees the exercise of the selfdetermination of the Palestinian people through the
establishment of the independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Madam President, let me first
congratulate you on your country’s presidency of the
Council. I also wish to align my delegation with the
statements by Egypt and Tajikistan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively.
Israel’s attack on the humanitarian freedom
flotilla and its razing of Palestinian houses in
Jerusalem are merely the latest examples in an everexpanding list of aggressive and illegal behaviour
towards the people of Palestine, and towards those who
wish to aid them. The world continues to be outraged,
but is unable to act.
In many parts of the world, inaction by the
United Nations — exemplified by the mild presidential
statement adopted by the Security Council on 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9) — has sharpened the perception that
there are two sets of standards, one for Israel and
another for the rest of the world. That perception has
strengthened the feeling of helplessness of many
people in all parts of the world, leaving them open to
attempts to radicalize them. It has also given rise to the

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

feeling that the United Nations is unable to defend the
rights of the most marginalized, those who most
require it.

The emergency special session would also be a
means of ensuring that Israel would be held
accountable for its intransigence.

It is therefore critical for the United Nations to
take all necessary steps to restore its credibility. Of
immediate importance is the speedy establishment of a
United Nations-led investigation pursuant to the
presidential statement. While we continue to support
the Secretary-General’s efforts in this regard, we are
disconcerted that 52 days after the adoption of the
presidential statement, the United Nations-led
investigation still exists in the shadows. For example,
it is still uncertain what the terms of reference of the
investigation are.

It is also increasingly alarming that the
intransigence of Israel goes beyond the expansion of
settlements. The following are some of the unlawful
acts committed by Israel that further illuminate Israel’s
malicious intent to entrench its grip on Palestinian
lands, which it has illegally occupied since 1967. The
first is the construction of the separation wall, which
snakes into Palestinian territory, thus annexing more
Palestinian lands illegally. The second is the eviction
of Palestinian families and demolition of Palestinian
homes. The third is the Israeli military order on
infiltration that went into effect in April this year,
which authorizes the Israeli occupying forces to deport
at least 25,000 Palestinian and Gazans residing in the
West Bank.

In the meantime, Israel’s military investigation
has concluded. As expected, Israel has exonerated
itself. As expected, they have employed the usual tactic
of changing the facts on the ground, hoping that the
results of that illegitimate investigation into an illegal
act will be the basis of a future United Nations-led
investigation. As expected, they have taken token
ameliorative action, such as to ease the blockade
against Gaza, hoping that the world will forget their
actions.
But the world will not forget. On Malaysia’s part,
the Prime Minister has written to the President of the
General Assembly requesting the re-convening of the
tenth emergency special session. The Malaysian
parliament has also adopted a motion that contains the
same idea. This idea is consistent with the position
adopted by the foreign ministers of the Arab League at
their meeting on 2 July.
Some may say that we should be patient and
prudent. We believe that patience is not inexhaustible
and that it is imprudent to continue waiting for a train
that is unlikely to come.
In addition, we believe that the emergency special
session could also focus on the causes of the situation,
of which the flotilla incident is merely a symptom,
namely, the blockade of Gaza and the lack of progress
towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
Eastern problem. The blockade imposed by Israel on
Gaza is a form of collective punishment forbidden by
international law. It is immoral and illegal and has
forced 1.5 million Gazans to live in abject conditions.
We urge Israel to completely lift that inhumane
blockade by opening the borders rather than to merely
allow consumer goods in.

10-45934

These actions clearly violate numerous United
Nations resolutions and international law and will
make it more difficult to reach a final agreement on the
basis of a two-State solution. Hence, the international
community, including the Security Council, must hold
Israel accountable for its illegal actions and put an end
to this occupation.
Resolving these issues requires the international
community to focus all its energy and efforts on
restoring comprehensive peace in the region and the
inalienable rights and dignity of the Palestinian people.
That requires, among other things, the political will of
the Council to bring into effect the Council's own
resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Rosales Díaz (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): First, allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your leadership in the presidency of the
Council and to thank you for having convened this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. Allow me also to express my
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing to the Council this morning.
Nicaragua, as a member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, fully associates itself with
what was stated by the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Egypt in his capacity as Chairperson
of the Movement.

13

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

Once again, Nicaragua reiterates its deepest
condemnation of Israel’s illegal occupation of all
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories and
demands its immediate withdrawal. We condemn the
Israeli policies and practices of building and not
dismantling settlements. We condemn the inhumane
blockade of Gaza and the policy of fragmentation of
the West Bank and other Palestinian territories.
On 31 May 2010, the world was astonished to
witness the cold-blooded, premeditated murder of nine
unarmed civilian activists at the hands of the Israeli
State’s military forces, who, like terrorists, boarded
vessels in international waters. More than 40 people
were wounded, some so seriously that the death toll
could still rise.
The Government and people of Nicaragua stand
in solidarity with the families of the victims and join
their voices to the call for justice without delay. We
take this opportunity to express once again our
solidarity with the people and Government of Turkey.
We also call upon the other Governments whose
citizens were among the victims to demand that justice
be done.
With its customary impunity, the State of Israel
has refused an international investigation and has
described the murders of those individuals as self
defence. Can it be that the illegal boarding of a
humanitarian flotilla in international waters could be
deemed an act of legitimate defence? As if it were not
enough to attack a humanitarian flotilla in international
waters, the Israeli soldiers displayed the most
barbarous violence and were not content to merely
neutralize their victims, instead riddling them with
bullets. As proof, if it was necessary, the Government
of Turkey revealed the content of the forensic reports
and pictures of some of their citizens who were killed
at point-blank range and others who suffered multiple
bullet wounds, five of which were head wounds.
Fifty-one days have gone by since that attack.
The Human Rights Council approved a resolution to
undertake an independent international investigation,
and the Security Council issued a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/9). However, Israel remains
unpunished.
Nicaragua asks that, first, the Council demand the
State of Israel to immediately lift the blockade on
Gaza; secondly, an international investigative
commission be established under United Nations

14

auspices; thirdly, the State of Israel be required to
provide full cooperation with such a commission as
well as with the commission established by the Human
Rights Council; and fourthly, those who masterminded
the crimes and those who carried them out be brought
to justice and punished.
These are but the minimal measures required to
ensure legal security and justice. While lip service has
certainly been paid to such measures over recent
decades of violent Israeli occupation, they must now
take precedence as soon as possible. Nicaragua hopes
that such measures will bring a degree of peace to the
families of the victims and give meaning to the idea of
justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Ms. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland is encouraged by the measures announced
by Israel to ease the blockade against the Gaza Strip, as
well as similar measures taken by Egypt. Those
measures are a first step towards a predictable, lasting
opening of crossing points between the Gaza Strip and
the outside world for the passage of goods and persons,
in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).
Gaza’s social fabric and economy have been
severely damaged by the hostilities and by the
blockade, to the particular detriment of the civilian
population. The objective we must all pursue must be
allowing the civilian population of Gaza to lead a
normal life. The revitalization of the private sector and
the resumption of exchanges between the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank are imperatives.
My country already raised the urgency of this
question in the open debate held in July 2009 (see
S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)) and has in the meantime
drafted the outlines of a mechanism to allow
sustainable, predictable and regular access to Gaza
while respecting the security needs of Israel.
Switzerland therefore welcomes the efforts of Council
members towards improving the situation and reiterates
its readiness to support such efforts.
Switzerland notes the continued violations of
international law by all parties to the conflict. The
recent announcements of the resumption of
construction activities in the Israeli settlements in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem are cause for serious
concern. Those settlements have been established in

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

violation
of
international
humanitarian
law.
Switzerland calls upon Israel to renew the freeze on
construction activities in the West Bank and to extend
it to East Jerusalem for an indefinite period of time.
My country also calls upon the Israeli authorities
to rescind the expulsion orders for the East Jerusalem
parliamentarians, which are contrary to human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
Switzerland wishes also to denounce arbitrary
detentions and intimidation of political opponents in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. We call on the
authorities to respect the rule of law and civil liberties
and to continue the intra-Palestinian reconciliation
process. This is necessary for the establishment of a
Palestinian State serving the entire population and for
the negotiation of a lasting settlement of the conflict
with Israel. That conflict must come to an end: it is not
only the security of Israel and of the Palestinians that is
at stake, but also the credibility of the international
security system.
The Clinton parameters, the Taba talks and the
Geneva initiative are some of the promising efforts that
indicate the outlines of a lasting solution. The State of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization have
reaffirmed on many occasions that their goal is the
birth of a Palestinian State. Hamas too has declared its
acceptance of the 1967 borders. Switzerland counts on
the support of Security Council members to ensure that
those declarations are treated with seriousness. The
Council should display continued determination to
overcome the obstacles which, to date, have prevented
this vision from becoming a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for scheduling this
very important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. I would also like to convey our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
for his insightful and comprehensive briefing this
morning. I further thank Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, for his statement.
I also wish to state that the Bangladesh delegation
aligns itself with the statements delivered by the
representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the

10-45934

Islamic Conference, respectively. In addition, I wish to
briefly make certain points that Bangladesh believes to
be of importance.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been a major concern
for the international community and for the United
Nations. A durable and sustainable resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine,
which is the core of that long-lasting crisis, must
therefore be our collective strategic objective. All
Member States should pledge complete commitment to
that objective and throw their full moral, diplomatic,
political and economic support behind its early
realization. Bangladesh is ready to play a constructive
role in this collective endeavour to achieve a just,
lasting and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on the two-State principle. Bangladesh unites
with the international community in reaffirming its full
support for the Palestinian people in their just and
legitimate struggle for self-determination and freedom
from continued occupation, and it reiterates its longstanding position that the continued occupation of
Palestine is the root cause of violence, unrest and
destabilization in the region.
The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental right to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their right to return home and live
with dignity and safety. Unfortunately, it appears to be
a collective failure on the part of the international
community that their fundamental rights to selfdetermination and to a sovereign State have remained
unrealized. It is also unfortunate that Israel, whose
people had the experience of suffering and deprivation
in the past, instead of avoiding those ugly practices,
has continued to violate international humanitarian law
by committing systematic human rights violations and
imposing deprivation against the Palestinian people.
For example, less than two months back the
Freedom Flotilla, a convoy of ships transporting
humanitarian aid to alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian people under Israeli blockade in Gaza, was
intercepted. Our thanks go to Israel, as it partially
lifted some sanctions. However, a full and
unconditional lifting of the sanctions on Gaza is a
legitimate expectation of the global community and
would be a step towards creating an environment of
goodwill and trust among the neighbouring peoples of

15

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

Palestine and Israel. That is essential for a lasting
peace in the region.
General Assembly and the Security Council, in
their resolutions adopted over the years, have
reconfirmed the occupying Power’s obligation to
ensure the basic human rights of the Palestinian people.
My delegation believes that only full and sincere
implementation of the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions can resolve the
Palestinian crisis.
In conclusion, in order to achieve a lasting
solution in the Middle East, it is very important to
address the key issue, which is the prolonged and
illegal occupation of Arab territories by Israel. The
people of Palestine have been under illegal occupation
over the past six decades. This occupation is extremely
costly for the taxpayers of Israel and also for Israel’s
friends and neighbours in terms of resources, human
lives and peace and stability. The solution, therefore,
requires
Israel’s
complete
and
unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab
lands.
Let me reiterate Bangladesh’s full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region, both
Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side and in peace with all its
neighbours.
Finally, my delegation believes that the Road
Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant
resolutions are the best guides for achieving a twoState solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Keegel (Sri Lanka): Permit me at the outset
to congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also wish to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing this morning. My
delegation appreciates the opportunity given to us to
once again to address the situation in the Middle East,
particularly, the Palestinian question.
My delegation believes that a resolution of the
Palestinian issue is crucial for restoring peace in the
entire Middle East and would have implications

16

elsewhere. My delegation has consistently supported a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue and has
called on all sides to fully implement the resolutions
adopted by the Council and the General Assembly
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and the realization of the two-State solution.
We remain deeply concerned about the
widespread suffering and hardship the Palestinian
people continue to endure due to the economic
blockade and about the ensuing grave situation in the
occupied territories. While we note the relaxation of
some restrictions by the Israeli Government, we call
for the removal of all restrictions. Further relaxations
could enhance the confidence level of all concerned
and facilitate efforts to bring peace to the region. The
Palestinian people have suffered for too long and
continue to live under occupation. The denial of their
fundamental right to statehood, recognized by the
United Nations, due to the continued Israeli occupation
has seriously affected progress on socio-economic
indicators for the population in Gaza and the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem.
In that context, my delegation reiterates its longheld position that for peace to be viable and sustainable
in the Palestinian territory, the occupying forces must
withdraw to the 1967 borders and must end the
economic blockade. We support a complete stop to the
illegal
expansion
settlements.
Changing
the
demographic character of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, would only increase tensions
and animosities in the entire Middle East region.
The Palestinian Authority needs to continue the
implementation of its security plan and make every
effort within its abilities to improve law and order and
to ensure its territory is not used for illegal attacks on
Israel. Allegations of illegal arms flows must be
investigated. Both sides must do everything possible to
ensure the safety and security of civilians.
Sri Lanka reiterates its support for the Palestinian
National Authority under the leadership of President
Abbas. We stress the need to preserve and protect the
national and democratic institutions that are vital to a
future independent Palestinian State. We therefore urge
the Palestinian groups to act speedily to reconcile and
reunite within the framework of the Palestinian
National Authority. Unity among the Palestinian people
is its strength.

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

My delegation supports international efforts for
the early resumption of direct negotiations, and
believes that the unity of the Palestinian people is
essential to this endeavour. We also remain concerned
by the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan,
including the plight of Syrian detainees. We call for the
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
My delegation reiterates its support for a lasting
peace in the Middle East, including an early settlement
of the Palestinian issue.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome this open
debate on the Middle East and the Palestine question.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Our delegation expresses its deep concern at the
humanitarian crisis and the deterioration of the living
conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territory. The brutal and systematic aggression of the
occupying Power, Israel, against the Palestinian people
will make their development and self-determination
impossible and hinders efforts to achieve peace in the
Middle East.
The repeated violation of the human rights of the
Palestinian people by the forces of the occupying
Power through the excessive use of force, collective
punishment, the confiscation of land and the
establishment and expansion of illegal settlements are
flagrant violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law and the Geneva
Conventions.
Operation Cast Lead and the criminal attack
perpetrated by Israeli military forces in international
waters against the freedom flotilla en route to Gaza
have been condemned by the Human Rights Council in
various resolutions. On 29 June 2010, the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Richard
Falk, condemned the expansionist plans of the State of
Israel in Jerusalem, including the plan put forward by
the Mayor of that city to demolish dozens of buildings
that are home to hundreds of Palestinian families. The
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,

10-45934

Robert Serry, expressed his concern at the decision of
Israel to demolish more Palestinian homes and expand
the settlements of Pisgat Ze’ev.
The political and military elite of the occupying
Power is promoting all kinds of illegal activities in the
aim of changing the geographic nature and the
demographic composition of the Palestine territory,
including the urban character and Arab and Islamic
identity of East Jerusalem. These carefully planned
activities constitute flagrant violations of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan and calls for
the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops. My
Government also rejects the construction of the wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which is intended to
fragment the unity, integrity and territorial contiguity
of Palestine, including East Jerusalem. As is well
known, in an advisory opinion the International Court
of Justice declared this measure to be illegal.
In its presidential statement of 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9), the Security Council took note of the
call of the Secretary-General for a “prompt, impartial,
credible and transparent investigation conforming to
international standards” into this reprehensible
incident. One month and 20 days have passed since
then. It is a matter of concern that the panel to carry
out this investigation has not yet been established.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as a State
Member of the United Nations, expects the
investigation to be genuinely impartial, credible and
transparent and conforming to international standards,
in contrast to the sham investigation that was carried
out by the State of Israel to cover up the proof of its
reprehensible crime.
The situation of the Palestine population in the
Gaza Strip is a humanitarian catastrophe. As a
consequence of the Israeli aggression known as
Operation Cast Lead and the blockade of the Gaza
Strip, 85 per cent of the population depends on
humanitarian aid.
Preventing by force, as Israel is doing, the
realization of cooperation in solidarity with the
Palestinian people is an act of an unquestionable
criminality. Venezuela demands once again an
immediate and unconditional end to the Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip and the opening of all the

17

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

border crossings, thus allowing for the freedom of
movement of goods and people and access for
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations has
said that “the long-running closure imposed on the
Gaza Strip is counterproductive, unsustainable and
wrong. It punishes innocent civilians. It must be lifted
by the Israeli authorities immediately”. Why does the
Security Council, which is mandated to address matters
related to international peace and security, not adopt
concrete and credible measures to bring to an end this
genocidal blockade repudiated by all the peoples of the
world?
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reaffirms it full support for the creation of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within
internationally recognized borders that guarantee the
full exercise of the right of this heroic people to selfdetermination. This is an indispensable element for
achieving peace and stability in the Middle East.
Israel’s possession of nuclear weapons is a threat
to international peace and security, in particular for the
Middle East region. Its militaristic policies continue to
ignore the repeated calls of the international
community for Israel to adhere to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to open its
facilities to the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards system.
In this context, Venezuela supports the decision
adopted at the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
recently held in New York, which resolved to call for
an international conference on the creation of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East on 2012
in order to ban the development, possession and
utilization of these weapons in the region.
The failure of the Israeli Government to comply
with the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly must be addressed by this Council,
including through the possible adoption of sanctions to
persuade the Israeli political and military elite of their
obligations to comply with the rules and principles of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and other international instruments in order to
achieve a solid and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The State of Israel repeatedly violates the Charter of
the United Nations and refutes through its actions the
very nature of this Organization.

18

If the Security Council wishes to preserve its
legitimacy as guarantor of peace and international
security, it should adopt the measures necessary to
achieve the end of the systematic slaughter of the
Palestinian people by the State of Israel.
In conclusion, I wish to affirm that Venezuela
supports the request made by the Prime Minister of
Malaysia for the convening of an emergency special
session of the General Assembly to consider the issues
under debate in the Security Council.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Madam for giving the
floor to the European Union. The candidate countries
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as
well as the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this statement.
Since our last open debate in April on this issue
(see S/PV.6298), two major developments have
occurred: the Gaza flotilla events of 31 May and the
beginning of proximity talks in early May. The Israeli
military operation in the morning hours of 31 May in
international waters against a flotilla sailing to Gaza
resulted in the loss of nine lives and directed
international attention to the unsustainable situation in
Gaza. The European Union called for an immediate,
full and impartial inquiry into these events, which
should include credible international participation.
Furthermore, the European Union declared its
readiness to contribute to the implementation of a
mechanism that would allow for full and regular access
to Gaza based on a list of prohibited goods. The
European Union High Representative discussed this
matter with the Israeli and Palestinian leadership
during her visit to the region last weekend and will
present options to the European Union Foreign Affairs
Council next Monday.
The European Union has welcomed the Israeli
Government's recent announcement, which is a
significant step forward in the review of Israel's policy
on Gaza. The implementation of commitments
undertaken will be key. The European Union is ready
to help in the opening of the crossings, but has
expectations linked to volumes, exports, the movement

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

of persons and security. These expectations are, of
course, applicable to all existing crossings.
The objective remains the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), as well as the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access, leading to
the immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
Gaza crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons. Israel's legitimate
security concerns should also be addressed and Gilad
Shalit must be released without delay and without
conditions.
The launch of proximity talks between Israelis
and Palestinians was welcomed by the European Union
and its Quartet partners. We called on the parties to
pursue them in good faith. These talks are a significant
step towards the resumption of direct bilateral
negotiations. The European Union supports the
continued efforts of Senator Mitchell in this regard.
The overall aim of negotiations between the
Parties is — within 24 months, as set out by the
Quartet in March — a settlement that results in the
emergence of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. A
comprehensive peace, which is a fundamental interest
of the parties in the region and the whole international
community, must be achieved on the basis of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the Road Map, the
agreements previously reached by the parties and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
It is the view of the European Union that
substantive discussion of all final status issues should
commence as soon as possible. The implementation in
the coming weeks of confidence-building measures on
the ground would help in reaching this goal. The
European Union calls on all parties to refrain from all
provocative actions.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the situation in East Jerusalem. Recent
settlement activity, house demolitions, evictions and
deportations underline the need to resolve through
negotiations the status of Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States. We particularly deplore the recent
house demolitions in East Jerusalem, which do not
contribute to the establishment of an atmosphere of
confidence, which is crucial at this stage of the
negotiation process.

10-45934

The European Union commends all initiatives
that contribute to improve the well-being of the
Palestinian population, especially in Gaza, such as the
recent summer games held by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in Gaza. High Representative
Ashton visited a summer camp on her recent visit to
Gaza. This initiative can count on the continued
political and financial support of the European Union
and its member States. It serves as a much needed
counterbalance to the backdrop of violence and
poverty, and it provides Gazan children with
recreational and educational opportunities. The
European Union strongly condemns the recent attacks
on UNRWA's summer camps.
The European Union expresses the hope that both
parties to this conflict will engage in substantive
discussion of final status issues so that, before the end
of the current session of the General Assembly, we can
take note of urgently needed progress towards peace
and stability for the people of the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I should like first
to congratulate you, Madam, on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July, and also to express my appreciation to you and
the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to address this Chamber on a matter that is
of grave importance to all of us — the peace, security
and stability of the Middle East.
The Philippines associates itself with the
statement delivered this morning by the representative
of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Align Movement, but at the same time wishes to
stress certain points.
The Philippines position regarding the situation
in the Middle East, specifically the Palestinian
question, remains clear and consistent. The Philippines
has always supported the establishment of a free and
independent Palestinian State, and the Philippines has
for many years joined in the global clamour for the
establishment of a Palestinian homeland. In this regard,
the Philippines sees merit in the two-State solution
proposed by our partners for peace, and hopes that both
Israel and Palestine will join hands together to achieve
a long-lasting and durable solution to the problem.

19

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

The Philippines is sensitive to the legitimate
security concerns of the State of Israel and the right of
its people to live free from fear and free from harm.
Indeed, the Philippines shares Israel's deep concern for
its safety and its existence as a State. But as we have
witnessed repeatedly, force only begets force.
The Philippines joins the Non-Aligned Movement
and other partners in calling for the full and immediate
lifting of the blockade leveled against Gaza to enable,
to the extent possible, the free entry of food, medical
supplies and other daily necessities. The Philippines
believes that the continued existence of this blockade
only succeeds in alienating and punishing the innocent
Palestinians. Moreover, the residents of Gaza must also
be allowed to move freely and to travel to their place
of work or employment outside of Gaza without
hindrance or harassment. We cannot turn a blind eye to
the suffering of innocent Palestinian civilians in Gaza,
particularly women and children, who suffer the most
in this conflict. The United Nations therefore bears the
inescapable responsibility to take the steps necessary to
alleviate the pain and suffering of the Palestinian
people.
The Philippines urges Israel and Palestine to
re-establish their proximity talks and negotiations. It is
a tortuous and fitful process, but it is the only viable
course of action. The Philippines believes that only a
diplomatic solution — that is, resumption of a sincere
and meaningful dialogue between the two contending
parties — can bring a just, comprehensive and
enduring solution to this problem. The environment of
conflict and anguish and the climate of fear should not
be allowed to continue. Instead, both parties must
promote a climate of trust and respect towards one
another, as future neighbour States.
The Philippines strongly supports the role of the
Madrid Quartet — the United States, the European
Union, the Russian Federation and the United Nations —
the Arab Group, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement and even
non-governmental organizations and advocacy groups in
ensuring that the momentum for peace talks does not
fizzle out.
From a much broader perspective, all countries in
the Middle East must be encouraged to find the
fortitude to explore uncharted avenues to durable peace
in their part of the world. The 2010 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear

20

Weapons (NPT), through follow-on action to the
resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference, has opened a
gateway through which other options could contribute
towards a peaceful Middle East.
In conclusion, the Philippines applauds the
Security Council for its full and continuous
involvement in this issue. I wish to assure the Council
and all of our partners in the United Nations that the
Philippines stands ready to do its part to contribute to
the building of a lasting peace in the region and to
helping Israel and Palestine find a way forward
towards peaceful and friendly coexistence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): The situation in the
Middle East remains of grave concern and continues to
threaten stability far beyond the region. My
Government attaches great value to the proximity talks
between Israelis and Palestinians and trusts that they
will pave the way for the resumption of bilateral
negotiations leading to the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State.
We also welcome the steps that are being taken in the
review of Israel’s policy on Gaza and look forward to
the full implementation of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009), leading to the
unconditional opening of Gaza crossings for
humanitarian aid, commerce and people.
At the same time, Iceland remains deeply
concerned at the continued house demolitions,
evictions, settlement activities and the building of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territories and fears
that this may lead to the erosion of the two-State
solution. Only last week, the Jerusalem municipality
approved the construction of 32 Israeli homes in a
settlement in East Jerusalem. This policy of continued
settlement activity is obviously not going to increase
confidence in the peace process and must be brought to
an end.
Also, the policy of house demolitions should be
ceased immediately. Last week, again, the Jerusalem
municipality demolished a number of Palestinian
structures throughout East Jerusalem, forcibly
displacing at least 25 people, including 12 children.
These and additional demolitions in the Jordan Valley
this week bring recorded demolitions in the occupied
Palestinian territories this year to a total of 198

10-45934

S/PV.6363 (Resumption 1)

structures, resulting in the forced displacement of
almost 300 Palestinians, half of them children, while
600 others have been otherwise affected.
While recognizing Israel’s legitimate security
interests, Iceland strongly believes the blockade of
Gaza to be in violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The humanitarian situation
in Gaza remains deplorable as a result of the blockade.
We align ourselves with those who call upon the
Government of Israel to immediately and fully lift the
blockade so that the people in Gaza can regain their
dignity and revive their economy.
Iceland has strongly condemned the action
leading to the loss of lives on 31 May during the Israeli
raid on a flotilla sailing to Gaza and supports calls for
an immediate, full and impartial inquiry into the
incident, with international participation.
In conclusion, Iceland remains a firm supporter
of a peaceful resolution of the conflict and the twoState solution. This requires genuine political
willingness by both parties to reach an agreement on
all final status issues, including borders, refugees and
Jerusalem. It has been said by some supporters of the
two-State solution that we are currently at one minute
to midnight. The urgency is clear, but what remains
unclear is whether the parties, in conjunction with the
international community, are ready to take the
measures that are necessary. Let us hope that we can
join forces and overcome the remaining hurdles before
the fateful hour strikes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting to address the very important issue on the
United Nations agenda. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. Ecuador
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

10-45934

The Government of Ecuador once again reaffirms
its position on the Middle East conflict: there must be
full compliance with the norms and principles of
international law, in particular those relating to the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The 1 June statement
of the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2010/9) and resolution 14/1 adopted by the
Human Rights Council on 2 June urge Israel to lift the
blockade imposed on the Palestinian population of the
Gaza Strip, to open all Israeli border crossings so as to
allow free movement of people and goods to and from
the Gaza Strip, and to comply with the norms of
international humanitarian law and with United
Nations resolutions.
Ecuador is gravely concerned about Israel’s
systematic violation of those provisions, which simply
blocks any rapprochement by the parties with a view to
achieving a negotiated solution. Ecuador reiterates its
determination to support all necessary efforts to
prevent Israel from continuing to take illegal measures
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.
It is the duty of the United Nations to take action
towards a fair and satisfactory resolution of the Middle
East problem. Here, the Security Council bears an
inescapable responsibility to act. The States Members of
the United Nations await such action, and now is the
time to achieve positive results. We urge the parties to
pave the way towards a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the conflict on the basis of
ongoing dialogue and fulfilment of their commitments
under the Road Map. That would unquestionably lead
to stability and peace in a region where the parties
must coexist within agreed borders.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

21
