United Nations

S/PV.6119

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6119

th meeting
Tuesday, 5 May 2009, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2009/221)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-32451 (E)

*0932451*

S/PV.6119

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2009/221)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Nepal.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Landgren to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal
for United Nations assistance in support of its peace
process (S/2009/221).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Karin Landgren.
I now give her the floor.

2

Ms. Landgren: The report of the SecretaryGeneral now before the Council (S/2009/221) provides
an overview of developments in Nepal’s peace process
and a midterm review of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), as requested by
the Council. It describes long-awaited steps by the
Government of Nepal towards resolving the continued
existence in the country of two armies and also towards
the discharge of some 4,000 disqualified Maoist army
personnel, including minors.
Since January 2009, there have been public
consultations on the new Constitution, and the
Constituent Assembly has continued to develop
concept papers. Several long-dormant Government
bodies have been revived, and in April by-elections
were held in six constituencies in a relatively peaceful
and orderly atmosphere. The progress has been, in the
language of the report, not insignificant, and the tone
of the report is thus guardedly positive.
The report, however, also warns of differences
among political parties, the high level of acrimony and
weak consultation over major decisions and the
atmosphere of mistrust. It notes the persistent tension
between the Ministry of Defence and the Nepal Army,
with the political parties publicly lining up to support
one or the other. And in the fortnight or so since this
report was written, the deeply polarizing political
stand-off between the Nepal Army and the leader of the
governing coalition, the Unified Communist Party of
Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M), has come to a head,
culminating in the resignation yesterday of Prime
Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”.
In the lead-up to that event, considerable gaps
had opened in the interpretation of the powers of the
President and the chiefs of Nepal Army staff, and the
Supreme Court had become increasingly drawn into
adjudicating such conflicts of interpretation. The
Maoists have seen in the position taken by the Army
chiefs and the other main political parties an attempt to
undermine their leadership of the Government, while
their detractors consider the Maoists’ actions as proof
of their intention to capture State power.
Those developments have serious implications
for the functioning of government and for the nature of
the State to be shaped by Nepal’s next Constitution. In
the short term, there is a risk of paralysis, with possibly
protracted negotiations on forming a new Government
and a stalling of preparations for the discharge of the

09-32451

S/PV.6119

disqualified and the integration and rehabilitation of
verified Maoist army personnel.
The Prime Minister’s resignation followed a
number of developments over the past two weeks. On
20 April, the Cabinet requested General Katawal to
provide clarification of three recent situations. Under
the Army Act, the chief of the Army can be dismissed
by the Government, if it deems it necessary, after being
given the opportunity to provide clarification, and that
request was widely thought to herald the chief’s
imminent dismissal.
The first of the three situations was the
recruitment by the Nepal Army of more than 3,000 new
personnel in late 2008, notwithstanding a prohibition in
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of November
2006 and the Agreement on Monitoring the
Management of Arms and Armies on the recruitment of
additional personnel by either the Nepal Army or the
Maoist army. Mr. Ian Martin, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, described that
situation in detail to the Council in his 16 January
briefing (see S/PV.6069), which is a matter of public
record. UNMIN has taken the position since 2007 that
any recruitment by either army would violate those
agreements. The Army was directed by the
Government to stop the recruitment, but it did not.
The second situation concerned the Army’s
reinstatement of eight retiring brigadier generals whose
services were not recommended for extension by the
Ministry of Defence, and the third concerned the
withdrawal of Nepal Army participants from several
events at the national games after Maoist army athletes
were allowed at the last minute to take part.
The issue of Nepal army recruitment and that of
the brigadier generals’ non-extension have been
brought before the Supreme Court, which is expected
to rule on both issues this month. The broad charge
levelled by the Prime Minister was that the Army chief
had repeatedly defied the authority of the elected
Government. In his response to the Prime Minister’s
Office, on 21 April, the Army chief reportedly stated
that he had never challenged legitimate civilian
authority over the Government, while also claiming
that the Prime Minister lacks the constitutional
authority to fire him.
Since the elections in April last year, which
brought the Maoists to power, senior Army officers have
repeatedly asserted that only the Nepal Army stands

09-32451

between the country and totalitarianism. The Maoists
have contributed to feeding such fears through
continued references to capturing State power. On
24 April, some media sources carried a detailed account
of plans for a military coup, sourcing the story to
senior Army officers.
The Prime Minister had said that he intended to
resolve this issue through consensus and had reportedly
secured the agreement of the leaders of the largest
governing coalition partner, the Communist Party of
Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) (UML), as well as
the major opposition party, the Nepali Congress, to
remove the Army chief. However, in the days after
19 April, the party political dynamics shifted rapidly
and such agreements as there may have been fell apart.
On 3 May, the UML pulled out of the Government,
leaving the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist
(UCPN-M) in a minority.
The active profile of the President, Ram Baran
Yadav, as those events unfolded raised constitutional
questions and eroded relations between his Office and
that of the Prime Minister. On 3 May, the Cabinet,
boycotted by some members of the coalition Government,
formally decided to sack the Army chief, and the Prime
Minister appointed the second-in-command of the
Army, Chief of General Staff Kul Bahadur Khadka, to
act in the top post. The Prime Minister also gave a
letter of dismissal to General Katawal.
Late in the evening of 3 May, the President wrote
to the Army chief, instructing him to continue in his
post. The President noted that the Interim Constitution
designated him as the protector, patron and Supreme
Commander of the Nepal Army and that steps taken by
the Government to dismiss the Army chief and appoint
a new chief had been constitutionally and procedurally
incomplete. In a public statement yesterday, the
President said that his directive did not violate
constitutional provisions, as the UCPN-M had not
consulted with its coalition partners.
The Prime Minister had previously threatened to
take his party out of the Government, if no satisfactory
compromise were found, and he did so yesterday,
4 May. In his televised address to the nation, Prime
Minister Prachanda urged the nation to respect the
peace process and the letter and spirit of the Interim
Constitution, saying that his resignation was intended
to allow a way out of the ongoing political crisis. He
criticized “foreign and international forces” for

3

S/PV.6119

interfering in Nepal’s politics and for undermining
national integrity and sovereignty.
This is a volatile moment in Nepal’s peace
process. The aim of the process in 2005 was to end the
war and hold a Constituent Assembly election towards
building a more democratic Nepal. It was premised on
the recognition that the decade-long conflict could not
be resolved militarily. The Maoists hold 40 per cent of
the seats in the Constituent Assembly — more than
twice the number of any other party — and the
Constitution cannot be completed without their
support. Significant progress has been made, including
the successful conduct of the elections, the ongoing
work of the Constituent Assembly and the declaration
of a Republic, which brought a peaceful end to the
monarchy. However, many challenges remain. The
challenges from the Army chief to control and
oversight by an elected Government, and the
countermanding of a Cabinet order by the President,
have exposed ambiguities in the Interim Constitution
and deepened mistrust among the parties, and they
have also empowered actors who are expected to
remain above politics. The development of multiple
power centres represents a real risk to the peace
process.
In announcing his resignation, the Prime Minister
pledged to continue to fulfil his party’s peace process
commitments while in opposition. Many such
commitments remain to be fulfilled — above all, the
drafting of a Constitution and the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel. The Maoist
army has only recently come under the authority of the
State through the Special Committee — formed, in
accordance with article 146 of the Interim Constitution,
to supervise, integrate and rehabilitate Maoist army
combatants — which held its first meeting on
16 January. A Technical Committee, established on
27 March, has spent its first three weeks in dedicated
activity, undertaking consultations, including visits to
Maoist army cantonment sites, and, after a short hiatus,
has now quietly resumed meeting. Senior Maoist army
personnel challenged the Technical Committee to act
independently of party political affiliation, which the
Committee has pledged to do.
Under the peace process agreement of 25 June
2008, the Special Committee was to reach and
implement decisions on integration and rehabilitation
within six months. However, the Army chief has taken
a restrictive stance on the integration into the Nepal

4

Army of former Maoist army personnel. Even before
the current political developments, both the Special
Committee and the Technical Committee said that they
were unlikely to be able meet that deadline. The
question is whether the situation of the Maoist army
can be satisfactorily resolved if the Maoists remain
outside the Government.
As the Council is aware, UNMIN now has a very
substantially reduced presence in Nepal, with 275
personnel, including 73 arms monitors. UNMIN’s
priority is to encourage full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and, to that end, to
conduct its monitoring responsibilities, including the
management of the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee, the dispute-resolution mechanism that
brings together senior officers of the Nepal Army and
the Maoist army. Since late March, UNMIN has led
discussions with the Ministry of Peace and
Reconstruction on the discharge of disqualified Maoist
army personnel, including minors. Together with the
United Nations Development Programme and UNICEF,
we seek a successful discharge and reintegration
exercise that meets international standards, with
adequate access by independent monitors and genuine
removal of the disqualified from military supervision.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Nepal is mandated
to monitor the human rights situation, advise the
Government on human rights matters and provide
technical cooperation to strengthen national human
rights institutions. That mandate will expire on 9 June,
five weeks from today. Its extension, for which Nepal’s
main political parties have expressed support, should
not become a victim of the present fluid situation.
Unfulfilled commitments are the Achilles heel of
the peace process, and they threaten the peace
dividends that the people of Nepal expect and so richly
deserve. Last year’s elections marked a strong
beginning towards fulfilling the commitment to greater
political inclusiveness. The Government’s subsequent
dialogue with agitating ethnic and indigenous groups
has remained fairly perfunctory, with weak followthrough. Security in the Tarai remains a matter of
serious concern, with many active armed groups and
general impunity for those engaged in violence. There
is a risk that the latest political developments will
divert the already limited attention being paid to these
issues.

09-32451

S/PV.6119

In the present situation, there is a serious deficit
of trust among the principal political actors. Since
January, issues relating to the Agreement on
Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies
and decisions by the Defence Ministry over the army
have been brought to the Supreme Court, as has now
the President’s decision to countermand the Cabinet
decision on the Army chief. This frequent recourse to
the Court is a manifestation of weak political
agreement and an absence of other effective
mechanisms. A high-level, multiparty monitoring
mechanism was envisaged in the peace agreements. It
is still needed and should be formed.
The peace process that Nepal has driven forward
since 2005 has been remarkable, and the events of
2008 were of historic magnitude. The parties should
urgently take steps to rebuild trust and work together in
the spirit of compromise and consensus that is needed
to protect these achievements and to ensure further
progress in the coming weeks and months. The next
key steps — addressing the future of the Maoist army
personnel and drafting the new constitution — will be
extremely difficult to achieve without a greater degree
of political cooperation and a common vision. An
inclusive, concerted and well managed consultative
process is vital to ensuring successful and timely
outcomes for both issues.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and
thanking Ambassador Heller for his excellent
presidency of the Council last month.
The United Kingdom very much welcomes the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2009/221) on the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). We are
also grateful for today’s briefing by the Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Karin Landgren.
We are deeply concerned by recent developments
on the ground and share the Secretary-General’s regret,
expressed in his 4 May statement, at the events leading
up to Prime Minister Prachanda’s resignation. But, like
the Secretary-General, we are also encouraged by the
Maoist party’s assurances of its commitment to the

09-32451

peace process and by the comments from across the
political spectrum stressing the importance of
proceeding on the basis of consensus.
Given recent developments, it is all the more
important that we hold all the political parties in Nepal
to commitments made under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. All of us in the international community
have a role to play here. We must support Nepalese
efforts to resolve this crisis in a way that does not
jeopardize the important gains made since the
Agreement was signed in 2006 — gains rightly
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report.
We will need to monitor the situation very closely
in the coming weeks and months. An objective
assessment of the situation on the ground will be an
important part of the Council’s deliberations ahead of
the end of UNMIN’s mandate on 23 July. In that
regard, we believe that it is important that the
Secretary-General’s next report include analysis of the
implications of recent developments for the future of
the peace process and for the role played by the United
Nations and wider international engagement in Nepal.
However, it is important that we not seek to reach
such conclusions prematurely. Our and UNMIN’s
immediate efforts must be focused on helping the
Nepalese peacefully to overcome this crisis and to
move forward. Even if a solution can be reached
quickly, it is clear that much remains to be done. Even
before the current crisis, the Nepalese authorities’
prediction that the integration process could be
completed by 15 July looked unrealistic. In our view,
that is and remains a substantial process involving
complex decisions that require political commitment
by all parties in the spirit of the peace process
agreements.
For our part, we will continue to offer our full
and active support to the people of Nepal and to the
peace process.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council and to underscore our eagerness to work
closely with you in the month ahead. I also want to
thank Ambassador Heller for his truly exceptional
leadership of the Council last month during a
challenging period. We are very grateful.
I would like to begin by thanking Ms. Karin
Landgren, the Representative of the Secretary-General

5

S/PV.6119

in Nepal. We are pleased to welcome her here for the
first time in her new role and we are grateful for her
briefing. We also want to thank her and her staff for
their efforts to carry out the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and to help the
people of Nepal move forward with the peace process.
The events that have shaken Nepal over the past
few days, leading to the 4 May resignation of the Prime
Minister, make it abundantly clear that Nepal’s leaders
must re-commit themselves to implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We in the United
States urge all parties to abide by the Interim
Constitution and to use it as a basis for resolving the
current impasse. Political parties must engage in
dialogue to resolve their disputes and must, as
appropriate, resort to the courts. As Nepal’s political
parties move to end the current stand-off, they should
ensure the continuity of legitimate and effective
government. The resignation of the Prime Minister
must not be allowed to create a political vacuum, and
the formation of a new Government must not drag on
for months.
We certainly remind all political parties of the
need to avoid tactics that might lead to bloodshed,
including large demonstrations, calls for general strikes
and provocative statements and actions. In particular,
we urge the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) to
remain involved in the political process. That includes
participating in the Constituent Assembly and in all
peace process-related bodies, including those related to
the effort to draft a constitution.
The continued misuse of political youth groups
also threatens the peace process. The United States
urges the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) to
renounce all violence committed by its militant Young
Communist League and to take concrete steps to
transform that group into an exclusively non-violent
one. Equally, we urge other parties to do the same with
their own youth wings and to ensure that their
activities are peaceful and constructive.
The Special Committee should now continue its
consultations, and the newly established Technical
Committee should move to implement its decisions. As
one step forward, we hope that the Government of
Nepal will move immediately to adopt the suggestions
of the Secretary-General’s Representative, to
consolidate arms and soldiers into fewer cantonments
and to discharge minors.

6

We very much hope that the people of Nepal and
their leaders will not lose sight of the enormous
progress that they have made towards establishing
peace. They have peacefully ended a violent
insurgency and started a process of reconciliation that
holds the promise of long-term security, stability and
peace. Those accomplishments must not be threatened
by a failure to implement parts of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement that were fully agreed to by all
parties, but for now those achievements remain at risk
while so many important aspects of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement are still unfulfilled.
The Maoist-led Government and the Nepal Army
must recognize that lasting democracy is rooted in the
principle of civilian control of the military and depends
on the prudent exercise of that control. As the
Secretary-General’s report notes, some progress has
been made towards integrating the People’s Liberation
Army and the Nepal Army, but those advances are
threatened by infighting. Like the presidential
statement before the Council today, we call on Nepal’s
Government and all political parties to recommit
themselves to working together in the spirit of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and under the terms
of the Interim Constitution. The parties should ensure
continuity of Government, strengthen multiparty
democracy and protect and promote human rights.
As the end of UNMIN’s current mandate
approaches next month, we will look forward to
consulting with Nepal’s leaders and our Council
colleagues on how best the Council can contribute to
lasting peace and stability in Nepal. The country has
come too far to let itself fall back.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of May. Our appreciation goes also to
Ambassador Heller and his team for their excellent
leadership during the month of April.
At the outset, I wish to thank Ms. Karin
Landgren, Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal, for her detailed briefing on the activities of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). I should
also like to pay tribute to Mr. Ian Martin, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Nepal, who concluded his excellent work in February.
I would like to begin by expressing deep concern
about the political developments of the past few days,
following the announcement of the dismissal of the

09-32451

S/PV.6119

chief of Army staff and the resignation of the Prime
Minister. These may have serious implications for the
future democratic process in Nepal. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s appeal to all concerned for
restraint and political consensus.
The United Nations has been actively engaged in
the peace process since the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement was concluded in 2006. During the more
than two years of UNMIN’s presence, the people of
Nepal and the parties concerned have achieved historic
breakthroughs despite continuing challenges. The
election of a Constituent Assembly and the
transformation to a federal democratic republic are
commendable achievements. We highly value the vital
supporting role of UNMIN and appeal to all concerned
to strictly adhere to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
Consultations on a new constitution have been
making steady progress. Given the vital importance of
drafting a document so basic to the future course of the
country, we understand the cautious approach taken by
the people of Nepal, as long as it is well grounded in
peaceful political dialogue. Despite the recent political
developments, we are encouraged by the Maoist party’s
assurances of its commitment to the peace process,
including continued participation in the drafting of the
constitution. We urge the people of Nepal to maintain
the momentum they have generated so far and to see
their efforts through to fruition.
The demobilization and integration of Maoist
soldiers is a greater challenge. The Special Committee
has begun its work and has established a Technical
Committee. But this still remains a task that is
fundamental to the peace process and is very difficult
to achieve. Based on the latest assessment by the
Secretary-General, we are concerned that it may not be
realistic to expect the necessary work to be completed
within the next three months.
The parties need to engage in consultations
among themselves, in good faith and in a spirit of
cooperation, in order to reach a decision on the
structures of security institutions. Despite the recent
political turbulence centred on recruitment for the
Nepal Army and the People’s Liberation Army, the
status of senior officials of the Army and the
resignation of the Prime Minister, we hope that all
parties will remember why and under what conditions
they embarked on this peace process three years ago. It

09-32451

was the outcome of the wisdom and courage of the
people of Nepal to take the initiative to bring a long
conflict to an end. All parties should adhere to the
Agreement on Monitoring the Management of Arms
and Armies, which clearly and specifically stipulates
restrictions on the Nepal Army and the People’s
Liberation Army.
It is time for the parties to demonstrate such
wisdom again, by resolving outstanding issues which
block the way towards durable peace and prosperity for
the country. Most urgently, a solution should be found
regarding how the 19,000 Maoist army personnel who
have been confined to the cantonments for two years
can contribute to the reconstruction and development
of the country.
Japan sincerely hopes that all parties engage
actively in political dialogue and make best use of the
technical expertise and support provided by UNMIN.
We look forward to UNMIN following through on its
successful supporting role.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
commitment to the peace process in Nepal.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, holding
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We also wish to thank Ambassador Heller for his
outstanding leadership as President of the Security
Council during the month of April.
I wish to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal and
head of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN), for her briefing. I thank her and UNMIN for
their hard work.
The Constituent Assembly of Nepal has begun its
work and will be able to complete the drafting of the
constitution by May 2010. The integration and
rehabilitation of the Unified Communist Party of
Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) combatants has been moving
forward steadily. The demobilization of disqualified
soldiers is under way, and the Government of Nepal
has promised to complete that task by 15 July. We view
this important progress positively, and we appreciate
the tireless efforts of the political parties and the
people of Nepal to that end.
We take note of the latest developments in Nepal.
We hope that the parties concerned will keep the
overall situation in mind, handle their differences

7

S/PV.6119

appropriately and make a joint effort to safeguard the
peace process in Nepal. We expect and believe that the
Government and the people of Nepal have the ability
and wisdom to continue their efforts, through dialogue
and consultation, to resolve all the legacy issues that
continue to impede the peace process and that, on the
basis of the plans that are in place, they will achieve
lasting peace, stability and development.
The entire staff of UNMIN is fully dedicated and
has been making positive contributions to the peace
process in Nepal; it has our appreciation. We encourage
UNMIN to continue to properly monitor arms and
armies in accordance with the mandate of the Security
Council and to cooperate actively with the Special
Committee with a view to completing, at an early date,
the integration and resettlement of the UCPN-M
combatants.
It should be pointed out that, in the final analysis,
the peace process in Nepal should be led by the people
of Nepal. We believe that, with the support of the
international community, Nepal will be able to reembark on the path towards peace and development.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of May.
You may rest assured, as always, of our full support
and cooperation. We wish also to congratulate
Ambassador Claude Heller and the Mexican delegation
and to thank them for their excellent presidency last
month. I thank Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of
the Secretary-General, for her up-to-date briefing.
My delegation takes positive note of the overall
relatively calm and stable security situation in Nepal
during the reporting period. We share the sense of
cautious optimism described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/221) regarding progress on
major components of the peace process in Nepal, in
particular those related to the drafting of the
constitution and discussions on the future of the two
armies.
At the same time, we share the common concern
about a number of unresolved issues — related
essentially to ethnic and political groups, the form of
governance and the new federal structure of the
country. We are particularly worried about the latest
political rift in the Nepalese leadership. We call upon
all political parties to exercise restraint and give top
priority to stability by promoting national unity and

8

resuming dialogue, in the spirit of compromise and
reconciliation, to expedite the peace process. We hope
that all parties in the Government of Nepal will build
upon the hard-won progress made so far in order to
continue to work together for the common good of the
whole nation.
Given the outstanding role played by the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), we commend the
Mission for its efforts in the area of arms monitoring
and supporting the work of the Special and Technical
Committees in the past reporting period. Taking into
consideration the Nepalese Prime Minister’s request
for further support from UNMIN for both the Special
and Technical Committees and bearing in mind the
ownership of the country’s peace process by the
Nepalese Government and people, we believe that
UNMIN should maintain its close cooperation with the
Government of Nepal and other United Nations
agencies to help sustain peace and stability and
expedite the necessary activities within its mandate to
complete its tasks. We reaffirm our support for the role
of the United Nations in coordinating international
development assistance for Nepal. We join in the
commitment made by the international community to
support the peace and development process on which
the Nepalese people and Government have embarked.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Let me start by
congratulating you once again, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. You have our
full support and cooperation in the discharge of your
duties. My warmest thanks also go to Ambassador
Heller, who presided over the Security Council last
month with great success. I also wish to thank
Ms. Karin Landgren for her briefing. As this is the first
time that she addresses the Council, I take this
opportunity to congratulate her on the assumption of
her duties. I wish her every success. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his informative
report (S/2009/221), which reflects recent developments
in the country in an accurate and objective manner. In
that regard, we share the Secretary-General’s cautious
optimism as to the implementation of the peace
process.
Since the beginning of this year, there have been
a number of concrete developments. In that regard, the
regular consultations on the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel and the
progress achieved by the Constituent Assembly in
drafting a constitution are indeed worth underlining.

09-32451

S/PV.6119

We also welcome the appointment of the members of
the National Security Council, which has met for the
first time in six years to make recommendations on the
mobilization, operation and use of the Nepal Army.
However, as reported by the Secretary-General,
the level of cooperation among the major stakeholders
in the peace process remains far from adequate. In fact,
the resignation yesterday of Prime Minister Prachanda
was a stark manifestation of the situation. As such, the
decision of the Prime Minister and what it entails for
the political stability of the country are a source of
significant concern. We sincerely hope that the
Government crisis will be resolved swiftly and in a
democratic manner and not constitute a major setback.
It should in no way jeopardize the peace process.
Accordingly, we call on all parties in Nepal to
work together in the spirit of compromise and
cooperation that is necessary to keep the peace process
on track. As we see it, it is the common responsibility
of all political actors to continue to adhere to the
principles and the understanding that led to the signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in November
2006.
Along the same lines, the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN), which has been most helpful
throughout the peace process, obviously has an
important role to play in this new situation too. Indeed,
UNMIN seems to enjoy the full confidence and support
of all Nepalese parties. We need to make the best use
of UNMIN. At this point, I very much look forward to
hearing the views and assessment of Ms. Landgren as
to what more could be done to facilitate the resolution
of the crisis through democratic means. On the other
hand, as to the future of UNMIN, I find the discussion
on possible exit strategies for UNMIN a bit premature,
especially in the light of the current situation. Indeed,
the urgent need now is to address the current political
crisis and to support all efforts that will keep the peace
process on track.
The United Nations and the international
community must remain committed to supporting the
process on which Nepal has embarked for the
consolidation of peace and the improvement of the
lives of its people. As such, the main conditions for
ending the United Nations Mission — namely, political
stability and peaceful coexistence — are yet to be
achieved fully. The Council should therefore continue
to monitor closely the political situation in Nepal with

09-32451

a view to reaching the right conclusions before 23 July
2009.
Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement before the Security Council, which reflects
the expectations of the Council with regard both to
Nepal and to UNMIN.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that, under your
guidance, the success of the Council’s work is more
than guaranteed. I am also certain that you will have
the cooperation of all the members of the Security
Council, just as we did during our presidency in April.
I would like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
her detailed briefing today on the situation in the
country and the work of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN). My delegation is grateful to Ms.
Landgren,
who
has
assumed,
with
great
professionalism and sense of responsibility, the duties
that the Secretary-General has conferred upon her as
she succeeds Mr. Ian Martin. We trust that
Ms. Landgren will continue to make efforts to contribute
to and achieve normalization in the political situation
in Nepal, as well as to finalize pending matters in the
peace process.
Until just a few days ago, the report (S/2009/221)
before us today could have been read against a
backdrop of optimism as a result of the significant
progress made in recent months with regard to the
peace process in Nepal. The Special Committee, which
is charged with overseeing the integration and
rehabilitation of the Maoist army, met for the first time
on 16 January, shortly before the adoption of resolution
1864 (2009). It has since held various meetings to
begin fulfilling its mandate and established the
Technical Committee, which will be entrusted with
supporting the Special Committee. Likewise, there has
also been progress in the drafting of the constitution
and the establishment of the Constitutional Council and
the National Security Council, which have held their
first meetings after several years of deadlock on this
issue.
Despite all that, events in recent days have led to
a political crisis in Nepal that could jeopardize the
peace process as a whole. As other members of the
Council have done this morning, my delegation would

9

S/PV.6119

also like to express its great concern at the events that
have taken place, whose consequences are yet to be
fully known. We therefore call on all the parties
concerned to resume dialogue as soon as possible, so
as to continue to strengthen national unity and
successfully conclude the peace process.
In the light of the current crisis between the
President and the Prime Minister, we believe it
particularly relevant to recall that recruitment by either
of the two former opposing armies constitutes a
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We
support the work that UNMIN has done in that regard.
In order to emerge from the current stalemate and
avoid the risk of a more serious crisis, it is necessary to
have the cooperation of all actors and political parties
involved in the process of reconciliation and national
unity in Nepal.
Addressing pending aspects of the peace process —
such as the establishment of a new constitutional order,
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel and the demobilization of minors involved in
the conflict — requires constructive coordination
among the parties and the support of the international
community.
Similarly, given the central place of human rights
in the peace process as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, my Government calls upon the
Government of Nepal to continue its cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
Finally, my delegation believes that the adoption
of the draft presidential statement that has been
prepared is extremely timely and appropriate.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all, Sir, let
me congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. We
look forward to close cooperation with you. I should
also like to thank Ambassador Heller of Mexico for his
presidency last month, under truly challenging
circumstances.
I wish to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
her comprehensive briefing and, especially, for the
update she gave us on ongoing developments.
Austria shares the serious concern expressed by
other speakers about the current political crisis in
Nepal. The dispute between Prime Minister and the

10

Nepal Army, which was followed by the Prime
Minister’s decision to resign, has clearly aggravated
the rift between political parties and deepened the
existing atmosphere of mistrust. It is of great
importance for all parties in Nepal to exercise restraint
and to re-engage in a cooperative and inclusive
political dialogue with the aim of overcoming the
current impasse. In particular, we hope for the
expeditious formation of a stable Government that
enjoys the widest possible consensus. It is the
responsibility of all Nepalese stakeholders to ensure
that the peace process, which had finally seen
promising progress in recent months, does not lose its
momentum once again.
Let me add that Austria was indeed encouraged
by the positive developments in the peace process that
had taken place over the first three months of this year,
including progress made on the process of drafting a
constitution. We wish a peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of Nepal. Reaching agreement on the
form of governance and a federal structure for the
country is clearly a challenge that bears great
significance for Nepal’s future. As I said on an earlier
occasion, as a country that has specific expertise in
these matters, Austria is prepared to offer support and
expertise.
Progress had also been made on disarmament and
demobilization, in particular with regard to the issue of
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel. It is very unfortunate that, in spite of the
declared determination and the efforts shown by the
political parties in Nepal to work together in a
constructive manner in the framework of the Special
Committee and the Technical Committee, this issue
now seems to be at the core of the current crisis. We
appeal to all the parties concerned to adhere to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and all related
agreements and encourage them to resume their work
as soon as possible.
In this context, we are also concerned about the
fact that the discharge from the Maoist army
cantonments of nearly 3,000 Maoist army personnel
disqualified as minors will now be further delayed. We
learned with great appreciation that talks on the
modalities of this discharge had started and that
preparations were under way prior to the current
impasse. There is a need for all stakeholders to ensure
that these steps have not been in vain and will lead to a
swift implementation of the assurances given to the

09-32451

S/PV.6119

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, in December 2008 that the discharge
and rehabilitation of minors would proceed without
further delay. We also believe that this task should be
carried out in a transparent manner, in conformity with
international standards and in close consultation and
cooperation with the United Nations. The proliferation
of militant youth wings affiliated with political groups
is another concern in this context.
I also wish to stress the importance of the fight
against impunity. During her official visit to Nepal in
March of this year, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, warned that Nepal’s
peace process could be at risk unless justice is ensured
for the victims of past and ongoing human rights
abuses. We were encouraged by steps taken by the
Nepalese Government to establish accountability for
past violations through the development of transitional
justice mechanisms. We wish to stress the need for any
such mechanism to pay particular attention to the
experiences of women and children during the conflict,
and we encourage the Nepalese Government to
continue its cooperation with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women in order to include
gender aspects in the transitional justice process, an
effort which receives Austrian support.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s view that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Nepal can continue to play an
important positive role, not only in capacity-building
for national human rights institutions, but in
maintaining the confidence of all stakeholders in the
peace process. We therefore hope that the presence of
the office will be extended by the Nepalese authorities.
In view of the difficult current situation and the
remaining challenges of the peace process, we
encourage all involved in Nepal to take advantage of
the expertise of the United Nations Mission in Nepal in
supporting the peace process. Austria reaffirms its full
support for the Mission and would appreciate it if the
Secretary-General could include in his next report an
assessment of the impact of the current crisis on the
implementation of the peace process as well as the
consequences for the United Nations presence on the
ground, in particular in view of a possible prolongation
of the mandate.

09-32451

Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I should like at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. I assure you of
the close cooperation of my delegation. I wish also to
pay tribute to Ambassador Heller and the Mexican
delegation for the excellent manner in which they
guided our work during the month of April.
I wish also to congratulate Ms. Karin Landgren
on her appointment to the post of Representative of the
Secretary-General in Nepal and to wish her every
success in her mission. I thank her for her briefing this
morning.
We are concerned at recent events in Nepal,
which led to the resignation of the Prime Minister.
Those events show that the situation in that country
remains fragile and that a return to stability could be
delayed. We therefore call upon political actors in
Nepal to opt for dialogue in order to establish a
genuine climate of mutual trust and to strengthen the
nation’s foundations.
The political rift among political actors and the
difficulties faced by a number of institutions point to
the need for additional efforts to create a more peaceful
political climate. It would be a shame if the progress
made in the peace process, which is described in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/221), were
jeopardized. Moreover, the gains that have been made
in drafting a constitution must be safeguarded. We
therefore call upon all political actors to agree on a
consensus draft.
One of the most difficult pending matters in
Nepal is the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist
army personnel. We therefore welcome the resumption
of the work of the Special Committee mandated to
follow up on this important issue. The establishment of
the Technical Committee to support the Special
Committee in its work also represents significant
progress.
Similar efforts must be sustained in the field of
demobilization, and that is why we call upon the
United Nations to continue to support the Nepalese
authorities in this area. It is encouraging to note that
the establishment of a committee to monitor the
implementation of the nine-point agreement has made
possible the publication of a report on land and
property seized by Maoists.

11

S/PV.6119

It is clear that all these achievements can be
strengthened only in a peaceful socio-political climate.
As a result, that means that efforts to support the
development of Nepal must be further strengthened.
We hope that the National Development Forum
planned for mid-May 2009 will enable the Government
to mobilize additional resources for the development of
the country. We call upon the country team as well as
all partners to sustain their efforts in this regard.
In spite of the recent holding of by-elections, we
ask the various parties to discuss their differences with
a view to creating a favourable climate for the peace
process. We call upon the Government to abide by the
commitments made.
In terms of safety and security, we look forward
to the National Security Council contributing to the
establishment of a healthy atmosphere. In spite of the
Government’s laudable initiatives, supported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the fight against impunity and ensuring
respect for the human rights of minorities remain
problematic issues. In this regard, we welcome the
Government’s
significant
efforts
to
establish
mechanisms for transitional justice and for the fight
against impunity. The United Nations, countries of the
region and all of Nepal’s partners must join in.
To conclude, we would like to thank and renew
our support for the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) through the Arms Monitoring Office and the
Political Affairs Office. We urge the Mission to pay
particular attention to the genuine demobilization of
minors and call upon the Nepalese Government to
honour its commitments in this area.
As we have seen, in spite of the progress that has
been made, the situation in Nepal remains fragile and
volatile. It is for that reason that my delegation, while
fully subscribing to the progressive draw-down of
UNMIN, would like to call upon the Security Council
to undertake it prudently in order to preserve the
progress that has been achieved to date. We thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for the preparation
of a draft presidential statement, which my delegation
supports.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like, Sir, to start by congratulating you and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I would reaffirm my delegation’s
cooperation in every way necessary. We would also

12

like to commend the Mexican delegation and
Ambassador Heller for their work last month in the
presidency of the Security Council, for which we are
very grateful.
My delegation is grateful for the briefing given
by Ms. Landgren. We are pleased to welcome her to the
Security Council for the first time, and we support her
efforts at the helm of United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) to ensure a successful outcome to the
reconciliation and peace processes in Nepal. We would
also like to also state our gratitude to Mr. Ian Martin
for his endeavours.
In view of recent political events, my delegation
calls upon the parties, in the interests of stability, to
strengthen the political dialogue which has come about
at the cost of so much sacrifice. We have reached a
crossroads where the political and military actors must
continue to work together in a spirit of compromise
that will enable them to carry out the agenda agreed to
at the time of the extension of the mandate of UNMIN
last January.
My delegation is of the view that it is crucial for
the parties to place national interests first and foremost
and that their conduct be in keeping with the
commitments expressed in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2006 and in conformity with the will of
the people as expressed in last year’s elections.
Consolidating a multiparty political system that is
inclusive, transparent, democratic and respectful of
human rights is an objective that will favour peace and
reconciliation.
My delegation shares the concerns of the
delegations of Austria and Burkina Faso with regard to
the reintegration of minors, the issue of human rights
and the fight against impunity. We also hope that
particular attention will be paid to situations that could
jeopardize the peace process, in particular, situations
that concern the integration and rehabilitation of
ex-combatants into the Army as well as situations
regarding human rights. Political players who possess
the means to resolve the current crisis must work in a
greater spirit of cooperation.
This political process must make it possible to
build a better society in which the conditions necessary
for national unity are to be found. Costa Rica will
support all efforts to that end and encourages
Ms. Landgren, as the representative of the United

09-32451

S/PV.6119

Nations, to continue the good offices that will ensure
progress on pending issues.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome Ms. Karin
Landgren and thank her for her briefing on the latest
developments in Nepal, especially regarding the peace
process. The latest events in Nepal, leading to the
resignation of the Prime Minister, events which other
members have mentioned, have caused a great deal of
concern to my delegation, especially as they could
potentially derail the peace process, which has, until
now, made significant progress. We call on all parties
to remain calm and seek to address the contentious
issues through dialogue.
While it is very important to resolve the
misunderstandings at the earliest opportunity, a lasting
solution will have to be reached in the framework of
the ongoing constitutional process. In this regard, we
welcome the progress made thus far in the constitutionmaking process and trust that the Constituent Assembly
will be able to reconcile the views presented by the
various parties, especially on the form of government.
The National Security Council, mandated with the
responsibility of making recommendations on the
mobilization, operation and use of the Nepal Army as
part of the process of strengthening civilian control
over that Army, will also have to expedite its work.
We are convinced that, as the peace process
moves forward, it is imperative to adequately focus on
the proper integration of the Maoist army into the
Nepal Army as a way of ensuring lasting peace. We
urge the relevant authorities to address this matter as
soon as possible. We welcome the formation of the
Technical Committee, which has already taken up its
function of supporting the Special Committee in
drawing up a work plan for completing the integration
and rehabilitation of verified Maoist army personnel.
Finally, we express our appreciation to the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for its contribution
to the stability of Nepal, especially in its support for
the peace process. Given the current political situation,
UNMIN’s role and its support for the Nepalese
authorities in dealing with the immediate aftermath of
the Prime Minister’s resignation will be very
important. We trust that, with the dedicated leadership
of Ms. Landgren, the situation will be stabilized and
the parties will move the process forward to its logical
conclusion, which is the attainment of lasting peace
and sustainable development in Nepal.

09-32451

Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to thank Ambassador Heller
and his team for their excellent presidency during the
month of April. I also thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing and in particular for the information that she
provided on recent developments in Nepal.
Those developments are worrisome. The current
crisis between the Government and the Army, which
has led to the resignation of Prime Minister Prachanda,
is a subject of concern, and the risk posed to the entire
peace process is not negligible. This is even more
regrettable because we had recently seen some limited
but real progress in the peace process — progress
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/221). In that context, we believe that it is even
more important that the Security Council send a signal
to the Nepalese parties calling on them for compromise
and cooperation to move the peace process forward. In
that connection, we support the draft presidential
statement submitted by the delegation of the United
Kingdom.
We have taken note of the official Nepalese
statements that the conditions are right for the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) to complete its
mandate in June. We wish that that were so, but it
seems a bit unrealistic to us, given the progress in the
process of demobilizing Maoist ex-combatants and the
current political crisis. Thus, the Nepalese parties
should be aware that UNMIN will not remain in Nepal
forever. Those parties have requested United Nations
support for the peace process, but they must shoulder
their responsibility to move the process forward, in
particular with regard to the reintegration of Maoist
ex-combatants.
We continue to hope that the Government’s
commitment to finally release the minors held in
Maoist camps will become a reality as soon as
possible. The obstruction of that situation cannot be
tolerated, as a solution should be technically feasible in
the near future.
Finally, we remain prepared to support
maintaining a lighter United Nations presence to
support the peace process, in one way or another, if the
Nepalese Government considers it useful.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like to join preceding speakers in

13

S/PV.6119

congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. You can be assured of the cooperation of my
delegation. I also wish to commend Ambassador Heller
of Mexico and the entire Mexican delegation for the
excellent leadership shown during their presidency in
April. In addition, we welcome Ms. Landgren and
thank her for her briefing and for the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and a
group of countries on behalf of Nepal.
We are closely following the situation in Nepal.
We hope that recent events will not undermine the
peace process in that country, especially since the
peace process has been going through a critical phase
requiring the cooperation of all parties to achieve
reconciliation, unification and the implementation of
the peace agreements and all other agreements reached,
so that the people of Nepal can enjoy peace, stability
and prosperity.
We were pleased to note Nepal’s progress in the
peace process, particularly with regard to a constitution
and the future of the Nepal Army and the Maoist army.
We hope that that progress will continue, so that the
people of Nepal can draft a constitution guaranteeing
the rights of all citizens, including those who have
traditionally been marginalized. That would lend
momentum to the peace process and help to bring
about lasting stability in the country.
We welcome the resumption of the work of the
Special Committee aimed at the reintegration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel, as well as the
steps taken by the Government to demobilize them at
various cantonment sites. We hope that those efforts
will result in demobilization, especially for minors, and
will help to bring about successful rehabilitation and
reintegration within the desired time frame.
Despite all that has been accomplished, we
remain concerned at the differences existing among the
various political parties with regard to the current
crisis, the murders, the abductions and the security
problems, as well as the refusal of a number of groups
to participate in dialogue. Thus, we call on all political
parties and other relevant actors to work together to
establish a dialogue and respect State institutions,
striving to achieve compliance with the peace
agreements, to strengthen the rule of law, to improve
the security situation and to address impunity, taking
into account the needs of marginalized groups. We

14

believe that those are the prerequisites for the peace
process.
Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General that,
if the current political challenges continue, they will
fray relations among various groups, to the detriment
of compliance with the peace agreements and the peace
process. Therefore, all political groups must work
together to coordinate the peace process and to
re-establish trust and a spirit of national unity and
common policies.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): My delegation would also
like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We express our appreciation to Ambassador
Heller and his team for the excellent work done during
the previous month.
At the outset, Croatia would like to express its
gratitude to Ms. Landgren for her comprehensive
briefing updating us as to the situation on the ground,
especially in light of the most recent, alarming events
that have taken place in Nepal. Croatia joins others in
expressing its deep concern over the current political
turmoil in Nepal generated by months of continuing
divisions and tensions among key political parties,
which have continued to seriously impede the
consolidation of peace. It is especially worrying that
they have been allowed to culminate in the
destabilization of the coalition Government and the
paralysis of Nepal’s fledgling democracy following the
resignation of the Prime Minister over the controversial
sacking and reinstatement of Nepal’s Army chief.
The disturbing turn of events over the past few
days has only served as a stark reminder that Nepal’s
troubles are far from over and that Nepal’s peace
process is facing its most severe test to date. In order to
prevent any immediate collapse of the fragile
architecture of the peace process, we call upon all sides
to exercise full restraint and to avoid political or
military retaliation, emphasizing the need to resolve
the current crisis through dialogue and consensus with
complete respect for the Constitution.
Following the current political impasse, we urge
all parties to remain loyal to the commitment to the
Nepalese people by re-establishing a consensus among
all political parties, based on a genuine political
dialogue aimed at completing the political process,
underpinned by an inclusive State with full regard for
human rights, and at ending impunity, so as to ensure

09-32451

S/PV.6119

the Nepalese people a durable democratic and
prosperous future.

formed and have begun to establish local peace
committees.

We are encouraged by reported assurances by
some political parties of their commitment to the peace
process despite the current situation. To that end, we
urge all political stakeholders to resume the progress
made to date in the important process of building a
constitution and to seriously address the remaining and
difficult issue of supervision, integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist combatants through the
effective working of the Special Committee and
specially mandated Technical Committee, and we urge
the Government to implement its commitment to
discharge minors from cantonments sites, all of whose
ultimate success is central to lasting peace in Nepal.

At the same time, we regret that, against that
positive backdrop, in recent days negative trends have
emerged in Nepal that are threatening the peace
process. In the current situation, it is essential that all
political forces in the country do their utmost to
promptly resolve by consensus existing disputes on the
basis of a political dialogue. We are confident that
UNMIN, within its mandate, will provide the necessary
support to the Nepalese for them to promptly overcome
their problems. We will follow developments in that
country.

Given the immense fragility of the current
political situation, we support a clear and unanimous
message from the Council that takes note of the
problem. We further call on the Government to fulfill
its assurances to the international community by
continuing to take the necessary steps to create
conducive conditions for the completion of the work of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), while
recognizing
the
importance
of
maintaining
international engagement in and in support of Nepal’s
peace process.
Finally, we would also like to express our deep
appreciation and our full support for the important
work of the Representative of the Secretary-General
and her team in UNMIN under increasingly complex
circumstances, as well as for the country team and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Nepal.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
We are grateful to the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Karin Landgren, for submitting
the report on the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) (S/2009/221) and for briefing us on recent
developments in that country. We support the efforts of
Ms. Landgren. We are pleased that the report welcomes
the progress achieved in key areas of the Nepalese
peace process. A serious discussion of developing a
draft constitution and determining the future of the two
armies has begun. The Special Committee on the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel
has started regular consultations. A Constitutional
Council and a National Security Council have been

09-32451

I now resume my functions as president of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.
Mr. Paudel (Nepal): First of all, Mr. President, I
would like to express my sincere gratitude to you and
the members of the Council for providing this
opportunity to share our views in this meeting. I also
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month.
We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/221) on United Nations support to the peace
process. We would like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
insightful briefing to the Council and we appreciate the
role of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
in our peace process under her able leadership. We
have taken note of the views expressed by Council
members and we appreciate their contribution. We also
appreciate the pledges of support to the Government
and people of Nepal for the success of the peace
process.
We have witnessed Nepal’s historic transformation
process moving forward with many ebbs and flows
since the signing of the peace agreement. We are
confident that the peace process will not drift from its
progressive and steady course, since the political forces
of Nepal are resilient and accommodative in nature. We
believe that the flexible attitude of the political parties
will guide them towards the logical conclusion of the
peace process.
We are also confident that current situation in
Nepal will be resolved soon through dialogue and
consensus among the political parties in the

15

S/PV.6119

Constituent Assembly. It will in no way jeopardize the
peace process.

the armies, as we have, I believe, what is
acknowledged as an impartial role in the peace process.

I would like to reiterate before this Council once
again that the political parties, despite their differences,
are engaged in dialogue to forge consensus in the spirit
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The
Constituent Assembly has been working vigorously on
drafting a constitution. The Nepalese people are eager
to see how their concerns and voices will be reflected
in the new constitution-making process, once the
Constituent Assembly puts forward a draft constitution
for a final round of consultations among the people.

The immediate challenge will be the formation of
a Government and progress in the elected LegislatureParliament, without spoiling the process and inserting
unconscionable delays into the procedure. There will
be great temptations for that at this moment, and all
parties will need to exercise restraint and show respect
for the democratic process to which they have
committed.

Similarly, the Special Committee on army
integration and its Technical Committee are at work.
Preparations to discharge the minors are making
significant progress with the help of UNMIN and other
United Nations agencies. We are determined to carry
out our obligations in that regard.
We believe that the Council fully understands the
throes of Nepal’s historic transformation and that it
stands by our side as a gesture of international support
that will revitalize our efforts in the peace process. I
would like to assure the Council that the Government
of Nepal will make every sincere effort to allow
UNMIN to complete its given activities by the end of
its current mandate.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Ms. Landgren to reply to comments,
observations and questions.
Ms. Landgren: First of all, Mr. President, let me
thank you and other members of the Council for your
kind words welcoming me to the Council and to United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and for your
appreciation for the work of my colleagues in UNMIN
and in the Department of Political Affairs on the report
(S/2009/221) before you. We have noted your
comments regarding the next Secretary-General’s
report.
The concerns of the present moment are indeed
acute, and the Security Council’s attention to and
support for the challenges of Nepal’s democratic
transition is extremely important. Let me take as a
starting point the question of what can be done,
especially by UNMIN. UNMIN will act within the
scope of its mandate and, as the Council knows, that is
a limited mandate, but we will build on our contacts
and on our strong dialogue with all political parties and

16

There will be a need for a continuing technical
role in respect of integration and rehabilitation of
Maoist army personnel. UNMIN is working very
closely with the committees to provide them and the
Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction with the support
that they need and request. However, I want to
underline that the resolution of that issue is not
primarily a technical matter. It will be a difficult
political negotiation. Nonetheless, we will support the
committees, which are expected to present detailed and
realistic proposals, on the basis of which the political
discussions can take place.
The frustration among Maoist personnel is high at
this stage, their having been in cantonments now for
over two years, and it is essential that those discussions
move forward. In the current context, the Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee (JMCC) becomes
a particularly important mechanism, as in that forum,
the Nepal Army and Maoist army come together under
the chairmanship of UNMIN. Through all the rough
patches of this peace process — and, as the Council
knows, this is not the first — the JMCC has continued
to meet and discuss; it has continued to bring together
the Nepal Army and the Maoist army for discussions in
a professional and civilized atmosphere. Now more
than ever, I would suggest, this becomes an important
dialogue forum for the armies.
With regard to the discharge of minors, I see a
risk that, at this moment, this could become a low
priority politically. UNMIN will continue with the
United Nations partners to help move this forward
without further delay.
The focus has been very much on security issues
centring on the Nepal Army and the Maoist army. It is
essential that the process be highly attentive to the
rights and interests of various other identity-based
groups. Clearly, the overriding national priority is the
drafting of the new constitution, and that requires not

09-32451

S/PV.6119

only consensus at the level of the political parties, but
also a sense of ownership on the part of all groups —
the sense that they too have a place in the new Nepal,
without recourse to violence. We have seen several
incidents of violence and boycott over the past several
months. That means maintaining an ongoing and
inclusive dialogue with the traditionally marginalized
parties and groups.

“The Security Council expresses its concern
about the current political crisis in Nepal, and
underscores the urgent need for the Government
of Nepal and all political parties to continue to
work together in the spirit of compromise. The
Council notes the steps taken so far in the
implementation of the peace process and recalls
its full support for that process.

As experts point out, Nepal is a country of
minorities. The largest group accounts for some 16 per
cent of the population, so unity is the only answer and
dialogue is the only satisfactory way to move forward.
UNMIN — given our mandate — is not directly
involved in that, but there is a need to continue to draw
attention to it, and we will do so.

“The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) and recalls resolution 1864 (2009)
calling upon the Government of Nepal to
continue to take the necessary decisions to create
conditions conducive to completion of UNMIN’s
activities by the end of the current mandate,
including through the work of the Special and
Technical
Committees
for
supervision,
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
combatants.

I would like to mention that with the recent
turbulent events, the National Development Forum
which was scheduled for next week has been
postponed. That Forum, which was bringing together
high-level representation of multilateral and bilateral
donors, has been an integral part of developing Nepal’s
new national development strategy. It is unfortunate
that the Forum had to be delayed and we hope that it
will come swiftly back on track.
In closing, I would like to again state my
appreciation for the Council’s close attention to the
report and to the situation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her clarifications.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

09-32451

“The
Security
Council
recalls
the
Government of Nepal’s commitment to discharge
minors from the cantonment sites and calls upon
the Government of Nepal to implement that
commitment in accordance with international
law.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/12.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

17
