274

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,93
1. Concurs with the recommendations and observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in its report;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a further report
setting out his proposals to give effect to those
recommendations.
105th plenary meeting
I 8 December I 984

39/243. Staff and administrative questions of the
Economic Commission for Western Asia
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
81 of 27 July 1984,
Deeply concerned about the high vacancy rate and difficulties in recruitment which have prevailed for a number
of years in the regional commissions, particularly in the
Economic Commission for Western Asia,
Convinced that the high vacancy rate has had a serious
impact on the work programme of the Economic Commission for Western Asia,
Recognizing that repeated efforts have been made by the
secretariat of the Economic Commission for Western Asia
to find qualified staff from unrepresented or underrepresented States in the region covered by the Commission, but that the difficulties still persist in the recruitment
of such staff,
Recognizing also the importance of knowledge of the
Arabic language by the staff of the Economic Commission
for Western Asia for the effective performance of their
work,
l. Urges unrepresented and underrepresented States to
endeavour to encourage competent personnel to work in
the secretariat of the Economic Commission for Western
Asia as staff members on a regular or fixed-term basis;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to enable the Economic Commission for
Western Asia to recruit staff from any State member of the
Commission to meet its personnel requirements;
3. Decides that all members of the Economic Commission for Western Asia should be treated in a manner consistent with their full membership in the Commission in
regard to employment in the secretariat of the
Commission.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/244. Respect for the privileges and immunities of
officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/212 of 17 December 1980,
36/232 of 18 December 1981, 37/236 of 21 December
1982 and 38/230 of 20 December 1983,
Recalling that, under Article 105 of the Charter of the
United Nations, officials of the Organization shall enjoy in
the territory of each of its Member States such privileges
and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization,
93 A/39/733.

which is indispensable for the proper discharge of their
duties,
Recalling the obligation of the staff in the conduct of
their duty to observe fully the laws and regulations of
Member States,
I. Takes note with concern of the report submitted to
the General Assembly by the Secretary-General on behalf
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, 94 which shows a continuing neglect of the observance
of the principles related to respect for the privileges and
immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations;
2. Reaffirms the above-mentioned resolutions;
3. Welcomes the measures already taken by the Secretary-General in furtherance of the safety and security of
international civil servants, as outlined in paragraph 7 of
his report; 94
4. Calls upon the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the Organization, to continue personally
to act as the focal point in promoting and ensuring the
observance of the privileges and immunities of officials of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies and
related organizations by using all such means as are available to him;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to give priority,
through the United Nations Security Co-ordinator and the
other special representatives, to the reporting and prompt
follow-up of cases of arrest, detention and other possible
matters relating to the security of officials of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies and related
organizations;
6. Calls upon the staff of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies and related organizations to comply
with the obligations arising from the Staff Regulations of
the United Nations, in particular regulation 1.8, and from
the equivalent provisions governing the staff of the other
agencies;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to review
and appraise the measures already taken to enhance the
safety and protection of international civil servants and to
modify them where necessary;
8. Invites the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to suggest in
his next annual report to the General Assembly further
steps designed to alleviate the present situation.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/245. Composition of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on personnel policy
and in particular resolutions 33/ l 43 of 20 December 1978,
35/210 of 17 December 1980, 37/235 of 21 December
1982 and 38/231 of 20 December 1983,
Bearing in mind Article IOI, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations which states that "The paramount
consideration in the employment of the staff and in the
determination of the conditions of service shall be the
necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the
94 A/C.Si.W, 17.
