S/PRST/2008/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2008
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5880th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 April 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls that it endorsed the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement as well as its Supplementary Agreements.
“The Security Council warmly welcomes the approval by the Ivorian
authorities of the proposal from the Independent Electoral Commission to
organize presidential elections on 30 November 2008. It underlines that this
announcement, supported by all Ivorian parties, and the signing by President
Laurent GBAGBO of related decrees, constitute an important step forward.
The Security Council encourages the Ivorian parties to redouble their efforts
to meet this commitment, and the international community to bring continued
support to this effect.
“The Security Council commends the Facilitator, President Blaise
COMPAORE of Burkina Faso, for his continued efforts to support the peace
process in Côte d’Ivoire, in particular through the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement follow up mechanisms. This support to the actions of President
Laurent GBAGBO and Prime Minister Guillaume SORO, with the active
engagement of SRSG CHOI Young-Jin, has been instrumental towards
achieving the establishment of a consensus among all political parties to hold
presidential elections in 2008.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Côte d’Ivoire, and recalls that he
shall certify that all stages of the electoral process provide all the necessary
guarantees for the holding of open, free, fair and transparent presidential and
legislative elections in accordance with international standards, consistent
with paragraph 9 of Resolution 1795 (2008). It fully supports in particular the
five criteria framework elaborated by Mr. CHOI Young-Jin in this regard and
welcomed by the Ivorian parties.
“The Security Council welcomes the visit of the Secretary-General to
Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire (22-24 April) and is encouraged by the
signing, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, of a Code of Good
Conduct for elections by all political parties.

08-32265 (E) 290408

*0832265*

S/PRST/2008/11

“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s report dated
15 April 2008 (S/2008/250). It encourages the Ivorian parties to build on the
ongoing mobile courts’ process for the identification of the Ivorian population
and registration of voters. The Security Council looks forward to the
publication of the electoral list as a crucial step in the electoral process.
“The Security Council calls upon the parties to make concrete progress to
promote political and security stability, in particular in the context of the
forthcoming presidential elections, in such key areas as the disarmament and
dismantling of militias, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, the storage of weapons, the unification and restructuring of
defence and security forces and the full restoration of State authority
throughout the country.
“The Security Council takes note with appreciation of the support of
bilateral and multilateral donors, in particular ECOWAS, AU and the EU. It
calls upon donors and the Government of Cote d’Ivoire to make further efforts
to finance the electoral process, including through the trust fund established
by UNDP to that effect, and calls upon the authorities of Côte d’Ivoire to
engage fully with the donors. It also encourages the international community
to enhance its financial support for the facilitation.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the role played by
the United Nations Operations in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), supported by the
French forces, in contributing to bring the security needed by the peace
process and the logistical support required for the preparation of the elections.
It welcomes the assessment made by the Secretary-General on the troop level
of UNOCI in his report (S/2008/250). The Security Council will review by
30 July 2008 the mandates of UNOCI and French forces which support it, as
well as the level of troops of UNOCI, in accordance with paragraph 8 of
Resolution 1795 (2008).
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it regularly
informed of the situation including on the logistical support that UNOCI will
provide for the elections.”

2

08-32265
