Re,olatiom adopted on the reporb of the Third Committee

Recalling further its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20
December 1965 by which it, inter alia, decided to hasten
the conclusion, among other instruments, of a convention on freedom of information,
Recognizing that freedom of information is indispensable to the enjoyment, promotion and protection of all
the other rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling its .resolutions concerning racism, nazism,
racial discrimination and other similar ideologies,
Recalling also its resolutions and the decisions of
other United Nations bodies regarding the dissemination
of information on the evils of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism,
Recalling the deep interest which the United Nations
has shown since 1947 in problems of freedom of information and the various measures, thus far inadequate, which it has taken to promote and safeguard
this freedom,
Mindful that recent technological advances in the
field of telecommunications have, by enormously extending the reach and scope of words, images and
ideas, greatly magnified the potentialities, for good or
evil, of the media of information,
Recognizing that the existence of monopolies in the
media of information is an obstacle to economic and
social progress and prevents the full achievement of
freedom of information,
Believing that the time has come for the international
community to take a renewed interest in measures
calculated to promote freedom of information and to
encourage the responsible exercise of this freedom,
l. Affirms the principle that the primary function
of media of information anywhere in the world is to
gather and impart freely and responsibly objective and
accurate information;
2. Emphasizes that the objectives of freedom of infor~ation could best be attained if everyone had access
to diverse sources of news and opinions ;
3. Recommends to all States and international organizations concerned that freedom of information
should be particularly promoted in the case of dissemination of information on the evils of apartheid
racism, nazism, colonialism and racial discrimination'.,
4. Appeals to the media of information everywhere
to ~o-operate in the strengthening of democratic institutions, the promotion of economic and social progress
and friendly relations among nations, and combating
propaga!1da for war or for natio~al,. racial or religious
hatr~, m accordance with the prmc1ples of the United
Nattons;
5. Draws the attention of the United Nations bodies
and specialized agencies concerned to the continuing
need for assistance in the development and improvement
of information media in the developing countries in
order to enable the latter to share in the benefits flowing
from the modern technological revolution and to redress
the inequality in this field between the developed and the
developing countries ;
6. Commends the existing practice of triennial reporting on freedom of information under the system of
periodic reports on human rights and recommends the
consideration of the _possibility of appointing, as may
be necessary, a special rapporteur on freedom of information to conduct an independent and objective
study of the actual situation and developments in this
field;

SS

. 7. Decides, pending completion of the draft Convention on Freedom of Information, to give priority at its
twenty-fourth session to the consideration and adoption
of the draft Declaration on Freedom of Information
so that it may serve as an inspiration and set a standard
for information media as well as Governments anywhere in the world.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.
2449 (XXDI). l..etlal aid
The General Assembly,
. Noting with appreciation resolution XIX on legal
aid adopted on 12 May 1968 by the International Conference on Human Rights'8 held at Teheran from 22
April to 13 May 1968,
Recalling that the Universal Declaration of Human
Righ~s proclaims that everyone has the right to an
effective r~mC?y by the competent national tribunals
for acts v1olatmg the fundamental rights granted him
by the constitution or by law,
Recalling further that article 14 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides in fjrt
tha~ everyone charged with a criminal offence shal be
ent!tled to de~end himself in person or through legal
assistance of his own choosing and to be informed if he
does not.have legal_ assistance! of this right and t~ have
!egal assista,:ice :1-ss1gned t~ him in any case where the
1f!ter~sts of Justice so re9u1re, and without payment by
him m any such case 1f he does not have sufficient
means to pay for it,
Believing that there are cases where the individual's
recourse to competent tribunals to which he has a
right of access is denied or hindered because of the
lack of financial resources to bear the expenses involved
Convinced that the provision of legal aid to thos;
who need it would strengthen the observance and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
l. Recommends Member States :
'
(a) To guarantee the progressive development of
~ol!lprehensive systems of legal aid to those who need
1t m order to protect their human rights and fundamental freedoms ;
( b) To devise stan~ards for_ granting, in appropriate
cases, legal or professional assistance ;
(c) To .consider y,ays a~d. means of defraying the
expen~s involved m prov1dmg such comprehensive
legal aid systems ;
( d) To consider taking all possible steps to simplify
legal procedures so as to reduce the burdens on the
financial and other resources of individuals who seek
legal redress ;
( ~) To ~ncoura~e co-operation among appropriate
bodies makmg available competent legal assistance to
those who need it;
2. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation
with the appropriate United Nations o~gans specialized
agencie~ and other intergovernmental organ; concerned,
to provide the necessary resources, within the limits of
the programme of advisory services in the field of
huJ?lan rights, to facilitate expert and other technical
ass1~taf!~e to Member States seeking to extend the
avatlab1hty of competent legal aid.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.
41 Ibid., p. 15.
