S/PV.7752

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7752nd meeting

Friday, 29 July 2016, 5.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-24245 (E)
*1624245*

S/PV.7752

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/659, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
Abstaining:
Angola, China, Egypt, Venezuela
The President: There were 11 votes in favour, none
against and 4 abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 2303 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to take this opportunity to convey the gravity of the
occasion today as we have just adopted resolution 2303
(2016), on Burundi. After intense negotiations, today
the Security Council has taken an important decision
that marks a potentially decisive step on the path to
peace in Burundi. I wish to thank all my colleagues and
their teams for the great amount of work that we done
together in a consistently constructive spirit.
In adopting resolution 2303 (2016), the Security
Council is pursuing two main goals. The first is to
support an authentic inter-Burundian dialogue. The
Security Council strongly reaffirms that only a peaceful
dialogue among all Burundians will allow Burundi to
restore lasting peace. To that end, the Security Council
is renewing its full support to the facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, former President Benjamin
2/10

29/07/2016

Mkapa. The Security Council urges the Burundian
parties to commit without delay to the process led by
Mr. Mkapa in a constructive and sincere manner. Next
week’s visits to Tanzania and Kenya by the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault,
will provide the opportunity to renew that support.
The Security Council also reiterating its support
for the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Benomar, so that he can support the work of the
facilitators. The dialogue must be based in no uncertain
terms on the Arusha Peace Agreement and respect it
in letter and spirit. More than ever, the Arusha Peace
Agreement is the compass that must guide stakeholders
in Burundi and the international community.
The second goal is to end the violence and calm
tensions in Burundi. Let us be clear — as the Office
of the High Commissioner on Human Rights has
underscored, acts of violence persist in Burundi,
accompanied by an increase of serious violations of
fundamental rights and freedoms. The number of
cases of forced disappearances and torture in detention
centres, the location of which is often kept secret, is
even on the rise. Targeted acts of political violence
continue and only increase tensions. Last month, the
arrest of 70 young people for having drawn caricatures
of the President of Burundi in their school notebooks
was a very troubling indication of that.
In order to contribute to calming the situation,
the Security Council expresses its readiness to adopt
sanctions against all those who threaten peace and
security in Burundi. Moreover, the Security Council
urges the Government of Burundi to finally allow the
deployment of 200 observers of the African Union in
compliance with the commitments undertaken last
February to the delegation of the Heads of State of the
African Union. As of today, fewer than 50 of those
observers are deployed in Burundi.
Finally, based on a proposal by the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council has decided to deploy 228
United Nations police officers to monitor the security
and human rights situations. With the rise in violence
and tensions, the Security Council must be have all ears
and eyes on the ground to alert, prevent and avoid the
worst in Burundi. By helping to reassure the people, the
police presence should assist in dissipating tensions,
thereby facilitating a peaceful dialogue. It will also help
to alert the Council if the situation further deteriorates.
16-24245

29/07/2016

The situation in Burundi

In its history, Burundi has already experienced
tragic massacres wherein ethnicity was exploited for the
worst ends. Today, the Security Council is carrying out
its responsibility so that history does not repeat itself.
Within the Chamber, we often stress the importance
of acting in a timely manner in order to prevent
conflicts. That is exactly what the Security Council is
doing through the adoption of resolution 2303 (2016).
Today, we are collectively carrying out a decisive act of
preventive diplomacy faced with the threat of tragedy,
requiring us to continue to work tirelessly, despite our
differences and with Burundi, to pave the necessary
way to peace.
We will never forget the Rwandan genocide of
1994. We will never forget our collective responsibility
in connection with what happened in Rwanda. We
promised ourselves: “Never again”. By adopting
resolution 2303 (2016), the Security Council is learning
from the past. By adopting resolution 2303 (2016), the
Security Council is acting in order to prevent Burundi
from reliving the worst possible scenario. By adopting
resolution 2303 (2016), the Security Council has heeded
the desire of the people of Burundi to finally resume
the road to peace. Today, while we are not at the end
of the road, we have taken a major step and sent a loud
message together.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
shares the concern of the other members of the Security
Council with regard to the current situation in Burundi.
Egypt is fully convinced that the Security Council must
play an active and effective role, in cooperation with
African and regional partners, in supporting Burundi’s
efforts to restore peace and stability and find solutions
to its challenges through serious and genuine national
dialogue.
Egypt sought to maintain a positive approach
based on cooperation vis-a-vis the Council and its
discussion on Burundi. We sought to preserve the unity
of the Council so that we could send a strong message
reflecting the desire of the international community to
see stability restored in Burundi. Egypt has consistently
upheld that the deployment of a police contingent
in Burundi should take Burundi’s national position
into account and be the subject of consensus among
the members of the Security Council. It should also
enjoy Burundi’s support as as to ensure that Burundi’s
effective implementation of the resolution, thereby
allowing a constructive interaction between Burundi
and the United Nations.

S/PV.7752

Despite divergent points of view, Egypt and other
like-minded Council members have taken a positive and
constructive approach to this issue that has led to a result
that takes the concerns of all members of the Council
into account. All these efforts notwithstanding, the
resolution adopted today does not address our concerns,
but rather imposes an option that Burundian authorities
do not support. Moreover, the resolution selectively
addresses the Secretary-General’s recommendations
regarding the mandate of the police contingent, which
could result in Burundi’s refusal to cooperate in the
implementation of the resolution and could challenge
the credibility of the Security Council. We even fear
that the current situation could have a negative effect
on the African Union’s efforts and on the mediation
efforts of the East African Community.
My delegation therefore abstained in the voting on
today’s resolution on the police contingent, as the current
language does not take our concerns into account and
does not fully represent the views of all members of the
Council. It may also cost the international community
the opportunity of cooperating with Burundi on
the deployment of the police contingent. This is a
legitimate concern, because the resolution has been
adopted outside of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and is consistent with the principles of
peacekeeping operations calling for the participation
and agreement of host countries.
Finally, I reaffirm Egypt’s commitment to continue
striving for positive and constructive cooperation
between the Security Council and Burundi with a view
to enhancing the role of the United Nations and helping
to restore stability to Burundi and to overcome existing
challenges.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, we
welcome your efforts in convening this meeting late on
a Friday afternoon, which means that it is important for
the Council to deliberate on this question.
Angola abstained in the voting on resolution 2303
(2015) for the following reasons.
First, we welcome the active engagement of
the African Union in Burundi and the consent of
the Burundian authorities to the deployment of 200
human rights observers and military experts. We call
for their rapid deployment, for the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi, and for international support
for the attainment of this objective.

16-242453/10

S/PV.7752

The situation in Burundi

29/07/2016

Secondly, we deem the coordination and
cooperation with the Burundian Government to be
essential to guaranteeing an engagement in the country
that will result in helping Burundi to return to peace.
Therefore, we are of the view that the establishment of
the United Nations police component in Burundi and its
progressive deployment should be done in consultation
with the Government of Burundi.

On the question of sending United Nations police
to Burundi, it is necessary to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Burundi and
engage in full consultations with its Government in
an effort to reach a Burundi-led settlement that enjoys
the consent of all concerned parties. Resolution 2303
(2015) does not address the aforementioned principles.
China was therefore compelled to abstain in the voting.

Thirdly, the resolution should make a tangible
contribution to urgently needed political dialogue,
which must be pursued fundamentally by strengthening
cooperation among the Government of Burundi, the
mediator, the East African Community facilitator and
the Special Advisers on the Responsibility to Protect
and on the Prevention of Genocide.

China urges the parties concerned to proceed with
caution on the question of sending police to Burundi,
to consult fully with the Burundian Government and
to reach an agreement in advance of their deployment.

Fourthly, during the negotiations, in a joint effort
with other members of the Council, Angola made goodfaith proposals that were aimed at a widely accepted
compromise. We regret that these proposals have not
been sufficiently taken into account. We feel that with
regard to Burundi, the Council must send a clear and
united message. This clarity, unfortunately, has not
seemed to persist or prevail, particularly in connection
with the deployment of the police contingent.
Angola stands ready to continue to engage with
all members of the Council towards the achievement
of peace and security in Burundi and in the region at
large.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the positive initiatives taken by the
Burundian Government to maintain national stability
and promote internal reconciliation, and urges the
parties in Burundi to actively participate in the political
dialogue and resolve their differences peacefully
through dialogue and consultation. China supports
the mediation efforts of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the East
African Community, on the question of Burundi, and
the United Nations ongoing constructive role in seeking
a political solution to the question.
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions should be deployed on the basis of
full consultation with the country concerned and follow
the principle of the consent of the host country. That is
the only way to ensure that peacekeeping operations
and special political missions can deploy smoothly and
implement their mandate.
4/10

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay participated actively in the drafting of
resolution 2303 (2015) and commends the dedication
and patient work of the penholder in the drafting of
the text, which we have just adopted. In drafting the
text, we were fundamentally motivated by the urgent
need to address the grave humanitarian situation in
Burundi. Reliable sources, such as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNICEF
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, have denounced the persistence of and, in
some cases, the increase in human rights violations in
Burundi — cases of torture, forced disappearances,
sexual violence, arbitrary detention and restrictions on
fundamental freedoms. Against this critical backdrop,
measures set forth in the resolution, including the
sending of a police officers component, could help
provide relief from the extreme vulnerability that the
people of Burundi are experiencing, which requires
immediate attention.
The resolution authorizes the deployment of
a maximum of 228 police officers. In Uruguay’s
judgment, the rate at which they are deployed should be
coordinated with the authorities of Burundi in order to
achieve the successful implementation of the resolution
we have adopted today.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2303 (2016) establishing a United Nations police
component in Burundi. We extend our thanks to the
France for its patient efforts to try to find consensus
on the resolution. We regret that not every member of
the Security Council was able to support the resolution
today. A united Council would have sent a clear
message to the Government of Burundi to accept the
police deployment.
16-24245

29/07/2016

The situation in Burundi

In the face of the worrying state of affairs in
Burundi, the Security Council had a clear duty to act.
The situation on the ground remains fragile, with a
very real potential for a spiral into mass violence. The
United Nations police component, working with human
rights observers from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, can help stop
that spiral. Together, they can prevent the further
deterioration of the security situation and help decrease
human rights violations. In doing so, the deployment
will help create an environment conducive to political
dialogue, a goal that all of us share.
But we need to recognize that today’s resolution
is just a starting point. We must insist on the full
deployment of the 228 police officers authorized by the
resolution, and we need to be clear that this deployment
is designed to monitor the actions of all parties in
Burundi, protect all Burundians and support a political
solution to the crisis. But to find this solution, the
Government must commit to and participate in good
faith in a genuine and inclusive political dialogue. We,
the Security Council, cannot let up in our calls for this
dialogue. We must ensure that the eyes of the Council
remain on Burundi.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): As we said at yesterday’s open debate at
the ministerial level (see S/PV.7750), in our opinion
we have failed to help the Burundians build a lasting
peace and have been unable to show a united front in
conveying to the Government of Burundi the urgent
need to find a way out of this crisis. We did not achieve
consensus, but the Council was nevertheless able to
adopt a decision — resolution 2303 (2016) — which in
and of itself is already tremendously important.
What do we see in this resolution? We see three
things. First, we are sending a message to the country
that the rounds of dialogue should continue, in order
to ensure the protection of civilians and the general
population so that violations of human rights cease.
Secondly, with resolution 2303 (2016), we are trying to
convey our wish that there be increased coordination
of and coherence in all the various efforts that are
currently being undertaken. Thirdly, and finally, with
the resolution, we are making a clear call to the leaders
of the region to get involved more substantially and
effectively in order to resolve the crisis.

S/PV.7752

In the 1990s, as we mentioned, we were not able to
avoid catastrophe, but I hope that history has given us a
second chance to try to avoid one now.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Eighteen months ago, with
the closure of the United Nations Office in Burundi
previously authorized by resolution 2137 (2014), there
was immense hope that Burundi had turned the final
page on a tragic chapter in its history. At that point,
Burundi seemed poised to move out of the post-conflict
phase into a period that would consolidate the political,
economic and social gains built on the principles of
the Arusha Agreement as well as those enshrined in
the country’s Constitution. Therefore the political and
security turmoil in Burundi that arose in 2015 and
which persists today is deeply distressing. Instead of
moving forward, there are legitimate fears that the
country is being drawn back to its dark days of violent
conflict.
The Security Council has often been faulted in the
past for not acting quickly enough in response to crises.
Too often, the Council reacts only after a situation has
significantly deteriorated to the point where it cannot be
ignored. In supporting resolution 2303 (2016) adopted
today, Malaysia believes that the Council’s decision
represents a novel approach to conflict prevention in
a region with a long history of conflict as the status
quo. This time we are not waiting for the worst to occur
before taking action.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence that have
occurred in the course of the protracted political crisis
in Burundi. Violence will never result in a permanent
solution. Rather, genuine, credible and inclusive
political dialogue is the only viable path to resolving
the crisis in Burundi in a peaceful manner.
We commend and support the leading role played
by regional organizations, including the African Union
and the East African Community, to mediate dialogue
and restore stability in Burundi. We believe that the
combination of a United Nations police component
to monitor the security situation on the ground and
strengthen United Nations capacity for human rights
monitoring mandated by resolution 2303 (2016) can
help create an environment conducive to supporting a
viable political dialogue.
We wish to make it clear that the consent and
cooperation of the Government of Burundi is
fundamental for the successful implementation of
the resolution. Malaysia reaffirms the sovereignty,

16-242455/10

S/PV.7752

The situation in Burundi

political independence, territorial integrity and unity
of Burundi, a principle that is clearly reflected in the
text and stresses the primary role of the Government in
upholding the security and human rights of its people.
In this regard, we call for the Government of Burundi
to extend its cooperation and for the United Nations to
consult closely with the Burundian national authorities
for the swift deployment of the United Nations police
component. We appeal to the Burundian Government
to take this opportunity to demonstrate its sincere
commitment to resolving the crisis peacefully and give
priority to the interests, security and welfare of the
Burundian people.
In conclusion, we wish to commend France,
the penholder, for setting the tone for constructive
negotiations on the draft text. While we regret that the
resolution could not be adopted by full consensus, we
support the resolution and its ultimate aim — to bring
Burundi back to a path of lasting peace and stability.
We fervently hope that the Government of Burundi and
the international community greet this resolution in the
same spirit we do.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution
2303 (2016), on the deployment of an police officers
component in Burundi for a year for substantive reasons
that blocked the consensus that is needed for a subject
as vital as the principle of obtaining the consent for
such action from the concerned State. It is clear to us
that there has been a lack of flexibility in this process,
which has made it difficult to find a consensus position.
Today’s voting reflects the prevalance of divergent
positions in the Council with regard to managing the
United Nations relationship with the State of Burundi.
The resolution does not address one essential factor
for the deployment of the police component — the
consent of the Government of Burundi, the country’s
principal institutional actor. It is not possible to
implement the mandate of a document of the Security
Council and the United Nations that does not reflect
this principle. It is a text that will violate the country’s
sovereignty, international law and the Charter of
United Nations, and it sets a negative precedent for the
international community. This is even more true because
the resolution reaffirms the Council’s commitment to
the political independence of Burundi. By not including
a specific and clear reference to the consultations that
should be held with the Burundian Government for the
6/10

29/07/2016

deployment of the police component, the resolution
undermines its own provisions. Instead of specifically
mentioning that element, it contains ambiguous
language that sets a dangerous precedent for the future
negotiations of other resolutions, which has in fact
happened in previous situations.
Our country notes that there are inconsistencies
in the Security Council’s actions in relation to the
concerned States and the relevant resolutions. In some
cases, the Security Council has shown great weakness
and laxity in taking unilateral actions against some
States with regard to the deployment of peacekeeping
missions. In other cases, including this one, the
Security Council imposes its resolutions and disregards
the opinion of the Government of Burundi, in violation
of the principle of State consent.
Venezuela recognizes the efforts of the African
Union and other subregional and Burundian
organizations to resolve the political crisis affecting
that nation. Our country also shares the concerns
that have been expressed by other States membes of
the Council with regard to the potential deterioration
of the situation in the country, which could lead to
even greater conflict. That is why we reiterate our
firm commitment to a peaceful settlement of the
conflict — one of inclusive understanding reached
through dialogue and in accordance with the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement and the country’s
Constitution. We also support the dialogue and
mediation process that is being led by former President
of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and by President of
Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, in the framework of an
African and inter-Burundian dialogue.
Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
regrets that the opportunity was missed to reaffirm
the Security Council’s responsibility to work in
coordination with Burundi and to safeguard, together
with the Member States of this Organization, the
principles of the rule of law.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2303 (2016), which authorizes the deployment
of a police component to Burundi.
Just yesterday in this Chamber, our debate on
peacebuilding (see S/PV.7750) demonstrated, inter
alia, that the political and security situation in
Burundi remained very worrisome. By adopting this
resolution, the Council expresses its full support for the
16-24245

29/07/2016

The situation in Burundi

inter-Burundian dialogue, under the aegis of the East
African Community through the good offices of the
Special Adviser, in the spirit and letter of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
We are suddenly in a prevention situation to ensure
that the worse does not occur. The African Union and
the United Nations must monitor the situation together
to assist the Government of Burundi and the opposition
in holding a peaceful dialogue.
Ms. Power (United States of America): We are
profoundly concerned about the dramatic deterioration
of the situation in Burundi over the past year and a half.
During this period, as we all know, some 270,000 people
have been displaced; at least 348 people have reportedly
been the victims of extrajudicial killings; and 651
reported cases of torture have been documented. These
are just the crimes that we know about. All are worrying
signs that the country’s brutal past may be repeating
itself. This week, appalling new reports emerged of
sexual violence by members of the ruling party’s youth
militia, which we and other Council members have
been warning about for several years. Women have said
that they were raped simply because of their political
party affiliations. This is sickening. Absent serious,
concerted international engagement and pressure, the
situation is all but certain to deteriorate further.
The Council is not alone in its grave concern
regarding these crimes or in its efforts to stop them and
bring the perpetrators to justice. The United Nations has
established an office in Burundi, drawn up contingency
plans, sent the Secretary-General to Bujumbura
and opened a Human Rights Council independent
investigation into the situation. And, as we all know,
in January the Security Council travelled to Burundi,
where we urged President Nkurunziza to change course
and pursue a path to peace. None of the steps that we
asked the President to take has he embarked upon.
Meanwhile, the African Union (AU) authorized the
deployment of 200 human rights and military monitors,
dispatched a delegation of five Heads of State to help
address the evolving crisis, and authorized, initially, a
5,000-strong peacekeeping force to stem the violence.
The AU began the deployment of human rights
observers and military experts to Burundi on 22 July
2015 — more than a year ago — after the AU Peace
and Security Council agreed to deploy monitors in May
2015. But rather than facilitating the deployment of AU
monitors, the Government of Burundi spent months

S/PV.7752

delaying the implementation of a memorandum of
understanding that would have allowed the monitors to
do their job.
After rejecting a peacekeeping force, the
Government promised AU Heads of State in February
of this year that 200 monitors would be allowed to
deploy. Yet today, only 36 monitors are in Burundi. I
want to stress that this is the Government of Burundi
with which many members of the Council have insisted
we coordinate the United Nations deployment. Of
course, the deployment must be coordinated with
the Government of Burundi. In order for anybody to
deploy, you have to coordinate with the Government
that provides visas and landing rights at the airport, and
that allows people to move around.
But, honestly, listening to speakers today, I feel
as if we are living in a parallel universe. Council are
members speaking, in many cases, with no regard
for what the Government is doing to Africa’s own
monitors. It is especially disappointing not to hear the
two abstainers from Africa even acknowledge the fate
of Africa’s own monitors. We have got to merge the
reality that we live in, in this beautiful Chamber, with
the reality that is playing out on the ground every day.
Today was an occasion when we could have sent a
clear, unified message to the Government of Burundi
that we will not allow similar tactics to delay the
police deployment authorized today, and that continued
obstruction of the AU mission must stop. If the African
Members of the Council cannot stand for this, I do not
know what we are doing here. This is a Government that
is blocking their people from deploying. The African
Council Members are trying to help. We are trying to
help them help.
The Government of Burundi has remained closed,
unwilling to listen to its neighbours, partners and the
international community, and resistant to following
through on the commitments it has made. Meanwhile,
it has to be stressed that some of those who oppose the
Government continue also to resort to violence and to
commit abuses. The United States strongly condemns
violence perpetrated by all sides in Burundi. We hope
that this presence, as it evolves, will document those
abuses and empower us to come to agreement on what
further steps might be taken.
The authorization of a United Nations police
component will put additional eyes and ears on the
ground, who will be able report directly to the Security

16-242457/10

S/PV.7752

The situation in Burundi

Council. That is valuable. But we should not harbour
any illusions that this will fix Burundi’s problems. It
will only at best observe those problems. Police are
not being deployed to protect civilians, even though
civilians are in dire need of protection. That should
embarrass us. Instead, police are effectively being
asked to be human rights monitors. That is the most
that we as a Council were able to agree upon, and we
could not even secure consensus on this.
This really raises questions about the Council’s
will when it comes to preventing atrocities, especially
when a Government is implicated in atrocities. What
the people of Bunrundi deserve and what the Council
needs to continue to insist on is serious engagement
by the Government in a process of dialogue with all
stakeholders in order to reach agreement on a peaceful
way forward. The games have to stop; the preconditions
have to stop. The Government is still insisting on sitting
down only with those it already agrees with. It must
stop lashing out at civil society and the opposition, and
the opposition, those who have engaged in violence,
must renounce it and must itself refrain from setting
these onerous preconditions for dialogue. No one will
get anywhere if things continue as they are.
The United States has settled for much less than
what it wanted with this resolution. Others have spoken
about good-faith proposals. I assure the Council that
lots of good-faith proposals do not appear in the text of
the resolution. But, as someone who has looked at the
issues of mass atrocities over many years and studied
it on many continents, I have to say that we worry
that our inability to unite even on this sends precisely
the wrong message to parties that already feel a great
sense of impunity. These abstentions will be solace to
a Government that relishes our division; it has always
made that clear. It is not at all clear to me that a Council
that says repeatedly that it has learned the lessons of
Rwanda has in fact done so.
It is not at all clear to me either that, for all the
talk at yesterday’s Africa peacebuilding meeting (see
S/PV.7750) about the importance of prevention, we in
the Security Council are serious about prevention. This
is a prevention moment, and yet this is where we are.
What is clear is that we believe in the prevention of
atrocities by non-State actors, but when a Government
is implicated, we cannot even unite to send a robust
monitoring presence.
8/10

29/07/2016

Today’s resolution is a step forward, but it is a much
smaller one than this crisis and the people of Burundi
deserve.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the Japanese
delegation for the effective presidency this month and
welcoming the adoption of resolution 2303 (2016),
which is an important prevention resolution. We would
like to express our gratitude to the French delegation
for its hard work on the draft and for taking on board a
number of suggestions, including ours.
Our delegation, recognizing the continued
violations of human rights and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Burundi, strongly supports
the deployment of a United Nations police component in
the country. In our opinion, sending 228 police officers
is the bare minimum for the moment. We strongly
condemn the extra-judicial executions and torture
perpetrated by the Burundian security forces from the
onset of the crisis. Unfortunately, the latest report from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights documents an increase in the number
of cases of forced disappearances and acts of torture in
the country. All of this happened after our own visit to
Burundi.
In this regard, we urge the Burundian authorities
to return to respecting, protecting and guaranteeing
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and to
bring to justice all responsible for such crimes.
Since only 32 human rights observers and 15
military experts out of the 200 previously agreed on
were deployed from the African Union in Burundi, we
call upon the Government of Burundi to ensure the full
implementation of the resolution without delay and to
reconsider its position regarding the deployment of the
police component.
We consider sanctions to be an effective enforcement
tool and fully support the Council’s intention to pursue
targeted measures against all actors that threaten peace
and security in Burundi.
At the same time, Ukraine is convinced that the
peaceful resolution of the Burundian crisis will be
possible only through an inclusive political dialogue.
We would like also to emphasize the need to strengthen
coordination between all relevant international and
regional stakeholders so as to find solutions to stabilize
the situation in Burundi.
16-24245

29/07/2016

The situation in Burundi

Mr. Taula (New Zealand): New Zealand voted
in favour of resolution 2303 (2016). The situation in
Burundi and the risk of further escalation continues to
be of major concern to New Zealand. The resolution
meets our expectations for a credible and appropriate
response. We would stress that the resolution is not the
end of the process but a small milestone in efforts to
restore peace and stability. Achieving this must take
place in the context of efforts to achieve a political
solution, with a significant role for the region and
supporting a genuine incredible inter-Burundian
dialogue.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation’s firm stance is
that international and regional efforts with regard
to Burundi will be successful only if they are taken
in strict respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country. Resolution
2303 (2016) must be implemented in cooperation,
coordination and consultation with the legitimate
Government of Burundi, within frameworks agreed
with it, and fostering a mutually beneficial dialogue.
The activities of the United Nations should be
based on these fundamental criteria. We are convinced
that our position will be fully taken into account by
Mr. Benomar, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, whom we fully endorse.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
position of China on resolution 2303 (2016), which
has just been adopted, is quite clear. Our starting
point is the fact that the fundamental interests of the
Government and the people of Burundi and those of the
Governments and people of the African continent as a
whole should be protected. The Council is an important
organ of the United Nations system. We need to have a
responsible attitude towards the people of Burundi, and
the Council should be cautious in dealing with these
extremely important matters.
The Security Council, during its discussions,
must take an inclusive approach and take into account
the views of the international community. As we
see it, the positions of other countries should not be
distorted in this Chamber. To do so is inappropriate
and irresponsible; it certainly does not contribute to the
common efforts of the Council to help the people and
the Government of Burundi to resolve their problems.

S/PV.7752

The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Power (United States of America): I thank
the representative of China for his response, which
is probably to my comments. I think that one of the
things that the Chinese Ambassador appealed for was
a cautious approach, and I just want to say that I think
that it is very safe to say, a year and a half into the crisis,
that the Council has succeeded in taking a cautious
approach. We have yet to do anything to materially
affect the trajectory of the conflict. We have a very
modest resolution before us today, resolution 2303
(2016), that luckily did go through but that we really
need to unite behind.
With our divisions, we are worse. We are worse at
preserving international peace and security. This is not
a resolution that the United States thought was a great
resolution, and I know abstentions can feel as if one
can just stay on the sidelines and make one’s principled
position clear, but we have to unite on Burundi. Those
same Burundian people that were just invoked are, I
think, counting on us to be able to unite on something
as modest as this.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Japan.
I would like to thank France for its leadership in
preparing resolution 2303 (2016). Japan welcomes its
adoption.
Yesterday, during the open debate on peacebuilding
in Africa (see S/PV.7550), we heard the representatives
of many Member States express their concerns over the
situation in Burundi. We must not allow Burundi’s hardwon progress to vanish after a decade of peacebuilding
efforts. It is time for the Council to take concrete
action. I believe that Council members are united in
their commitment to supporting the political process in
Burundi, in close cooperation with the African Union
and the East African Community, in order to halt the
violence and human rights violations and to prevent a
further deterioration of the situation.
Let me underscore one point. Japan believes that
the deployment of the United Nations police component
authorized under today’s resolution will help not only
the Security Council to closely monitor the situation on
the ground and deter any degradation of the situation,
but also the Government of Burundi to rebuild mutual

16-242459/10

S/PV.7752

The situation in Burundi

trust with its international partners. In that regard,
Japan calls on all the Burundian parties to extend their
full cooperation to the United Nations, including the
United Nations police component.
Japan, as a long-term development partner of
Burundi, sincerely hopes that Burundi will find a
way forward out of the current crisis and chart a
renewed course towards stability and prosperity in the
near future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Egypt has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to make the following clarification. As I said in
my explanation of vote, resolution 2303 (2016) does not
refer to the African Union’s monitors. My delegation
had proposed including such a reference in the draft,
but one of the penholders objected to its inclusion.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked to make a further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I do not
wish to try people’s patience on a Friday evening,
so I shall be brief. The point I wished to make in my
explanation of vote was that when the African Union
(AU) came together, as it did usefully to propose the
deployment of 200 monitors a year and two months

10/10

29/07/2016

prior to the negotiation of a resolution by the Security
Council, and when only 36 of those 200 monitors have
been deployed and none has been able to exercise the
mandate that was given to them by the African Union,
that is worthy of comment here at the United Nations
as we seek to support our African brothers and sisters.
A reference to the AU, without making note of what
that AU mission has become, would have seemed to be
divorced from reality.
The President: Before adjourning the meeting, as
this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council for
the month of July, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Japan to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives and their respective staffs, and the
Secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us.
Indeed, it has been a busy month and one in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, as well as the interpreters, sound
technicians, security staff and other relevant conference
service officers. As we end our presidency, I know I
speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation
of Malaysia all the best in the month of August.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

16-24245
