S/2020/421

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 21 May 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, as well as a copy of the statements delivered by
the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Indonesia,
the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa,
Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on
the situation in Libya convened on Tuesday, 19 May 2020. A statement was also
delivered by the representative of Libya.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, these briefings
and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-06968 (E) 010620 040620

*2006968*

S/2020/421

Annex I
Statement by the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Stephanie Williams
[Original: Arabic and English]
Let me open with best wishes to our Muslim colleagues on the occasion of the
holy month of Ramadan. Allow me also to congratulate Estonia on its presidency of
the Security Council this month.
I had hoped to be able to deliver a more positive report to the Security Council
today but, unfortunately, just when we think that the bottom has been reached in
Libya, we somehow manage to achieve new depths of violence, heartlessness and
impunity. Despite our determined efforts and the Secretary-General’s plea for an
immediate ceasefire to allow Libyans to respond to the common threat of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), I regret to report that there has been no lull in the fighting
between the Government of National Accord (GNA) forces and General Haftar’s
Libyan National Army (LNA), also known as the Libyan Arab Armed Forces.
Instead, fighting has escalated, with an unprecedented increase in indirect fire in
urban areas and a growing tide of suffering for civilians.
For nearly 15 months since the launch of General Haftar’s attack on Tripoli in
April of 2019, armed conflict has been raging in and around some of Libya’s most
densely populated areas. As a result of the intensifying armed hostilities, coupled
with the dire socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, including the loss of employment
and livelihoods, 1 million people are now in need of some form of humanitarian
assistance. That includes 400,000 internally displaced Libyans, along with 654,000
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. In the last year alone, since the attack on
Tripoli started, 201,000 Libyans have been forced to flee their homes, mostly in and
around the capital.
While people around the world are adjusting to the new normal of living with
a global pandemic, millions of Libyans — most notably the 2 million residents of
Tripoli — are living a most abnormal and terrifying existence under almost constant
bombardment and with frequent water and electricity cuts. That existence is
compounded by restricted movement resulting from COVID-19 preventive measures,
rendering the whole situation unbearable for the majority to celebrate the holy month
of Ramadan in peace. We continue to witness an alarming military build-up as a result
of the uninterrupted dispatch by the foreign backers of increasingly sophisticated
and lethal weapons, not to mention the recruitment of more mercenaries to both sides
of the conflict.
After their successful bid to retake six cities on the coastal road west of Tripoli
in April, GNA forces are now seeking to roll back the LNA’s foothold in southern
Tripoli by forcing the redeployment of resources and disrupting their supply lines
from the nearby city of Tarhouna. Emboldened by those recent successes, the GNA
showed reluctance to reciprocate a unilaterally declared cessation of all military
activities announced by the LNA on 29 April on the occasion of Ramadan. On
5 May, GNA forces initiated operations to seize control of the Al-Watiya airbase but
were initially repelled by unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and snipers, resulting
in dozens of fatalities. After repeated attempts, supported by multiple air strikes
conducted by drones, GNA forces took control of the airbase on 18 May. The
control of that strategic airbase may trigger further escalation, turning the Libyan
conflict into a pure proxy war. As has been the case on a number of occasions, we
witnessed the direct involvement of foreign parties in that operation, either with
2/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

UAVs or the presence on the ground of air defence systems, in blatant violation of
the arms embargo.
Since 24 April, Tripoli, and in particular Mitiga airport, has been subjected
to nearly non-stop daily shelling. On 7 May, heavy-artillery bombardment and grad
rocket attacks launched by pro-LNA forces impacted downtown Tripoli, including
the seaport and the vicinity of the Foreign Ministry, the Turkish Embassy and the
residence of Italy’s Ambassador to Libya, with at least two civilians killed and
three others injured. Another round of shelling on targets in and around Mitiga by
General Haftar’s forces on 15 May hit three warehouses of the Central Committee
for Municipal Council Elections, destroying a sizable amount of electoral material.
Once again, we call for the immediate cessation of attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure, while calling on the GNA to restore the civilian nature of
Mitiga airport.
Military operations in and around Tarhouna have caused new displacement
and negatively impacted humanitarian access to the city. I am concerned about
UAV attacks by the GNA over the past two months on vehicles travelling between
Mizdah and Tarhouna as well as in Bani Walid, which caused collateral damage to
vehicles carrying non-combat-related items like food, goods and fuel and resulted in
civilian casualties.
Since my last briefing, the Al-Khadra hospital, which was assigned to receive
patients infected with COVID-19, was hit on four separate days by LNA rockets,
along with the Royal Hospital, the field medical support centre in Tariq Al-Matar
and the Weryemma polyclinic, causing the facilities to be evacuated. On 16 May,
shelling carried out by Haftar’s forces struck a shelter for internally displaced
persons and migrants in Tripoli’s Al-Furnaj district. At least seven persons were
killed and 17 injured, including women and children. It was not the first time that
camp has been targeted. On 10 May, an armed group opened fire inside the intensive
care unit in Al-Jalaa hospital in Benghazi, damaging equipment, while the Tripoli
Central Hospital sustained damage as a result of LNA rocket attacks. I would be
remiss not to reiterate that such attacks violate international humanitarian law and
may amount to war crimes.
Between 1 April and 18 May, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) documented at least 248 civilian casualties — 58 killed and 190 injured —
an 89 per cent increase compared to the total civilian casualties recorded for the
first three months of this year. The vast majority of the total civilian casualties are
attributed to forces affiliated with General Haftar. Those guilty of crimes under
international law must be brought to justice.
We are also concerned by attacks on civilians, the desecration of corpses
and retribution, including looting, robberies and torching of public and private
properties, in western coastal towns recently seized by GNA forces. On 14 April,
following the GNA forces’ takeover of the city of Surman, the Martyr Othman
Hamza Company, affiliated with the GNA, broke into Surman prison and unlawfully
released 401 prisoners. In Tarhouna, on 5 April, the LNA-affiliated armed group
9th Brigade killed at least nine civilians and demolished seven houses, after
forcibly evicting families from their homes and abducting seven women, whose fate
remains unknown.
Social media is another theatre of the Libyan conflict. Building on the
workshops we ran last year to counter incitement and the use of hateful rhetoric in
the media, UNSMIL organized a virtual forum in April with nearly 30 prominent
Libyan traditional and social media figures from across the spectrum. We were

20-069683/32

S/2020/421

pleased to see the participants agree to establish a hate speech observatory under the
auspices of UNSMIL and to produce a code of ethics.
COVID-19 compounds existing insecurity, in addition to exacerbating longstanding vulnerabilities. The United Nations system is hard at work to assist national
authorities, including through the provision of supplies, equipment and training.
Testing capacity has been scaled up. There are now five operational laboratories in
the country, up from two, but more are needed, including the qualified personnel to
operate them. As of 18 May, there were 65 confirmed cases, including three COVIDrelated deaths, reported across Libya. According to the World Health Organization,
the peak has not yet been reached in Libya and the risk of an intensification of the
outbreak remains very high. It should also be noted that the low count of positive
cases is proportional to the low testing capacity, contact tracing and fear of social
stigmatization in the country.
Although the national authorities have provided frequent updates on financial
pledges to address the COVID-19 pandemic, including for the purchase of medical
equipment and the payment of salaries to medical workers, these have been slow to
materialize and salaries to be fully paid. Local authorities across Libya face severe
shortages of functioning hospitals, intensive care units, vital medical equipment
and supplies, including personal protective equipment. According to a recent World
Health Organization survey, while 75 per cent of primary health centres are open,
only 20 per cent are delivering services. Likewise, humanitarian actors face access
constraints in moving humanitarian supplies into and around the country, and flights
carrying medical supplies have not been able to land owing to a lack of clearances
in Benghazi. Negotiating clearances to operate during curfews imposed due to
COVID-19, as well as ongoing insecurity, has delayed relief distributions.
To mitigate the spread of COVID-19, and in response to advocacy from
UNSMIL, I welcome the reported release by the Libyan authorities of more than
2,000 prisoners and detainees between 25 March and 15 May. The Supreme Judicial
Council, the Public Prosecution Service and the Ministry of Justice have demonstrated
a desire to protect prisoners and detainees from COVID-19, and we encourage them to
release further prisoners, particularly women and children, persons with disabilities
or medical conditions, older persons, migrants and refugees. With technical support
and equipment provided by the United Nations, Al-Jadida prison in Tripoli hosted
several successful remote court hearings between 15 and 30 April.
I remain very concerned about the situation of migrants and asylum seekers in
Libya. Since January, more than 3,200 have been intercepted at sea and returned to
Libya, frequently to abusive conditions in detention, while others have disappeared
altogether. UNSMIL is also concerned about the expulsion of at least 1,400 migrants
and refugees from eastern Libya this year, in violation of Libya’s international human
rights law obligations on non-refoulement and collective expulsions, and about the
risk that more may soon be forcibly deported. We have received reports of the failure
to assist and of coordinated pushbacks of migrant boats in the central Mediterranean,
which continues to be one of the deadliest migration routes in the world. Both Italy
and Malta — and now Libya as well — have closed their ports to the disembarkation
of migrants rescued at sea, citing health concerns related to COVID-19. I stress that
the stabilization of populations in Libya will come, first and foremost, through an
immediate ceasefire followed by a full return to political dialogue.
I would like to urge Member States to respond to our call for COVID-dedicated
funding and to ramp up support for the 2020 humanitarian response plan, which is
seriously underfunded at 14 per cent. The lack of funding is hampering our ability
to combat the pandemic and ensure that existing vulnerabilities are not exacerbated.

4/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

There is a risk that violence may expand in southern Libya as the conflict
sharpens existing divisions. In the southern city of Sabha, the recently sworn-in
elected municipal council was suspended after it made a statement supportive of
the LNA on 26 April, leading the GNA Ministry of Local Governance to replace it
with an appointed steering committee. The elected council has filed an appeal of the
GNA’s decision. I encourage the Government to engage in a constructive dialogue
with the elected council in order to safeguard democratic processes in Libya.
Municipal service delivery should be shielded from national politics.
We commend the perseverance of Libya’s local electoral committee officials
who continue preparations to resume municipal council elections despite tremendous
challenges. Another 38 local elections are planned to be held in 2020; municipal
councils and the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections are considering
special measures to provide a safe environment for voting during the pandemic.
Elections are planned in several municipalities in June and July, including in Misrata.
The fighting, compounded by COVID-19 and the ongoing oil blockade,
poses an unprecedented challenge to the already fraught socioeconomic situation
in Libya. The blockade itself has already cost Libya over $4 billion. With a looming
budget deficit of 26 billion dinars in 2020, the Central Bank of Libya has imposed
austerity measures, including limits on foreign exchange. All of this has led to a loss
of income, food shortages, price spikes and supply chain disruptions. The parallel
market exchange rate has increased from 4.1 dinars to the dollar in January to
6.1 today, further impacting people’s purchasing power. Many of the gains from the
economic reforms enacted in 2018 have been erased. I have engaged both the Prime
Minister and the Governor of the Central Bank to address the country’s financial
crisis and encourage dialogue with the aim of implementing a series of reforms to
both mitigate the national deficit and improve the lives of the average Libyan. This
month, the Ministry of Justice delivered an encouraging ruling on the legality of the
international audit.
Another worrisome trend is the weaponization of vital services. Since the
end of March, there have been four incidents, two that cut water supplies from the
Great Man-Made River and two that cut natural gas supplies to electrical power
plants. Those acts are reprehensible at any time but particularly so at a time when the
country is suffering from the effects of war and a global pandemic.
In a positive development, on 3 May the National Oil Corporation (NOC)
managed to restore the institutional integrity of the national fuel distribution
company, Brega, by reunifying the management committee. We welcome that
development, as it maintains the impartiality and effectiveness of the NOC.
I assure the Council that the United Nations will not relent in our effort to get
Libya’s political and military leaders to assume their responsibilities and commit to
a ceasefire and a political settlement. In the wake of recent military developments,
it appears there may be a window to breathe new life into some political activity.
On 23 April, House of Representatives President Saleh announced a new
political initiative, calling for the social and political constituencies representing
the east, the west and the south to elect their own representatives to a three-member
Presidency Council, under the supervision of the United Nations. In contrast, on
the same day, General Haftar regrettably reiterated that he considers the Libyan
Political Agreement and the current Presidency Council void and requested that
Libyans choose an institution to lead the country for a transitional period. In a
follow-up speech just four days later, on 27 April, General Haftar “accepted”
what he believes is a popular mandate for his General Command to play a greater
governance role. On a more positive note, on 5 May, Prime Minister Serraj publicly
20-069685/32

S/2020/421

welcomed all political initiatives that called for a peaceful solution to the Libyan
crisis and urged all parties to resume political talks either within the framework
of the Libyan Political Agreement, or via an agreement to hold elections under an
agreed constitutional framework. Should the talks be held under the Libyan Political
Agreement framework, Mr. Serraj referred to the restructuring of the executive,
including formation of a Presidency Council with three members, and a Government
headed by a prime minister.
We welcome the constructive stance taken by the Prime Minister and the
House of Representatives President and any political initiatives that are inclusive
and aimed at ending the fighting and finding a peaceful solution to the conflict
under the framework of the conclusions of the 19 January international conference
in Berlin and resolution 2510 (2020). Our mission remains to help Libyans rebuild a
State strong enough to peacefully contain political differences.
We have engaged with the GNA and the LNA to build on the draft ceasefire
agreement put forward at the 23 February 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks
in Geneva. The Mission is analysing comments on the draft agreement provided
by the GNA team. We are still waiting to receive feedback from the LNA General
Command. I request the Council’s assistance to ensure that we receive a response at
the earliest to resume these much-needed exchanges. The existing draft constitutes
the most solid basis for a resumption of discussion.
We appreciate the support expressed by participants in the Berlin Conference.
In the same spirit, we hope to count on their backing to urgently stop the inflow
of military support from abroad in violation of the United Nations arms embargo.
The European Union launched its Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI on
1 April. We welcome all efforts to support the implementation of the United Nations
arms embargo, in line with resolution 2292 (2016), and encourage Member States to
contribute to its monitoring and implementation in a comprehensive manner.
We equally appreciate the interest of Member States and our Libya quartet
partner organizations to engage within the international follow-up committee on
Libya, which convened at the senior officials’ level on 2 April and 13 May. The raison
d’être of the Committee is to ensure the implementation of the Berlin commitments.
Discussions have begun in the four thematic working groups established under the
Committee. The groups form a critical tool not only to support UNSMIL but also to
demonstrate to Libyans that the Berlin Conference can deliver on its promises.
As we survey the carnage wrought by almost 15 months of unrelenting
violence in Libya, I believe we have a reached another turning point in the conflict.
From what we are witnessing in terms of the massive influx of weaponry, equipment
and mercenaries on both sides, the only conclusion we can draw is that this war will
intensify, broaden and deepen, with devastating consequences for the Libyan people.
As the foreign intervention increases, the Libyans themselves are getting lost in the
mix, their voices crowded out. We must not let Libya slip away. We must enable
responsible Libyans to write their own future. By coming together now, the Security
Council can ensure the collective security it is mandated to maintain by applying
consistent and credible pressure on those regional and international actors that are
fuelling the conflict. We can collectively write a different ending to this heretofore
sad tale, but only if we demonstrate the collective will to do so.

6/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex II
Statement by Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
Today I have the honour to brief the Security Council on the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) about its activities
conducted during the period of 30 January to 19 May, in accordance with paragraph
24 (e) the resolution. The Committee conducted its work using the silence procedure
with the aim of facilitating the implementation of the sanctions measures.
At the outset, I would like to recall that, on 11 February, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2509 (2020), by which it extended the time-bound authorizations
and measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of petroleum, including crude oil
and refined petroleum products, from Libya to 30 April 2021. The arms embargo,
the travel ban and the assets freeze are not time-bound and continue to apply.
The resolution also extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts to 15 May 2021.
Thereafter, on 10 March, the Secretary-General appointed six individuals to serve on
the Panel. I would like to recall the privileges and immunities enjoyed by experts on
mission under the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations. Owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic, the newly appointed Panel
of Experts was unable to travel to New York to present its work programme to the
Committee. Instead, the Panel provided its programme in writing and subsequently,
on 15 May, discussed it with the Committee members via videoconference.
In my last report, I informed the Council that the Committee had agreed to take
action on two recommendations addressed to it in the Panel’s final report submitted
pursuant to resolution 2441 (2018) (S/2019/914). Accordingly, the Committee updated
identifiers on its sanctions list on 25 February and considered the Panel of Expert’s
second recommendation pertaining to the assets freeze, on 5 March. Furthermore,
the Committee considered and approved a response letter to the Libyan Investment
Authority, a designated entity, addressing questions raised with regard to the assets
freeze measure and the applicability of various exemptions under the Libya sanctions
regime. Since my last report, the Committee received seven written updates from the
Panel of Experts, five of them focusing on aspects of the implementation of the arms
embargo and two on events related to crude oil exports from Libya and the import
of Jet A-1 aviation fuel to Libya. Upon recommendation of the Panel of Experts, the
Committee decided to share two of the updates with concerned Member States for
their information.
As for the travel ban, the Committee considered and approved a request to
amend the travel dates of Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, for travel already approved
during the previous reporting period.
The Committee also received, in the current reporting period, a communication
from its Libyan focal point pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014).
I note that the primary responsibility to implement sanctions measures rests
with Member States. The Committee is committed to facilitating the implementation
of these measures and seeks to contribute to promoting peace and stability in Libya.

20-069687/32

S/2020/421

Annex III
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, Yao Shaojun
I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams
and Ambassador Schulz for their briefings, and welcome Ambassador Elsonni to
this meeting.
The current situation in Libya is complex, sensitive and fragile, seriously
affecting the security and stability of neighbouring countries and the whole region.
The situation is subject to rapid change. China has been closely following the
developments in Libya. Under the current circumstances, the people of Libya deserve
a peaceful environment to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I
wish to make four main points.
First, the current priority is to achieve a lasting ceasefire. We express our
concern regarding the attacks against civilians and relevant infrastructure. There is
no military solution for Libya. We call on all parties to the conflict for a cessation of
hostilities and to achieve a lasting ceasefire as soon as possible. China welcomes all
efforts conducive to a lasting ceasefire in response to the global ceasefire appeal by
the Secretary-General, and encourages the resumption of the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission. Now is the time to be united, since conflicts only deepen the
suffering of the people.
Secondly, global synergies should be strengthened to promote the peace
process. The international community should remain committed to the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned political process under the framework of the United Nations.
China supports the continued leading role of the United Nations, and calls for the
appointment of new Special Representative of the Secretary-General as soon as
possible for the sake of the peace process in Libya. During the process, Libya’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity should be respected. The African
Union and the League of Arab States, being uniquely positioned to mediate a conflict
between the parties, should be supported in playing their respective roles and ensure
synergies between their efforts and those of the United Nations.
Thirdly, unremitting efforts must be made to combat terrorism. Terrorism
within and around Libya seems to have resurrected. The international community
must stay highly vigilant on this trend, strengthen coordination and cooperation and
work together to tackle challenges. It is imperative to combat terrorism in all its
forms across Libya and, at the same time, guard against the cross-border movement
of foreign terrorist fighters. We must never allow Libya to become the breeding
ground for terrorism.
Fourthly, sanctions measures must be used properly and effectively. China’s
consistent position is that sanctions are a means rather an end. Sanctions regimes
should always serve the political settlement of relevant issues. Under the current
circumstances, it is important to strictly enforce the arms embargo against Libya, and
refrain from a military intervention or any action that could aggravate the conflict.
Now we have a common enemy in the COVID-19 pandemic. Only by
maintaining unity and solidarity can the parties in Libya they bring peace and
prosperity to Libyan people and effectively fight the COVID-19 pandemic. We
highly appreciate the assistance provided to Libya by the World Health Organization
in fighting the pandemic. China will continue to provide assistance to Libya to fight
COVID-19, facilitate the Libyan political process and support the Libyan people in
their pursuit of peace and stability.

8/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex IV
Statement by the Special Envoy of the Dominican Republic to the
Security Council, José Singer Weisinger
We would like to start by praising the tireless efforts on the ground of the
staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as the formidable work
of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). We also thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Stephanie Williams, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz for their briefings.
The Dominican Republic strongly condemns the continued flagrant attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, especially residential areas, airports and
hospitals in and around Tripoli, which inevitably add to the human suffering. It
is unacceptable that more than seven health facilities have been directly targeted
or impacted so far in 2020, and more than 62 attacks of this nature were reported
in 2019.
The continued violations of the arms embargo, which clearly undermine
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, are particularly worrisome and
gravely hamper the ability of the Libyan authorities to effectively tackle the impact
of the coronavirus disease outbreak.
We express grave concern for the dire humanitarian situation these actions
create for the most vulnerable groups, including women, children and internally
displaced persons, refugees and migrants, as well as political prisoners and human
rights defenders currently being held in detention centres. In this regard, we reaffirm
our call to ensure unhindered access to humanitarian aid and personnel, while
encouraging a return to the negotiating table, in order to attain an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire.
We deeply regret the announcement made on 27 April by General Khalifa
Haftar declaring himself leader of Libya. These developments most certainly
undermine United Nations-led dialogue initiatives.
It is clear that, in Libya, despite the challenges, young people have managed to
start many initiatives for national reconciliation to resolve the conflict. However, this
does not match the low numbers of young participants in reconciliation committees.
We therefore support UNSMIL efforts in mainstreaming gender and ensuring the
meaningful participation of women and young people throughout the three-track
dialogues, as well as the capacity-building provided by the United Nations Mine
Action Service to young people and women, aimed at addressing the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the ongoing efforts of the European
Union on the implementation of the Berlin Conference conclusions, the international
follow-up committee on Libya and the establishment of the European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, and highlights the importance of close
consultations with the internationally recognized Government of National Accord,
in addition to regional organizations and neighbouring countries.
We applaud the positive steps taken on the military, economic and political
tracks, and encourage the negotiations within the framework of intra-Libyan dialogue
to continue in good faith, to achieve sustainable peace for the Libyan people.
With regard to the 1970 Committee, we thank the Panel of Experts for its
relentless endeavours in shedding light on critical events taking place on the ground
in Libya. The countless flagrant violations like the ones mentioned in the recent

20-069689/32

S/2020/421

Panel of Experts reports shall not continue to be committed with impunity, and we
urge all members to exercise restraint.
Furthermore, in order for the Panel of Experts to work efficiently, Member
States should continue to share information as requested by the Panel in a
timely manner.
To conclude, we reaffirm the United Nations central role in facilitating a
Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political process, and urge the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representative for Libya as soon as possible.

10/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her informative
briefing. We fully support the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the United Nations-facilitated political process in Libya. In that
regard, we sincerely hope that the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya will be appointed as soon as possible.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the latest
developments in Libya (S/2020/360), which, however, paints a grim picture of the
situation on the ground. We are disappointed to see that the fighting and military
escalation continue despite the promises made by both parties to the conflict to respect
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in the face of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
To make matters worse, the growing number of attacks, including shelling,
mortar fire and small arms fire, is causing more civilian casualties, as well as
damaging and destroying vital civilian infrastructure such as health-care facilities
and schools. Considering the already dire humanitarian situation and the spread
of COVID-19 in the country, the indiscriminate attacks against hospitals are the
most appalling. The latest attack on a shelter for displaced people in Tripoli must
be condemned in the strongest terms. All violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law need to be addressed, and the perpetrators must be
held accountable.
The parties to the conflict must return to the negotiating table. The
responsibility to stop the ongoing escalation lies not only with the conflicting parties
but also with the international community and the Council.
That brings me to the issue of the arms embargo implementation. Unless
the flagrant violations of the United Nations sanctions regime and the outside
actors’ involvement stop, Libya does not stand a chance for peace. It is a positive
development that the Berlin process is continuing despite the restrictions imposed to
fight the pandemic. We call on all the participants to uphold the commitments they
made at the Berlin Conference.
Estonia continues to support the United Nations-led three-track approach to
the political process in Libya. It is regrettable that the draft ceasefire agreement that
was negotiated by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in February has not yet been
signed. We urge the parties to take concrete steps in bringing forward a political
solution to the conflict in Libya.

20-0696811/32

S/2020/421

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
First, I would like to thank Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Stephanie Williams and Ambassador Schulz for their briefings.
In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we call on
the Libyan parties to cease hostilities and to find a political solution to the conflict.
Both parties should formally endorse the draft ceasefire agreement concluded
on 23 February within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. That
draft ceasefire agreement is a Libyan-owned document and has been agreed upon by
representatives of both camps.
It is also important that another meeting of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
take place as soon as possible and without preconditions, with a view to finalizing
that agreement and establishing subcommittees on structural issues such as the
dismantling of militias.
Those are the messages that the French Minister for Foreign affairs conveyed
to the Libyan leaders from both camps.
A durable ceasefire should be put in place and monitored by the United
Nations, and we have taken positive note of the proposal made to agree on a truce
during the holy month of Ramadan, which was approved by the Libyan National
Army. There can be no military solution in Libya and, in that regard, we condemn
the bombing of civilian areas in Tripoli. Both parties should refrain from fuelling
tensions and avert any escalation, and military interference should cease.
In that regard, we regret that no element on the monitoring of a possible ceasefire
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has been included in the
most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/360) in the absence of a specific
report, which was requested by the Security Council in resolution 2510 (2020).
We call on the parties to resume inclusive political talks as soon as possible
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Core issues such as elections, the type of constitution and civil-military
coordination will have to be discussed as a matter of priority. This political dialogue
should be relaunched with the active participation of Libya’s neighbouring countries
and of the African Union, the League of Arab States and the European Union.
We should collectively support the implementation of reforms of economic
and financial institutions, starting with an audit of the Central Bank of Libya, in
order to restore its sound and transparent governance. The equitable allocation of oil
resources and the lifting of the oil blockade are also matters of priority.
The Security Council and, more broadly, the United Nations must remain
fully mobilized to find a solution to the Libyan crisis. The French authorities have
continued their dialogue with all Libyan parties in order to find such a solution, in
support of the efforts led by the United Nations mediation. In that regard, we call
on the Secretary-General to appoint a new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral as soon as possible. It has been almost three months since the resignation of
Mr. Ghassan Salamé.
We also welcome the deployment of the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which will implement the arms embargo, which is
12/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

continuously being violated by both sides, and thus help to implement the outcome of
the Berlin Conference and resolution 2510 (2020). IRINI will operate strictly within
the framework of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In that regard, the
renewal by the Security Council of the mechanism created by resolution 2292 (2016)
is absolutely essential.
France will remain fully committed to and engaged in the process of finding
a political solution in Libya.

20-0696813/32

S/2020/421

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations, Muhsin Syihab
Indonesia would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for her briefing. We thank also
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for delivering the Committee’s
thirty-eighth periodic report to the Council.
Today’s meeting marks the second Ramadan since the new conflict in Libya
started. Libyans are deprived of being able to celebrate the holy month in peace and
are currently at risk of celebrating another Eid al-Fitr in terror.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General, as stated in his most recent
report (S/2020/360), that any further escalation of violence will risk reversing the
fragile progress that has been achieved and further complicate the achievement of a
peaceful resolution for Libya.
The Council’s engagement on Libya has been long and winding. We do not
need more empty narratives that have zero impact on those who are fighting on the
ground and those fuelling the conflict, including by violating the arms embargo.
Our term as an elected member of the Council is brief, and what we do right
now will be recorded in history. At the end of the day, the ultimate question will be,
how many lives have we saved? On that note, let me focus on the following points.
First, we need to focus our efforts on saving the people of Libya. That includes
those who are particularly vulnerable: women, children and migrants.
Unfortunately, even amid the global call for a ceasefire, attacks against
civilians and civilian facilities persist. Attacks against health facilities will severely
impact Libya’s ability to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic at the
time they need it most.
In the first quarter of 2020, the number of civilian casualties in Libya increased
by 45 per cent compared with the last quarter of 2019, amounting to at least 131
civilian casualties. These attacks must stop. We call on all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law and take measures to protect all civilians. We also
call for an expansion of humanitarian corridors during Ramadan and the COVID-19
pandemic so as to provide the space needed for humanitarian workers to reach those
in need. We need to continue on the path of political dialogue, since there can never
be a military solution in Libya.
We join the Secretary-General’s call for all parties to continue communication
and move forward with the draft ceasefire agreement produced by the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission. We continue to support the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and call for the immediate appointment of its
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, we continue to support the role of its neighbours and of regional
organizations, including the African Union and the League of Arab States, in
assisting Libya. To that end, we echo the appreciation expressed by the SecretaryGeneral to the Government of Tunisia and Nepal in supporting UNSMIL’s operation.
Thirdly, Indonesia supports all international efforts to bring lasting peace to
Libya. Nevertheless, it is important to align such efforts with existing international
tracks, including resolution 2491 (2019). We continue to observe the continuation
of the Berlin Conference and its follow-up, as well as all regional efforts for Libya.
Finally, we do not need any further reminder that the actions of the international
community must be aligned with the sole purpose of saving lives and providing
lasting peace.
14/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
Allow me first of all to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her commitment to peace and
stability in Libya.
I would also like to thank the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, for his outstanding briefing.
Ceasefire violations by both sides in Libya have significantly undermined the
peace efforts sponsored by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and have resulted in the deaths of hundreds of innocent civilians. Thousands of
people have been forced to leave their homes since the beginning of the clashes
between the protagonists in the Libyan crisis.
Alas, the violence has spared neither hospitals and airports nor residential
areas, thus weakening the already fragile capacity of the country’s health-care system
at a time when it must help respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
It cannot be said often enough that these attacks on civilian infrastructure are
a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and should stop immediately.
Indeed, if health workers and patients themselves are not protected from these
attacks, even in hospital facilities, which are supposedly inviolable, a coordinated
and effective fight against the coronavirus pandemic will simply not be possible.
That is why the Niger joins the appeal launched by seven United Nations agencies
to support the Libyan population, which is dangerously threatened by the conflict
and COVID-19.
The Niger deplores the fact that despite the repeated calls for a humanitarian
ceasefire, in particular the one launched on 23 March by the Secretary-General,
hostilities are continuing unabated, hindering access and the delivery of essential
humanitarian assistance.
My country deplores the continued external interference and reminds all
actors of the commitments they made at the Berlin Conference. We urge Council
members to spare no effort and to use all their influence to help achieve a ceasefire
and to create an environment conducive to political talks, in accordance with
resolution 2510 (2020).
Violations of the arms embargo and the introduction of foreign mercenaries
into Libya to fight alongside the various factions will only increase the escalation of
violence. Those acts are a source of major concern to Libya’s immediate neighbours,
including the Niger in particular, and to the entire Sahel subregion in general.
While it may not be the only one, the main reason for the destabilization of
Libya has undoubtedly been the serious security situation facing the Sahel today.
We fear that the thousands of jihadists transferred to Libya today will spread out
throughout the Sahel in the same way as the Libyan army’s formidable arsenals have
fuelled the destabilization that the region is facing.
On the economic front, we are deeply concerned about the consequences of
the continuing conflict, which is seriously hampering the proper functioning of
the Libyan National Oil Corporation. Indeed, the drop in the price of oil and the
difficulties faced by the Corporation will further aggravate the country’s economic
difficulties, with serious consequences for the livelihoods of many Libyan families.
20-0696815/32

S/2020/421

I would like at this juncture to commend the European Union on having set
up the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, in accordance
with resolution 2292 (2016). We hope that the Operation will work closely with the
Libyans, neighbouring countries and the African Union to ensure compliance with
the arms embargo and help in the fight against organized crime, the smuggling of
migrants and the illegal export of Libyan oil.
The Niger hopes that the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya will take place very soon so that the momentum for
peace and reconciliation in Libya can be revived. In that regard, the Niger supports
the work of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya established by the African
Union and expresses the hope that the inter-Libyan reconciliation conference will be
organized very soon under the auspices of the African Union.
Regarding the reconciliation process, my country believes that the time has
come for us to show courage and imagination to find a lasting solution to the serious
Libyan crisis. It is clear today that no solution to the Libyan crisis can be found
without the full and complete participation of all the daughters and sons of Libya,
without any exclusion.
Today is the time for reconciliation. The daughters and sons of Libya have
endured enough suffering to be asked again and again to pay. Libya, once a model of
stability and peace, has become a country of chaos, war and distress whose immense
resources are being plundered in the most abject manner.
At this time, when the COVID-19 pandemic is forcing us to revisit our
convictions and question our certainties, it is high time that we overcome our divisions
and assume our responsibilities by working towards the only goal that is worthwhile
today for Libya and its people: reconciliation, peace, justice and prosperity.

16/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank the Acting Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Stephanie Williams, for her briefing on the situation in Libya and
the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Juergen Schulz, for his report on the work of that
subsidiary body.
To our regret, we see how the trend of a protracted armed conflict is being
consolidated in Libya. Clashes continue in various parts of the country. Unfortunately,
the level of distrust between Libyan parties is so high that it is virtually impossible to
enforce a ceasefire despite the calls made by many, including the Secretary-General.
Humanitarian pauses introduced separately by the Government of National Accord
and the Libyan National Army were not respected.
The threat of coronavirus has become another challenging issue in Libya,
especially given the grave humanitarian situation on the ground and basically
destroyed health-care system.
The parties continue to exchange aggressive rhetoric. At the same time,
Mr. Agila Saleh, Speaker of the Libyan House of Representatives, called for a
cessation of hostilities in connection with the holy month of Ramadan. We note that
this statement contains a number of constructive proposals on how to pull Libya out
of the crisis. Among them are the creation of unified bodies of power on the basis of
proportional geographical representation, the development of a new constitution and
the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections. We believe that these ideas
could form a basis for political discussions in the framework of the comprehensive
Libyan settlement process.
However, so far there has been no progress in military consultations in the
5+5 format or on the political track. We believe that the early appointment of a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya can help break the
deadlock in the political process. This issue is long overdue.
We are convinced that further armed conflict will bring more disastrous
consequences for Libya and its people. We urge all parties to immediately cease
hostilities and resume dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations on all three
tracks of the settlement: military, political and economic. We continue efforts in
that regard, including through participation in follow-up meetings of the Berlin
Conference and communication with the parties concerned. At the same time, we
proceed from the principle that we have repeatedly voiced — that any decision and
recommendation must be agreed in advance by the Libyans. Otherwise, we will
never succeed.
We would like to remind the Council of its adoption of resolution 2510
(2020). I note that Russia abstained in the voting, not because we were whimsical or
capricious, but rather — as we said — because without involving the protagonists, the
resolution would fail. In my explanation of vote on that resolution (see S/PV.8719),
I said publicly that if I was wrong and the resolution worked, I would be the first to
acknowledge it. I regret to say that I was, unfortunately, right.
We are concerned about reports of ongoing violations of the arms embargo in
Libya. We believe that the supply of arms and mercenaries should be stopped. That
practice has continued in Libya from the very start of the conflict in 2011, when
Libyan statehood was destroyed as a result of NATO’s illegal aggression. We are
pushing Libyan parties to pursue dialogue and search for compromises.
20-0696817/32

S/2020/421

We are closely following preparations for the launch of a European Union
military operation off the Libyan coast. We once again emphasize that this operation
must be in accordance with the mandate of resolution 2292 (2016). Any modification
must be subject to Council review.
I have listened to some allegations of Russian participation in the Libyan
conflict. I will reserve my right to say a few words about it today after all speakers
have spoken. We hear a lot of speculation about so-called Russian mercenaries. The
United Kingdom representative went as far as to say that they are responsible for all
the troubles and mishaps in Libya. That is an interesting way to shift responsibility.
I remind the Council that the primary reason for all of Libya’s troubles today is
NATO’s aggression, which destroyed Libyan statehood. Instead, today some prefer
to miss the point and pretend to not hear.
I now move on to the report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1973 (2011). First of all, we are dismayed that the confidential report of the
Panel of Experts was leaked to the press. This is not the first time that a report of a
sanctions committee Panel of Experts has been leaked. We demand an investigation
of the incident by the Secretariat.
We are still studying the report. However, our first reading of the text allows us
to draw certain conclusions. To begin with, there is no concept of a private military
company in Russian legislation. The report incorrectly interprets and arbitrarily uses
excerpts from Russian law. For the most part, the report is based on unverified or
clearly fabricated data and is aimed at discrediting Russia’s policy in Libya. Experts
use sources of dubious quality that have a direct interest in the Libyan conflict.
In the report a significant number — not just one or two — of Internet links
are not working. That can be verified by anyone who ventures to do so. That is not
accidental. The reliability of the information, particularly the portion based on socalled confidential discussions, is impossible to prove. Much of the data, especially
regarding the Russian citizens mentioned in the report, is simply unfounded. The
Russian people allegedly fighting in Libya have not left our country. The so-called
wounded are quite healthy. This information is all publicly available and verifiable.
It is worth noting that the lists selected by the experts were copied from the notorious
Ukrainian database Myrotvorets, or “Peacemaker”.
I reiterate that there are no Russian servicemen in Libya. We are aware,
however, that there is a host of foreign military personnel in the country, and not
just foreign terrorist fighters. If there is great interest, we are willing to disclose the
names of the countries involved. Council members would be surprised to hear them.
A lot of mistakes or deliberate falsifications have been made regarding
weapons. In particular, it is not clear why the drone is attributed to Russia, since
its manufacturing characteristics point to one of Russia’s neighbours. In the same
vein, equipment that has long been in Libya is misidentified as newly exported
from Russia.
Another fabrication in the report is photos from Syria passed off as Libyan
landscapes. Another story tells of Syrian militants transported to the west of Libya to
support the Government of National Accord. Deliberately or not, the facts are turned
inside out, as the report turns mercenaries associated with terrorist organizations
into fighters in the Libyan National Army.
These are only the most apparent mistakes in the report. To us it is clear that
the report is intended to mislead the international community about Russia’s policy
in Libya. We will provide a more detailed assessment of the Panel’s findings when
the time is right.
18/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for
their briefings.
Let me begin by extending my Government’s sincerest condolences to the
families of the victims who have lost their lives as a result of the escalating violence
in Libya. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly condemns the incessant
attacks against the civilian population and infrastructure, which only aggravate the
suffering of the Libyan people. We are all the more dismayed to hear the terrifying
and unbearable conditions underscored in Ms. Williams briefing this morning.
It is extremely disturbing that approximately three months after the adoption
of resolution 2510 (2020), the status quo in Libya remains. The security situation is
extremely volatile, the humanitarian situation is grim, the economy is weak and the
political impasse lingers. For the sake of the development aspirations of the Libyan
people, the international community and all Libyan stakeholders cannot afford a
continuation of the status quo. Accordingly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines calls
on all warring parties to de-escalate tensions, commit to a ceasefire and engage in
inter-Libyan dialogue in order to resolve the conflict peacefully.
The ceasefire is pivotal to ensuring unhindered humanitarian access to help
combat the coronavirus pandemic and to restore stability by providing a space
for dialogue and negotiation, including advancing the United Nations three-point
initiative and the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We take solace in knowing that the Libyans support this initiative and strongly urge
the warring parties to refrain from actions that may jeopardize those efforts. We
also look forward to the appointment of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya.
My delegation reiterates its support for the conclusions of the Berlin Conference
on Libya and welcomes the progress made by its international follow-up committee.
We call for strict adherence to international law, in general, and respect for the arms
embargo, in particular, and urge all external actors to assist in that regard.
We deplore the violence against groups in vulnerable situations, including
migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons and women and girls. We call
on the authorities to ensure their protection and safety, carry out the necessary
investigations and hold the perpetrators of violence accountable.
Finally, we stand in solidarity with the people of Libya and reaffirm our
support for UNSMIL and the efforts being undertaken by the African Union, the
League of Arab States and all other actors that seeks to bring a peaceful political
solution to the conflict. To that end, we look forward to the convening of an African
Union-led inter-Libyan reconciliation conference. In closing, I echo the acting
Special Representative’s plea — we must not let Libya slip away.

20-0696819/32

S/2020/421

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
Allow me to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for her detailed briefing on the latest political, security and economic
developments in Libya for the period under review. I also thank Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, for his briefing on the Committee’s work.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the prevailing security situation
in Libya, the increasingly challenging humanitarian circumstances in the country
and the ongoing fighting, in spite of efforts towards a ceasefire and the calls for
a humanitarian pause due to the threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is
regrettable that parties in Libya failed to heed the Secretary-General’s call for a
humanitarian pause to allow local authorities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic,
especially during Ramadan.
Allow me to focus on three issues.
First, my delegation reiterates that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Libya. All Libyan parties, community leaders and non-governmental
organizations should commit to a cessation of hostilities and political dialogue, and
avoid ongoing military confrontation. Further, we reiterate the concern voiced by the
Contact Group of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya of the African Union
(AU) about the political deadlock and the fighting that continues unabated in Libya.
All mediation efforts must be aimed at a Libyan-led and -owned process, with the
support of the United Nations and the international community.
It is concerning that arms continue to flow into Libya despite the various
resolutions adopted by the Council with respect to the arms embargo. Furthermore,
South Africa remains concerned about foreign involvement, which perpetuates the
conflict, threatens the country’s sovereignty and undermines its efforts to establish
State authority throughout its territory. Most concerning, however, is the blatant
disregard of the Council’s authority in the shoddy enforcement of the arms embargo
despite commitments made in Berlin early this year.
Notwithstanding, South Africa stands ready to support any initiative aimed
at strengthening the monitoring of the arms embargo, provided it complies with
and falls within the necessary Council measures related to the arms embargo, in
accordance with resolutions 2473 (2019), 2509 (2020) and 2510 (2020).
Secondly, the Secretary-General has repeatedly emphasized, including in
previous reports, that Libya cannot be considered a safe place for the disembarkation
of refugees and migrants rescued at sea under international law. Nevertheless,
refugees and migrants continue to be disembarked in Libya, mainly after being
intercepted by the Libyan Coast Guard. Disembarkation in Libya remains dangerous.
South Africa remains concerned about the persistent violation of human
rights, as cited in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/360). As such, we
remind Libyan political actors of their obligations under international human rights
and humanitarian law.
Thirdly, South Africa welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations,
the AU, the League of Arab States and the European Union in finding a lasting
solution to the Libyan crisis. We reiterate the 19 May communiqué of the AU Contact
Group on Libya, which stresses the need for strong cooperation with neighbouring
20/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

countries. My delegation looks forward to close cooperation among all Council
members in ensuring the success of the AU’s upcoming inter-Libyan reconciliation
conference, to be held in July.
We would like to thank UNSMIL, under the leadership of former Special
Representative Salamé and Acting Special Representative Williams, for its continued
efforts to assist Libya in reaching a political settlement and in putting measures in
place to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, the Council’s endorsement of the Secretary-General’s call for
a global ceasefire and the lifting of its economic sanctions will lend him political
support in his efforts to promote peace during the COVID-19 pandemic. That will
also go a long way towards enhancing the Council’s credibility in this regard.

20-0696821/32

S/2020/421

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
At the outset, I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing and active
engagement in these difficult circumstances. I would also like to reiterate Tunisia’s
full support of the mandate of United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and our continuing collaboration with the Mission’s office in Tunis.
I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his briefing and commend
Germany’s efforts as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Tunisia is deeply concerned about the continuing escalation of violence in
Libya, especially the intensification of indiscriminate attacks on civilians, including
medical personnel and health facilities. These make it all the more difficult to fight
the spread of the coronavirus pandemic and put the Libyan people at high risk.
We recall the obligations of the warring parties under international humanitarian
law and call on them to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian aid throughout
the country.
There is no military solution in Libya. The last nine years of conflict and
its devastating impact on all aspects of daily life of Libyans have proven that.
Tunisia appeals to all stakeholders to immediately commit to the humanitarian
truce and terminate all military operations in order to enable a lasting ceasefire
and create conditions conducive to the resumption of the political process and
national reconciliation.
Accordingly, while calling on all parties to consider the outcome of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission talks in February 2020 in a positive light, we urge the
international community to use all its influence to encourage the Libyan parties
to ease tensions and achieve an immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire,
with a view to preventing any further deterioration of the situation and the targeting
of civilians.
In this regard, we note with appreciation UNSMIL’s continued engagement
with all Libyan representatives on the three tracks, with a view to resuming meetings
as soon as possible. We also emphasize the important role the international follow-up
committee on Libya plays in advancing the implementation of the conclusions of the
Berlin Conference.
Tunisia is deeply concerned with the continuing violations of the Security
Council-imposed arms embargo on Libya. It is obviously known that as arms
continue to flow into the country, violence and military escalation will persist and
expand, and the conflict will be exacerbated and amplified to the detriment of the
political track and further impair peace and security not only in Libya but in the
region as a whole. We therefore firmly insist on the necessity of abiding by the arms
embargo and refraining from any interference in the armed conflict or the internal
affairs of Libya. We also express grave concern over the growing involvement of
foreign fighters in Libya and stress the urgency of addressing the related threats and
challenges as well as the danger posed by the terrorist groups taking advantage of
the situation.
It is high time to reverse the current trends. All our efforts should converge
towards relaunching an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process,
fostering dialogue and promoting a genuine intra-Libyan reconciliation. There is no
alternative to such an approach if security and stability is to be restored in Libya and
if an end is to be put to the suffering of the Libyan people.
22/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Before concluding, my delegation would like to reaffirm Tunisia’s strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Libya. We also reiterate our support for the peaceful settlement of the
Libyan crisis in accordance with international legality and in full respect of the will
of the Libyan people, underlining the importance of the continued inclusiveness of
the Libyan political agreement.
Finally, Tunisia reaffirms its strong support for the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral and highly values the role that UNSMIL and all United Nations agencies
and humanitarian partners in Libya are playing. We also recall the important role of
the neighbouring countries and regional organizations, notably the League of Arab
States, the African Union and the European Union, in advancing peace in Libya.
The fighting in Libya must stop. That is a legitimate aspiration of the brotherly
Libyan people. The Security Council has a key role to play in helping the Libyan
people turn the gloomy page, and the international community has a moral obligation
to act resolutely in support of bringing peace and stability back to the country.

20-0696823/32

S/2020/421

Annex XIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Jonathan Allen
I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie
Williams for her briefing. We hope that we will be able to agree on a permanent
successor for her before too long. Through Ms. Williams, I would now like to thank
her staff and all who are working so hard to try to end the conflict in Libya, in what
are not always the most promising of circumstances or contexts.
Let me start by sharing the deep concern Ms. William’s expressed about the
significant escalation in hostilities in Libya. I think she described an unprecedented
increase in direct fire in civilian areas, which is extremely worrying. The cost in
civilian lives and the damage to civilian infrastructure is totally unacceptable.
Attacks in civilian areas, particularly on health-care facilities, show a complete
disregard for international law, and they must cease. At a time when countries around
the world are coming together in the face of a shared threat from coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), it is unconscionable that health-care facilities are among the civilian
infrastructure targeted.
I also wish to reiterate our continuing concern with respect to the deteriorating
human rights and humanitarian situation in Libya. Ms. Williams highlighted a
situation in which a million people are now in need of humanitarian assistance.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/360) makes clear that the situation —
including the death, injury and displacement of significant numbers of civilians —
is not acceptable, and that civilians, including migrants and refugees, remain at
risk. The intentional cutting of electricity, fuel, water or food supplies is a potential
violation of international humanitarian law.
We remain particularly concerned by further reports that external parties
continue to provide materiel, equipment and mercenaries. All Member States must
abide by their international obligations, including Security Council resolutions. In
this regard, we note further reports of activity by the Wagner Group in Libya. Wagner
Group activities continue to exacerbate the conflict and prolong the suffering of
the Libyan people. I want to urge all Security Council members to abide by the
resolutions of the Security Council, for which they themselves have voted.
We condemn the blockade of oil facilities, which is harming the Libyan people
and has led today to a loss of over $4 billion. Efforts to illicitly import aviation fuel
into Libya are also unacceptable, and all parties must uphold the integrity and unity
of the National Oil Corporation.
There will not be a military victory, not least because the foreign actors
involved in this war will not permit it. Therefore, an inclusive political solution,
as set out at the Berlin Conference, offers the best hope for the stability and future
prosperity that the Libyan people need and deserve.
We call on the Libyan National Army to engage substantively with the United
Nations-drafted ceasefire document of 23 February, as the Government of National
Accord has recently done. The United Kingdom reaffirms its support for Libya’s
legitimate and internationally recognized institutions, as agreed in the 2015 Libyan
Political Agreement and recognized by the Security Council.
The United Kingdom is consistent in its belief that if the warring parties
and their backers had the interests of the Libyan people at heart, they would cease
fighting, halt attacks on civilians, and stop private or unilateral initiatives, and
24/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

instead get behind the United Nations and the inclusive political solution. It is the
only hope, and it is what the Libyan people need and deserve after all these years
of conflict.
Let me just ask one question, if I may, of Ms. Williams. I wonder if she could
say whether there has been any change since the COVID-19 outbreak in the public
mood, specifically in terms of public support for or in public attitudes towards the
conflict, and whether there are any signs that the calculations of any of the parties to
the conflict are being affected by that public view.

20-0696825/32

S/2020/421

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
It has been great to see Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Stephanie Williams this past week and even better to be able to converse with her.
I thank her for her time and for the updates that she provided the Security Council
today, and we wish her and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
team the best of luck on the ground in the country.
To begin, I want to be clear about the following points today. All actors
involved in the conflict in Libya must immediately suspend military operations.
They must halt the ongoing transfer of foreign military equipment and personnel
to Libya, including, as the representative of the United Kingdom mentioned,
Wagner Group mercenaries. They must allow local health authorities to respond to
the alarming health challenges posed by the coronavirus disease. Additionally, the
Security Council must help Libya quickly find a political path to stability, facilitated
by UNSMIL.
The United States opposes the now more-than-year-long military offensive
against Tripoli by the Libyan National Army (LNA), and we strongly reject any
unilateral moves to change Libya’s governing structures. There is only one legitimate
path for Libyan leaders, and that is full buy-in to the United Nations-facilitated
three-track process, which encompasses political, security and economic reforms.
Any attempt to short-circuit this route would not only disregard existing
Security Council resolutions, but it would also short-change the Libyan people.
Libya’s future governance must be determined through a representative political
process and, ultimately, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned elections.
The United States endorses the obligation on all Member States to comply
with the United Nations-Libya arms embargo, as well as the ban on illicit oil exports
and petroleum products. We are supportive of the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which is aimed at enforcing the arms embargo in
accordance with resolution 2292 (2016), including through the use of aerial, satellite
and maritime assets. We urge Member States to share information with the Panel
of Experts operating under the auspices of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) related to potential arms embargo violations.
Finally, let me reiterate our strong support for the United Nations-facilitated
dialogue to achieve a comprehensive political settlement for Libya. We urge both the
Government of National Accord and the LNA representatives to return to ceasefire
talks as agreed upon in Geneva earlier this year. Acting Special Representative
Williams and UNSMIL have our full support in carrying this urgent work forward.

26/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their
briefings. I would also like to commend the efforts of Ms. Williams and reiterate our
full support for the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I am pleased to welcome Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, to this meeting.
Viet Nam is following the situation in Libya with great concern. Despite the
truces agreed between the Libyan parties in January and March this year, violence
in Libya has continued to escalate. We are deeply troubled at the ongoing attacks on
civilians and civilian objects during the month of Ramadan, especially the targeted
attacks on schools, airports and health-care facilities mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/360). Continued violence also obstructs collective efforts
aimed at addressing the global threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We
also remain concerned about the growing presence of terrorist groups in Libya,
particularly the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We reaffirm our consistent position that a peaceful political solution is the
only option for resolving the conflict in Libya, which has lasted for nearly 10 years.
In this regard, it is vital for the international community to continue to support an
inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process, on the basis of respect for
Libya’s independence and sovereignty and in line with the three tracks — political,
military and economic — set out in resolution 2510 (2020). It is also important to
ensure the timely appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya.
Accordingly, Viet Nam wishes to highlight the following issues. First, we once
again urge the relevant parties in Libya to immediately stop the ongoing hostilities,
uphold their commitment to the truce, fully respect international humanitarian law,
stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, and allow unhindered humanitarian
access in order to effectively address the COVID-19 pandemic.
Secondly, Viet Nam urges the relevant parties in Libya to return to peace talks
under the three tracks as soon as possible, so as to respond to the draft ceasefire
agreement proposed by UNSMIL in February 2020. At the same time, we call on
relevant Member States to use all their influence to bring the Libyan parties back
to peace negotiations. We must not let the momentum of the Berlin Conference on
Libya be squandered.
Thirdly, the role of the United Nations, UNSMIL, regional organizations and
Libya’s neighbours will continue to be crucial in promoting peace in the country.
Further cooperation and synergy among these actors will create an environment
conducive to the success of the peace process in Libya. We are pleased that the second
meeting of the international follow-up committee on Libya took place remotely in
April. We welcome the intention of the African Union (AU) to hold an intra-Libyan
reconciliation conference. We would also like to commend UNSMIL and the AU for
promoting the role of women in the peace process in Libya.
Fourthly, on the issue of sanctions, we reiterate the importance of upholding the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council on Libya, especially those related to the
arms embargo. We urge all parties inside and outside of the country to strengthen their
commitment to and actions towards implementing the arms embargo in accordance
20-0696827/32

S/2020/421

with relevant resolutions of the Council. At the same time, we reiterate our position
that sanctions measures must be correctly and properly targeted at individuals and
entities that threaten peace and security in Libya and that they should not negatively
affect the livelihood of the common people of the country.
In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm our strong support for the
pursuit of peace, stability, development and national unity in Libya.

28/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Libya to the
United Nations, Taher Elsonni
[Original: Arabic and English]
First of all, I wish to thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for briefing us
today on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya. I would also like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing
on the latest developments in my country.
For over a year now, the situation in my country has not changed. Violations
and aggression have continued, including the systematic indiscriminate shelling of
Tripoli and its outskirts, causing the deaths of dozens of civilians and the destruction
of infrastructure, in order to terrorize and frighten people.
As we gather today to listen to briefings and reports, everyone must be
wondering what is new in and what is next. If we refer back to the prior reports of
the United Nations and other international entities and the records of the meetings
of this organ, we find them almost repetitive; the only thing that changes in them
is the increase in the number of victims and the diversity and monstrous nature the
violations. The common denominator among these reports and records is the words
of condemnation and outrage, and the calls addressed equally to all parties to stop
the fighting, without ever identifying the responsible party who has led, carried out
and instigated all those actions, and who bragged about them before everyone’s eyes
and in the presence of the Secretary-General during his visit to Tripoli last year.
In my statement, I will naturally — and as usual — enumerate the latest
crimes committed by the war criminal himself, as well as his terrorist militias and
mercenaries, even though we know that the Security Council already has all the
facts and is well aware of what is happening, who is committing these crimes, who
is supporting them, who sparked this crisis, who is responsible for the bloodshed and
who has plunged the country and the region into a mess that has affected everyone.
In that regard, I recall some of the resolutions adopted by this very Council,
of which there have been 16 since the signing of the Libyan Political Agreement in
2015, all on punishing and holding spoilers accountable. If those resolutions had been
implemented by the Council, we would have avoided the current situation today. The
eleventh preambular paragraph of resolution 2278 (2016) reads in part:
“Reaffirming the importance of holding accountable those responsible
for violations or abuses of human rights or violations of international
humanitarian law, including those involved in attacks targeting civilians.”
The twelfth preambular paragraph of resolution 2376 (2017) states:
“Reaffirming the need for all parties in Libya to engage constructively
with the United Nations and refrain from any actions that could undermine
UN-mediated political dialogue and reiterating that there can be no military
solution in Libya.”
The sixteenth preambular paragraph of resolution 2486 (2019) reads:
“Reaffirming that all parties must comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as applicable, and emphasizing that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights
must be held accountable.”

20-0696829/32

S/2020/421

Two weeks ago, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Bensouda, presented her nineteenth report (see S/2020/371), and I am confident
that all Council members have now seen or heard evidence of the violations taking
place in my country. On this occasion, we extend our thanks to Ms. Bensouda for
her clarity and for clearly identifying the perpetrator of those war crimes by name.
However, we are still waiting for the Council and the international community to
show similar courage and to put an end to the series of politicized statements that
the war criminal and the States that support him have used to continue committing
crimes and violations and creating chaos.
As a reminder to the Council, after announcing a false humanitarian truce,
the aggressor deliberately launched hundreds of rockets against Tripoli, targeting the
central hospital. Prior to that, he bombed Al-Hadaba hospital, dedicated to treating
coronavirus disease patients, in addition to attacking civilian neighbourhoods in
Souq Al-Jum’a, Abu Salim and Bab Ben Ghashir. His forces also bombed areas
near diplomatic missions in the Zawiyat Al-Dahmani neighbourhood on 7 May. The
aggressor’s violations did not stop there. He also bombed a shelter for internally
displaced persons in the Farnaj area last Saturday, killing seven civilians and injuring
dozens, as if it were not enough to have already forced the victims to abandon their
homes. Further numerous terrorist acts have caused more killing, displacement and
destruction. Despite all that, as I keep repeating, we still hear statements about an
anonymous perpetrator.
It no longer makes sense to remain silent about countries that support those
violations and terrorism. Everyone has read the recent reports of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) and has seen first-hand the type of
weapons and mercenaries being used by the militias committing the aggression.
The best example of this are the regular flights by Emirati freight planes and
aircraft operated by Syria’s Cham Wings Airlines, not to mention the recruitment of
thousands of mercenaries of various nationalities, including from Chad, the Sudan
and Syria, affiliated with the Russian Wagner Group. Those are not only our words;
this is being reported in United Nations documents.
Regarding weapons, for example, Council members witnessed the successful
liberation of cities on the west coast by the heroic soldiers of our Libyan National
Army, such as the liberation yesterday of Al-Watiya airbase. In the process, we
captured a number of Russian-made Pantsir-S1 air defence systems, destroyed a
number of Emirati Tygra or Panthera armoured vehicles and found tons of high-tech
ammunition and weapons. Before that, we shot down several Wing Loong II drones,
made in China. In that connection, we wish to inform the Council that we have
damning evidence, supported by previous reports — which we are sharing with the
Panel of Experts — of the repeated involvement of the United Arab Emirates in the
transfer of those specific weapons to the war criminal and his subversive militias.
Accordingly, today we officially call, via the penholder on Libya, for the
urgent convening of a Council meeting with a view to taking steps to end the
systematic illegal interventions of the United Arab Emirates in an attempt to
overturn the legitimate Government of Libya, in violation of all relevant United
Nations resolutions. We also call on the countries concerned, especially those of the
manufacture or origin of the weapons, to provide us and the sanctions committee
with documents certifying the end-users and to explain how the weapons fell into
the hands of those who subvert legitimacy and violate Security Council resolutions.
In addition, we request all countries whose nationals are involved as mercenaries to
take immediate action to pull them out of Libya and to hold all those involved in their
recruitment accountable, rather than simply claiming that they are not responsible.

30/32

20-06968

S/2020/421

Talking about developments in Libya leads me to resolution 2292 (2016), on
granting authorizations to Member States and international or regional organizations
to carry out ship inspections as part of the implementation of the arms embargo.
Here we would like to put the following facts in the record.
Resolution 2292 (2016) stipulates that implementation should be done in
coordination with the Libyan Government, a message that is reiterated in paragraph
11 of the recent report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2473 (2019) (S/2020/393). Therefore, any international operation carried out without
proper coordination with the Libyan Government is considered illegal and not
founded on relevant Security Council resolutions. For that reason, we have announced
our rejection of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI
in its current form because we were only being notified of a fait accompli rather
than being consulted and properly engaged, as we were under Operation SOPHIA.
Operation IRINI is insufficient to implement resolutions banning the provision of
arms to illegal entities. The operation is not comprehensive and excludes the land
and air borders of eastern Libya, which is the main hub of support for the aggressor
militias that operate outside the law. When the arms embargo was put in place, it
was supposed to be in my country’s interest and applied to individuals or groups
attempting to smuggle weapons. But what is the logic in imposing such an embargo
on a sovereign legitimate Government that has supposedly been backed by the
Council from day one?
In the same context, we categorically reject the statements made a few days ago
by some countries directly involved in supporting the aggressor and in the killing of
Libyans, casting doubt on the legitimacy and legality of our sovereign agreements and
alliances, which constitutes blatant interference in our internal affairs. We therefore
condemn and reject those statements. Moreover, if those countries do not recognize
the legitimacy of our agreements, they should review the ongoing agreements we
have reached with them, as we might reconsider their feasibility. Our advice to
those countries is to find satisfactory answers for their people when they ask why
their country’s name is listed in reports of the United Nations sanctions committee
and why their country is spending billions to support militias and mercenaries and
provide them with weapons to kill and displace thousands of Libyans.
Without a doubt, my country welcomes and appreciates all sincere initiatives
and efforts aimed at ending the ongoing conflict and all attempts, such as those made
in Moscow, Berlin and elsewhere, to reach the humanitarian ceasefire that we have
always sought. We all agree that preventing bloodshed and sitting down for dialogue
is the only way out of this crisis. However, this is true only of those who seek a
peaceful solution, understand the meaning of democracy and aspire to a civil State,
and not of someone who has sent our youth to perish, turned his back on everyone
and appointed himself ultimate ruler and tyrant of the country, ignoring the will of
the people and their right to self-determination.
Therefore, we reiterate our categorical refusal to sit down with those whose
hands are stained with the blood of the innocent. The Council should know that no
political solution should be reduced to a single person or group and that eastern
Libya and its people are part of the core of our nation and are much bigger than this
dictator who represents only himself. The east has been hijacked and is living in fear.
Council members are witness to the number of violations committed there, and the
arrests, torture, forced disappearances and extrajudicial killings committed by his
criminal takfiri militias under the slogan of “national army, safety and security”.
Finally, the Council has witnessed the victories of our Libyan National Army
and military forces as they have liberated most of the aggressor’s strongholds,
revealed the truth and laid bare the weakness of the militias, which have started
20-0696831/32

S/2020/421

to demonstrate their defeat under the guise of tactical withdrawals, despite all the
support they have been receiving for years. As much as we appreciate the change
of position on the part of a number of States that have finally sided with the truth
now that it has become clear, we no longer pay much attention to empty statements
or words of condemnation. We assure the Council that our efforts to defeat the
aggressor will continue with all our might, by all means and with the alliances we
see fit in order to extend the State’s authority throughout the country.
It should now be clear to all that the war criminal’s project has come to an end
and now belongs to the past and that those who have been betting on him have lost
their wager. He is the one who pulled out of dialogue and peaceful solutions. That is
why we call on all those who have been involved with him to put down their weapons
and surrender and to side with our nation so that we can end the cycle of conflict, sit
down for a dialogue and reconciliation and discuss the post-Haftar days.
To that end, we would like the United Nations, in coordination with the African
Union, to play a more effective role in the coming period and to adopt new methods
to deal with the Libyan issue and learn from the mistakes of the past. Through that
new role, those obstructing peace will be held accountable in order to deter their
authoritarian tendencies, the free will of the people will be ensured and solutions
will not be dictated so that we can work towards a united civil State free from any
intervention and inclusive of all.

32/32

20-06968
