1

Security Council

S
Distr.
GENERAL
S/21084
16 January 1990
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Colombia, CGte d'Ivoire. Cuba, Democratic Yemen,
Ethiopia. Malaysia and Zaire: draft resolution

The Securitv Council,
Takincr into account the statements made by the delegations of Nicaragua and
the Dnitrtd States on tk events that occurred on 29 December 1989, at the residence
of the Arabassador of Hicaraqua in the Republic of Panama,
Becallinq the principles of independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity,
ard sovereign equality of States,
Considerinq the obligation of States to respect fully the privileges and
immmities granted to diplomatic missions and agents by international law, ,j
codified in the Viesuza Conventicn on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April 1961,
especiaiip with regard to the inviolability of the premises and residences of
diplomatic missions and the immunity, safety and personal integrity of diplomatic
agents,
Recallinq that The Havana Convention of 20 February 1928, on Diplomatic
Officers, provides that "Diplomatic officers shall be inviolate as to their
persons, their residence, private or official and their property'*,
Reaffirminq the need to comply with the obligations assumed by States in the
Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations, as well as in other
international legal instruments, as a contribution to the preservation of
international peace and security and friendly relations among States,
Takinq note of the letters, dated 4 and 5 January 1990, from the Permanent
Mission of the United States of America to the President of the Security Council,
regretting the search of the residence of the Ambassador of Nicaragua in Panama b-y
United States military forces, and indicating that the United States has taken
steps to prevent the recurrence of such actions,

90-01117

19982

(E)

/. . .

s/21004
English
Page 2
1.
I&.2.&ag that the serious events that took place are, as has been
acknowledged, a violation of the privileges and immunities recognized under
international law and codified in the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular
Relations;
2.
mw its deep concern over any measure or action that restricts free
communication and prevents the functioning of diplomatic missions in Panama in
accordance with international law, and calls upon those concerned to take the
appropriate steps to avoid the recurrence of such measures or actions:
Demandg the full respect for the rules of international law that
3.
guarantee the immunity of diplomatic officers and the inviolability of the premises
of diplomatic missions, an essential condition for t.he ncJrmn1 development of their
activities.

me..-

I
