:i9

Resolutions adopted on reports of tht> Fifth (:ommith·e

Nations, with only such alteration,; a~ are required to
meet the constitutional provisions and organizational
stn1ct11r<' of the re.-;pcctive agencies.

(iii) This Agree111ent may be tenninated by either [?arty
"iving the other written n(Jtice of its inte11t1on to termmate
;uch .\greement at least twelve (12) months in advance
of the tnrnination date fixed in such notice.
I:,; wITN 1-:ss w11 EREOF the respective representatives have
,ign<'rl this Agreement and have ;iffixed their sc:ils r.creto.
Do:-.E in duplicate this

305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
ANNEX

day of

Financial Regulations of the Vnited Nation,
455 (V). Expenses resulting from obligations
placed on the United Nations by in~truments
relating to the control of narcotic drugs:
assessment of non-member States signatories
of those instruments

Article I
APPLICABILITY

1.1 Th('se regulati"n~ shall govern the financial adrrnnistration uf the United Nations, including the lnternation;il
( ·, ;i1rt ,,f Ju,ticc.

The General Assembly,

.·I rtidc ii

Taking note of the report 10 of the Secretary-General
to tht> fifth session of the General Assembly on the que~tion of the assessment of signatorirs of international
instruments relating to the control of narcotic dru .. ·
which are non-memhers of the United Nations, forth•
fare share of expenses resulting from obligations plal, ·
on the United Nations by those instruments,

THE FINANCIAL YEAR

_
Th, financial vear shall be the peric, 1 I Janna n
to :n lk,·crnher incln;ive.

1

1. Approves the principle proposed by the ::-iecretary
General ior determining the expenses to be considered
as assessable on such non-members;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributiom to determine the rates at which such non-members should be
assessed by the same method as that followed in determining the assessment of non-members which are parties
to the Statute of the International Court of Justice for
their share of the expenses of the Court ,
3. Directs the Secretary-General to seek payment of
such amounts as are determined by the method established above in respect of the 1950 expenses and those
of future years.

305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
456 (V).

Financial Regulations of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the agreement reached in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to recommend a
common set of financial regulations for the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
Approving the amendments 11 recommended by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,

I. Declares that the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations set out in the annex to the present resolution are adopted in place of those adopted by the General Assembly at its second session under resolution 163
(II) ;
2. Expresses the hope that Member States will support the adoption by the specialized agencies of the
Financial Regulations approved herein for the United

Article Ill
THE BUDGET

,i.l
:·h,
1'·, ~ecrcL,

nmi:d budget estimates shall he prepar"d by
Ccneral.
Th •.,timatcs shall cover income and expenditure,
for th, •· :, .:ial year to which they relate, and shall he
presen, . J ,,1 lJnitrd States dollars.
3.3 Tlw annual budgrt estimates shall be divided into
part;;, sections. chapters and articles, and shall be accompanied by such information annexes and explanatory statements a,; may be requested by, o: on behalf of, the General
Assernblv, and such further annexes or statements as ·b·
:-;errct:ir·y-(;cneral may deem necessary and useful.
3.4 The Sec-retary-General ,hall submit to the regular
~ession of the General Assembly budget estimates for the
following financial year. The estimates shall be transmitted
to all Member States at least five weeks prior to the open•
ing :>f the regular session of the General Assembly.
3.5 The Secretary-General shall, at least twelve weeks
prior to the opening of the regular session of the General
Assembly, submit the estimates to the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (hereinafter
referred to a, the ''Advisory Committee") for examination
3.6 The Advisory Committee shall prepare a report to
the General Assembly on the estimates submitted by the
Secrctary-Crneral. This report shall be transmitted to all
:\1ember States at the same time as the estimates.
3.7 The budget for the following financial year shall
be adopted hy the General Assembly after consideration
and rcriort ,m the estimates bv the Administrative and
Huclgetary ( ·ommittee of the .'\.ssembly.
3.8 Supplementary estimates may be submitted by the
Secretary-( ;cneral whenever necessary.
3.9 The Secretary-General shall prepare supplementary
estimate, in a form consistent with the annual estimates
and shall submit such estimates to the General Assembly.
The Advisory Committee shall review such estimates and
report thereon.
Article IV
APPROPRIATIONS

1o See document A/1418.
11

See document A/1412.

4.1 The appropriations voted by the General Assembly
shall constitute an authorization to the Secretary-General
