United Nations

S/PV.6280

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6280th meeting
Thursday, 4 March 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Issoze-Ngondet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-25834 (E)

*1025834*

S/PV.6280

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Gérard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
February 2010. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Araud for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Yukio Takasu, Permanent
Representative of Japan and Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). I now give the floor to Ambassador
Takasu.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I add my voice to yours in
thanking Ambassador Araud and the French delegation
for their excellent work during the month of February.
I have the honour to present the report of the
1737 Committee here today. This is the thirteenth
90-day report to the Security Council in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737 (2006). The
report covers the period from 11 December 2009 to 4
March 2010, during which time the Committee held no
meetings but conducted its work using the silence
procedure.
In the previous report, I informed the Council
that the Committee had received two reports of
violations of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),

2

which imposed an export ban on arms and related
materiel on the Islamic Republic of Iran. I also
informed the Council that the Committee had
dispatched letters to the two States involved in the
transfer of the arms-related materiel from Iran found
onboard the M/V Hansa India and the M/V Francop,
respectively, inviting them to provide an explanation
for the transactions as well as additional relevant
information about the origin, final destination and
ownership of the goods. During the current reporting
period, the Committee received a response from one of
those States: the State of destination identified in the
Hansa India bill of lading.
The State asserted that it had found no record
indicating that the Hansa India was destined for one of
its ports and that it was conducting investigations, the
results of which it would share with the Committee.
The Committee has not yet received any further
information from this State on this matter.
Subsequently, the same State, which was also
mentioned as the State of destination in the Francop
bill of lading, wrote to the Committee on that latter
case, though not in direct response to the Committee’s
letter. The State asserted that the allegations made
against it were false, and that the Francop had not been
carrying any materiel that pertained to it. To date, there
has been no response from the reported State of origin.
On 20 January 2010, the Committee approved a
second implementation assistance notice containing
information that might prove to be useful to Member
States in implementing their obligations under
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
The notice provided a summary of the facts involved in
the Hansa India incident and urged all Member States
to be especially alert for additional violations involving
similar circumstances. The Committee also highlighted
paragraph 7 of resolution 1803 (2008), in which the
Council decided that the targeted financial measures
shall also apply to
“persons and entities determined by the Council
or the Committee to have assisted designated
persons or entities in evading sanctions of, or in
violating the provisions of, [the relevant
resolutions]”.
Members will recall that the first implementation
assistance notice of 24 July 2009 contained an incident
report and conclusions concerning the arms-related
materiel found on board the M/V Monchegorsk and the

10-25834

S/PV.6280

involvement of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines (IRISL). Similarly, this second notice addressed
the arms-related materiel found on board the Hansa
India, also highlighted the repeated involvement of
IRISL and noted the similar circumstances of the two
cases, namely the same destination and originating
States. Both notices are available on the Committee’s
website. In line with its mandate, the Committee will
continue to explore options for responding effectively
to this pattern of repeated sanctions violations.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received three notifications from a Member State with
reference to paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006),
concerning the delivery of items for use in the nuclear
power plant in Bushehr, Iran. The Committee also
received one notification pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 1737 (2006), in connection with the
unfreezing of funds to make payments for contracts
entered into prior to the listing of two entities. In
addition, the Committee received, and responded to, a
written query from a Member State concerning certain
aspects of the sanctions regime.
Finally, with regard to reporting by States on the
implementation of all relevant measures set out in
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008),
the figures remain as follows: 91 reports under
resolution 1737 (2006), 78 reports under resolution
1747 (2007) and 67 reports under resolution 1803
(2008).
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Araud and the
delegation of France for their able leadership last
month.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Takasu for
his comprehensive report and briefing today. But,
unfortunately, since we last met on this issue, our
concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme have only
deepened.
First, the latest report of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) once
again concludes that Iran is not complying with its

10-25834

IAEA and Security Council obligations, obligations
that are essential to building confidence in Iran’s
assertion that its nuclear programme is for exclusively
peaceful purposes. Specifically, the Director General
confirmed that Iran has not suspended its enrichment
and heavy water-related programmes as required by the
Security Council. Instead, Iran has declared that its
stockpile of low-enriched uranium has increased and
that it is moving quickly to produce near-20 per cent
low-enriched uranium. Iran has also announced that it
intends to build 10 new enrichment plants, but it has
not offered the IAEA any information about their
location or design, as required by Iran’s Safeguards
Agreement.
Moreover, Iran continues to make significant
progress in its heavy water-related activities,
particularly with the continued construction of the IR40 reactor. But Iran has denied the IAEA’s request to
sample heavy water that the Agency discovered in Iran.
The Director General also recounts several key issues
and unanswered questions about a possible military
dimension to Iran’s nuclear programme, and he
provides troubling information about the timing of
Iran’s decision to begin work on its previously secret
enrichment plant at Qom. Iran’s actions fail to provide
confidence in the nature of its nuclear programme and,
importantly, caused the Director General to declare that
the IAEA cannot confirm that “all nuclear material in
Iran is in peaceful activities”.
We particularly regret the fact that Iran has not
taken advantage of an IAEA proposal to provide fuel
for the Tehran research reactor in a one-time exchange
for 1,200 metric kilogrammes of Iran’s low enriched
uranium. By rejecting this generous deal, Iran is
missing yet another opportunity to build the confidence
of the international community in its assertions that its
nuclear programme is only for peaceful purposes, and
it has deprived the Iranian people of assured access to
life-saving medical treatments. Unfortunately, these
ongoing violations and this behaviour show a
continued pattern of disregard by the Government of
Iran for the clear and serious concerns over its nuclear
programme expressed by the international community.
Secondly, Iran’s continued refusal to provide
meaningful responses to the request for information
made by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) is further evidence of Iran’s
disregard for the obligations imposed by this Council.
We commend the Committee’s continued diligence in

3

S/PV.6280

carrying out its important mandate, even in the face of
repeated sanctions violations by certain United Nations
Member States. We were pleased that the Committee
issued a second Implementation Assistance Notice
urging all Member States to be especially alert to
additional violations involving similar circumstances,
such as those involving the Islamic Republic of Iran
Shipping Lines or transfers from Iran to Syria. That
Notice also reminded Member States that the
Committee has the authority to impose additional
targeted sanctions on entities that facilitate sanctions
violations or evasion, and we encourage the Committee
to continue to explore options for responding to
violations, particularly for how to most effectively
respond to repeated sanctions violations.
As my Government has noted before, the
effectiveness of Security Council resolutions depends
on follow-up and enforcement by the Committee, the
Security Council and all Member States. As such, it is
our responsibility to be vigilant in ensuring that these
sanctions are rigorously enforced and that thorough,
comprehensive investigations are conducted when
there is evidence of violations.
The United States remains firmly committed to a
peaceful resolution of international concerns about
Iran’s nuclear programme. Over the past year and
more, the United States has reached out to Iran in
unprecedented ways, repeatedly demonstrating our
commitment to working towards a diplomatic solution
based on mutual respect. And yet, Iran has yet to take
steps to build confidence and honour the commitments
it has made.
As Security Council members, we must all
continue to stand firm in our conviction that Iran must
comply with its international obligations. Four years
have passed since the IAEA referred this serious
situation to the Security Council. In that time, the
permanent five members of the Council plus Germany
have dedicated themselves to a dual-track approach to
place a clear choice before Iran so that it can choose a
better way forward. The United States remains
committed to that strategy.
In light of Iran’s continued non-compliance with
its obligations, this Council must consider further
measures to hold the Government of Iran accountable.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to add my voice to others congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the

4

Security Council this month, and to pay tribute to the
stewardship of Ambassador Araud and his French team
during the month of February.
I am grateful for Ambassador Takasu’s detailed
report and for the diligent work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the
past three months. His report shows that sanctions have
had an effect. For example, they have led to several
seizures of illegal Iranian arms exports, and I commend
the thorough work of the States that have acted in
accordance with their international obligations to
ensure that Iran’s illicit activities have been disrupted.
Sanctions have also made it harder for Iranian banks to
finance proliferation activity and for Iran to develop its
nuclear programme.
However, while existing measures have had some
effect, they have not yet led Iran to change course on
its nuclear activities. That is clear from the most recent
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), whose charge-sheet against Iran is getting
longer with each report. It reinforces our fears that Iran
is acting duplicitously and illegally. I would highlight
five particular areas covered, including one new
example of non-cooperation.
First, Iran showed its contempt for Security
Council resolutions through the construction of the site
at Qom and announcing its intention to build 10 further
enrichment plants. The report states that the
development of the Qom site is inconsistent with Iran’s
obligations under the subsidiary arrangements of its
Safeguards Agreement and raises concerns about the
completeness of its declarations.
Secondly, the report states that Iran has provided
the Agency with measurement results indicating that
enrichment levels of up to 19.8 per cent were obtained
between 9 and 11 February. Moreover, the report
highlights that, although the Agency told Iran not to
start enriching to 20 per cent, Iran continued to do so
anyway. It states that Iran has now installed 8,610
centrifuges, of which 3,772 are operating, and has
increased its stockpile of low enriched uranium to
more than 2,000 kilogrammes.
Thirdly, the IAEA Director General makes clear
that there has been no Iranian cooperation with the
IAEA on outstanding issues concerning possible
military dimensions for 18 months, and he states that
the information available to the Agency on these issues
“altogether raises concerns about the possible existence

10-25834

S/PV.6280

in Iran of past or current undisclosed activities relating
to the development of a nuclear payload for a missile”.
Fourthly, the report also highlights new areas of
non-cooperation. For example, Iran has refused to
allow the Agency to take samples of heavy water
stored at Esfahan or access to the heavy water
production plant.
Fifthly, the report makes clear that Iran has still
not implemented the Additional Protocol. The Director
General urges Iran to take steps to fully implement its
safeguards and other obligations, and we fully support
the IAEA efforts in this regard.
Iran’s true intentions were also shown by its
failure to respond constructively to the proposal to
replace fuel rods at the Tehran nuclear research reactor
using Iran’s stocks of 3.5 per cent low-enriched
uranium. That proposal met Iran’s wish to secure fuel
for this research reactor, and it would have been a real
confidence boost to the prospects for a broader
dialogue with Iran on nuclear matters. But
despite
initial signals that Iran could accept such a deal, it
instead made counter-proposals in complete opposition
to the spirit and purpose of the agreement.
Iran’s current trajectory is illegal and
destabilizing. The IAEA report emphasizes again that
they are unable to verify that Iran’s nuclear programme
is for non-military purposes. Without this reassurance,
there is a very real possibility that Iran’s actions could
lead to increased proliferation across the region.
However, the prospect of tough sanctions means
that this scenario is not inevitable. Despite Iranian
boasting, we can still persuade Iran to comply with
IAEA requirements by making the cost of their current
nuclear programme too great to bear. Further measures
would demonstrate that the international community is
united behind a diplomatic resolution to Iran’s nuclear
issue and would stave off any pre-emptive moves by
others to resolve this issue by other means.
Adopting further measures represents the best
prospect for bringing Iran into serious negotiations to
resolve the IAEA concerns. Such measures should be
smart and effective. They should target areas with an
impact on the regime’s policy calculations. They
should show the regime the extent to which the costs of
their nuclear programme outweigh any dubious
benefits.

10-25834

At the same time, we should reaffirm our
willingness to continue to engage with Iran. The E3+3
has offered economic benefits, such as investment and
trade, help so that Iran could develop civilian nuclear
power and a renewed relationship with the
international community based on respect and equality.
We have never denied Iran’s right to pursue a
peaceful civilian nuclear programme, but with that
right comes responsibility, and Iran needs to restore
trust by the international community. Their continued
silence on possible weaponization activities, combined
with the revelation of secret enrichment sites and
aggressive rhetoric, does little to restore trust in their
intentions, but merely adds to our concerns about the
programme.
The United Kingdom and its international
partners, including the European Union, are committed
to the dual-track strategy, and we hope that the
Security Council will continue to support us in these
efforts.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I too would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Takasu for his
90-day report, as well as for his management of the
Committee and the professionalism of his team. His
briefing has described the Iranian efforts to circumvent
the Security Council sanctions, along with the
exemplary behaviour of States in seeking to address
this.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has just issued a damning report concerning the Iranian
nuclear dossier, and I would like to highlight a number
of points that are of particular concern.
Iran continues to energetically pursue its
enrichment programme, which it was under the
obligation to suspend. It has now produced almost two
tons of low-enriched uranium; this would be, after
re-enrichment, more than enough to manufacture a
nuclear device. But there is no nuclear plant in Iran
that would be able to use it.
Iran has already started to enrich uranium to
20 per cent, without having notified the Agency in due
time. Thus, the Agency was unable to take the
measures necessary to monitor this progression to a
level that brings Iran dangerously close to the military
threshold. As we know, 20 per cent is more than 90 per

5

S/PV.6280

cent of the way towards the enrichment of militarygrade uranium.
Iran also continues to pursue its heavy water
activities in Arak and its work on a 40-megawatt
plutonium reactor, which is far too powerful for the
research and development or medical isotopes
activities alleged by Iran. Nor did Iran authorize the
Agency to take samples from several thousands of
litres of heavy water recently discovered at Isfahan.
Iran has constructed a clandestine enrichment
factory in Qom, announced last November. This site
remained undeclared for some years, in violation of
Iran’s safeguards agreement. Iran claims that this site’s
nuclear purpose was decided only in the second half of
2007, while the Agency states that it has information
revealing that the design of the installation dates back
to 2006. Iran did not respond to the Agency’s request
for access to the companies involved in the
construction of the site. The Agency had asked Iran to
confirm in writing that there were no further hidden
sites in preparation, and Iran did not do so.
There is no credible civilian application for this
site. The Agency has confirmed that this installation
could harbour around 3,000 centrifuges. That is
sufficient to construct an atomic bomb but not nearly
enough for a reactor. Nearly 45 years would be
required for it to produce a single annual refuelling for
a reactor similar to that of Bushehr.
We cannot underestimate the gravity of these
facts. How can we have trust? How many hidden sites
remain?
For two years now, the Agency has been
investigating the alleged military studies, namely on
conversion activities, work on coordinated high-power
explosives and, finally, work on a Shahab missile to
carry a nuclear warhead. It is these studies that give
rise to the fear that not only has Iran worked in the
field of fuel and modes of delivery, but also on the
missing link: the development of a device and its
delivery by missile.
The Agency has confirmed that it has credible
information from multiple sources covering a long
period of time, information that is consistent in terms
of the technical detail, timetables, individuals and
entities concerned.
Iran itself has corroborated some of the
information, such as the identification of certain

6

workshops or the designation of certain projects.
According to the Agency, these activities apparently
continued after 2004.
For nearly two years now, however, Iran has
denied access to any of the documents, sites,
individuals or entities involved. As time passes, the
Agency is concerned that it will become harder and
harder to obtain information. Without this information,
it will be impossible to rule out the possibility of a
military nuclear programme.
In terms of transparency, Iran has — completely
illegally — ceased to apply modified Code 3.1. It is
also is not applying the Additional Protocol.
Concerning the research reactor in Tehran, Iran
has rejected the agreement proposed by the Director
General of the IAEA. That agreement, which was
accepted by all the other parties, had proposed a
transparent and balanced supply strategy aimed at
meeting Iranian needs in terms of medical
radioisotopes. It would have restored some trust while
ensuring that, for a number of months at least, there
would not be a sufficient quantity of low-enriched
uranium in Iran to build a bomb.
Iran, however, has merely re-proposed options
that were categorically ruled out by Mohamed
ElBaradei during the negotiations in Vienna. These
were ruled out with good reason: they all would have
enabled Iran to construct an atomic bomb at any
moment.
Lastly, while this is not reflected in the report,
Iran has rejected all of the E3+3 offers to hold a
meeting on its nuclear programme.
If we take all of these facts together, we see a
country that is producing nuclear fuel without having a
nuclear plant, which is secretly developing enrichment
sites without any credible civilian application, which is
underhandedly making progress towards the necessary
enrichment level to construct a bomb, which has
developed a ballistic missiles programme and which
categorically refuses to comment on the militarization
of its programme even though there is a wealth of
information on this work that the Agency considers
credible.
My country is determined to support the broadest
possible dissemination of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. We have undertaken extensive cooperative
efforts in the Gulf and elsewhere. In Paris next week,

10-25834

S/PV.6280

we will hold a high-level conference on this subject.
But how can we maintain confidence in nuclear energy
if it is possible to completely reject transparency
without being called to account? How can we
guarantee the integrity of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on the eve of
this year’s Review Conference if it is possible to
violate all of its rules without consequences?
Within the E3+3, we remain deeply committed to
finding a diplomatic solution to this question.
However, we cannot sit idly by. We cannot allow the
Iranian programme to progress while our offers for
dialogue and cooperation are turned down one after the
other and while the work of the IAEA is hampered in
such a provocative manner. Furthermore, the Security
Council cannot allow a State to flout five consecutive
resolutions.
Lastly, we cannot allow ourselves to continue to
be taken advantage of by the range of dilatory
overtures being made by the regime. Every moment
counts. Given this situation, along with our partners we
have today no other choice but to seek the Security
Council’s adoption of new measures in the coming
weeks, in line with the dual-track approach that has
been consistently promoted by the permanent five
members of the Security Council plus Germany.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, Mr. President, let me
congratulate you and the delegation of Gabon on your
assumption of the important functions of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Araud and the
French delegation for the dynamic and skilful manner
in which they presided over the Council in February.
We are also grateful to Ambassador Yukio Takasu
for his briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), the
regular 90-day review and the work that has been done.
In the period under review, the Committee continued to
act in strict compliance with the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
It is important that, in the future, the Committee apply
the spirit and letter of those resolutions in the interests
of finding an effective resolution to the Iranian nuclear
problem solely through political and diplomatic means.
The situation concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme continues to be complex. The talks of the
permanent five members of the Security Council plus

10-25834

Germany (P5+1), the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Russia have made considerable
diplomatic efforts, which have to date not produced the
desired results. However, we believe that there is an
opportunity for negotiations, and in particular to agree
on a convincing and mutually acceptable fuel-exchange
model for Tehran’s research reactor. The successful
implementation of such a project would be a genuine
step towards restoring trust in the solely peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme and the best
way to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iranian
people.
We continue to advocate the resolution of the
issues related to the Iranian nuclear programme
through dialogue and interaction with the Iranian side.
The core of the Russian position has always been and
will continue to be based on talks to find diplomatic
solutions and on involving Tehran in joint efforts under
the IAEA’s mandated involvement. We call on Tehran
to make the necessary accommodations to ensure the
very prompt resumption of a broad dialogue with the
P5+1 with a view, among other things, to achieving a
negotiated settlement of the situation concerning the
Iranian nuclear programme. We are convinced that
such a settlement would respond to the basic interests
of the entire international community and of Iran itself.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I would also like
to express our appreciation to our French colleagues
for their very effective work in the month of February.
I should also like to thank Ambassador Takasu for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) during the past
90 days. We appreciate the work he has done since
assuming the chairmanship of the Committee. China
notes that the 1737 Committee has done very effective
work in that period, for which we are grateful.
The Council has adopted several resolutions on
the Iranian nuclear issue since 2006, including
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
Those resolutions reflect the common concerns of the
international community in connection with the Iranian
nuclear issue. They were adopted in the interest of
maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime, strengthening the authority and role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and

7

S/PV.6280

promoting diplomatic efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue. Every State has
an obligation to implement those resolutions
comprehensively and faithfully.
China has always supported the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. We favour addressing
the Iranian nuclear issue through the dual-track
strategy. We attach great importance to and have
strictly observed our obligations under the relevant
resolutions. At the same time, however, we believe that
sanctions are not an end in themselves and can in no
way provide a fundamental solution to this issue.
Diplomatic negotiations and a peaceful settlement of
the issue therefore remain the best option.
Although the relaunching of negotiations
currently faces some difficulties, the window for
contact and dialogue is not closed. In that regard, it is
worth noting that all the parties concerned have
indicated that the draft IAEA agreement on supplying
nuclear fuel for the Tehran research reactor continues
to be valid. This illustrates that diplomatic efforts by
the international community have not been exhausted
and that there is still room for further diplomatic
efforts.
China has taken note of the latest report of IAEA
Director General Amano. We support the IAEA’s
continued constructive role in finding an appropriate
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We also hope that
Iran will further strengthen its cooperation with the
IAEA and clarify and properly resolve relevant

8

questions at an early date so as to remove the
international community’s doubts about its nuclear
programme.
We believe that the key to easing the current
tense situation surrounding this issue remains finding
an acceptable solution to the problem of supplying
nuclear fuel for the Tehran research reactor and the
resumption of negotiations between the permanent five
members of the Security Council plus Germany with
Iran as soon as possible. We hope that the relevant
parties will arrive at early consensus with regard to the
IAEA draft agreement for the supply of nuclear fuel for
the Tehran research reactor. We also hope that the
parties concerned will take the broader and more longterm situation into consideration in order to strengthen
diplomatic efforts, including adopting more flexible
and pragmatic policies with a view to making progress
in the dialogue and negotiations.
China will continue to participate actively in the
work of the 1737 Committee and support and
coordinate with the relevant efforts of the Chairman to
allow the Committee to play a constructive role in duly
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations on other
issues.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

10-25834
