A/61/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

93

rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 4 April 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 116, 117, 124, 128 and 133.
I request Mr. Diego Simancas of Mexico,
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, to introduce, in one
intervention, the reports of the Fifth Committee that
are before the Assembly.
Mr. Simancas (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour today
to introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
Fifth Committee that contain recommendations on a
number of items that require action during the first part
of the resumed sixty-first session of the General
Assembly.

With regard to agenda item 128, entitled
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”, the
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/61/832. In paragraph 8 of its report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 133, on the Financing
of the United Nations Operations in Burundi, the report
of the Fifth Committee is contained in A/61/547/Add.1.
In paragraph 6 of its report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft decision, which the Committee adopted without a
vote.

The Fifth Committee met from 5 March to 2 April
2007 and held 9 plenary meetings, 34 informal
consultations and numerous “informal informal”
consultations. The General Assembly has already taken
up various other reports of the Fifth Committee that
were prepared for the first part of the resumed session.
I therefore now have the honour to make the following
brief report on the work of the Fifth Committee.

With regard to agenda item 117, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”, the
report of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/61/592/Add.4. In paragraph 17 of its report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of three draft resolutions, which were adopted
by the Committee without a vote. Draft resolution I
pertains to the conditions of service and compensation
for officials other than Secretariat officials, namely,
judges. Draft resolution II is entitled “Strengthened and
unified security management system”. And draft
resolution III pertains to after-service health insurance.

With regard to agenda item 124, entitled “Joint
Inspection Unit”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/61/654/Add.1. The relevant
draft resolution, recommended in paragraph 6 of the
report, was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Also under agenda item 117, a draft decision
entitled “Financing of the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women” was
adopted by the Committee without a vote. The
Committee recommends to the General Assembly in

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-29679 (E)

*0729679*

A/61/PV.93

paragraph 18 of its report, contained in document
A/61/592/Add.4, the adoption of the draft decision
without a vote.
Agenda item 116 is entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”. In paragraph 8 of
its report in document A/61/667/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution on the audit and investigative reviews
of the tsunami relief operations conducted by the
United Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes and
specialized agencies. Also in paragraph 9 of the same
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft decision relating to
questions deferred for future consideration. Both
proposals were adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same

2

manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
I therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now consider the report of the
Fifth Committee on agenda item 124, entitled “Joint
Inspection
Unit”,
contained
in
document
A/61/654/Add.1.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Programme of work of the Joint
Inspection Unit for 2007”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/260).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
124.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/832)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report, contained in document
A/61/832.
During this sixty-first session of the General
Assembly, we have taken a significant step forward in
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of this
Organization by approving the first serious overhaul of
the United Nations system of administration of justice
in 60 years. Around the world, the Organization
promotes justice and equality and represents the rule of
law to its Members. The Organization therefore
requires a system of justice that is independent,
transparent, professional and adequately resourced.
We owe it to the 55,000 staff members of the
Secretariat, funds and programmes who, in the case of
employment disputes, have recourse only to the
Organization’s own justice system. Having taken this
step, I would like to give my personal thanks to

07-29679

A/61/PV.93

representatives in both the Sixth and Fifth Committees,
as well as in the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, who worked
tirelessly, with focus and commitment, over these past
few weeks to establish a more effective system of
internal justice for both current United Nations staff as
well as the next generation of employees.
I would also like to thank the members of the
independent external panel of legal experts — the
Redesign Panel — that proposed the radical overhaul
of the system last summer, as well as the SecretaryGeneral and his staff, who helped to facilitate this
important deliberation. This has been a true team effort
and a model for cooperation among Member States and
Secretariat management and staff.
The existing system of internal justice, in place
since the late 1940s, was designed for a different era
when the Organization had only a few thousand staff
members in a handful of locations. It relied on the
voluntary input of staff members themselves,
participating in ad hoc boards and committees with
only limited authority to advise the Secretary-General.
Over time, the backlogs and delays have become
significant and the independence and credibility of the
system seriously compromised.
The existing system serves no one well — not the
staff, not the managers and, ultimately, not the
Organization or the Member States. The Redesign
Panel rightly recognized that and made bold proposals
for change. The draft resolution before the Assembly
today lays out the key features of fundamentally
different system. Members have asked for all its
elements to be fully functional by January 2009.
These include: a more robust informal system
with the emphasis on resolving a large number of
disputes between staff and managers before they go to
litigation; a strengthened Ombudsman function for the
Secretariat and its funds and programmes that will be
integrated yet decentralized and with the capacity to
conduct formal mediation services; a professionalized
formal system with two tiers, comprising a firstinstance tribunal and an appellate body rendering
binding decisions and ordering appropriate remedies —
this will replace the advisory bodies that exist in the
current system; a stronger capacity for providing legal
assistance and guidance to staff; a series of measures to
improve the accountability of managers and correct
faulty decisions; and a new office for the

07-29679

administration of justice, headed by a senior official
who will take ownership of this system and coordinate
all of its elements.
These represent important measures. However,
we must keep up the momentum to make sure that this
new system is created in a timely and efficient manner.
The Secretary-General has been asked to prepare
a set of reports which will provide the necessary
supplementary details for the new system. The
Assembly has also asked the Secretary-General to put
forward an immediate request for resources so that the
transition from the old to the new system can be made
effectively and with minimum disruption. The swift
approval of these additional reports, along with
approval of the necessary resources, is essential in
ensuring that the new system comes into effect in a
timely manner. I am confident that members will
continue to provide the necessary support and
guidance, as they have done in the past few weeks.
While the adoption of the draft resolution today
will be only an initial step towards that very important
reform, it will, indeed, be a crucial step. The reform of
the system of the administration of justice should not
be viewed in isolation from the total package of United
Nations reform. By adopting the draft resolution, the
General Assembly will reaffirm our commitment and
determination to see a better United Nations.
I would again like to thank members for their
support on this issue. They have done the Organization
a great service, which will be appreciated for years to
come.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report (A/61/832). The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/261).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 128.

3

A/61/PV.93

Agenda item 133 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/547/Add.1)
The President: The General Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
133.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/592/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 17 of its report and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 18 of the
same report.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a letter from the President
of the International Court of Justice dated 3 April 2007,
which I transmitted to all Permanent Representatives
and Permanent Observers to the United Nations
yesterday and which will be issued as a General
Assembly document under the symbol A/61/837.
I now give the floor to those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of position before action
is taken on draft resolution I.
Mr. Woeste (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
European Union would like to reaffirm its unreserved
support for the work of the judges, prosecutors and all
personnel of the International Court of Justice and the
international criminal tribunals and for their
responsible and important work. The EU would also
like to underline again that the work of judges of
various courts and tribunals is equally valuable and
important to us.

4

During the first part of the resumed session of the
Fifth Committee, member States were able to reach
consensus on a draft resolution in response to a request
to make the salary system of the International Court of
Justice, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda clearer and more transparent and
to remove certain anomalies. That draft resolution will
be adopted shortly.
The EU notes that the President of the
International Court of Justice has sent a letter to the
President of the General Assembly dated 3 April 2007,
which raises concerns about the impact of that text on
the equality of judges at the International Court of
Justice. That letter was brought to the attention of
Member States only yesterday, and after the adoption
of the draft resolution in the Fifth Committee.
Unfortunately, the timing meant that we were not able
to take the letter into account during our deliberations
on the item.
The European Union wishes to reaffirm its
appreciation for the dialogue between the international
courts and tribunals and the Member States represented
in the General Assembly, and reiterates its readiness to
continue to consider all aspects of and viewpoints on
the conditions of service for judges in the context of
the forthcoming sessions of the Fifth Committee and
the General Assembly.
Mr. García (United States of America): My
delegation notes with concern the letter from the
President of the International Court of Justice, Rosalyn
Higgins, about the possible implications of draft
resolution I for provisions of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. My delegation would
urge that the Secretary-General consult with the
President of the International Court of Justice on the
concerns raised in her letter and to include additional
information on this topic, as well as possible options
for addressing the concerns of the Court, in the context
of the report requested in paragraph 11 of the draft
resolution.
Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone): My delegation wants
to express its support for the two statements just made,
on behalf of the European Union and the United States
respectively. My delegation finds the letter from the
President of the International Court of Justice to be
very compelling, and we support the suggestions made
by the representative of the United States.

07-29679

A/61/PV.93

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
We will now take a decision on the three draft
resolutions and on the draft decision.
We now turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Conditions of service and compensation for officials
other than Secretariat officials: members of the
International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem
judges of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/262).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Strengthened and unified security management
system”. The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution
II without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/263).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Liabilities and proposed funding for after-service
health insurance benefits”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution III without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/264).
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Financing of the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the decisions just taken.
Mr. Hussain (Pakistan): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
regarding draft resolution I contained in document
A/61/592/Add.4.

07-29679

The Group of 77 and China wishes to express its
high appreciation for the important work of the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) as a principal organ
of the United Nations. We would like to reaffirm
Article 32 of the Statute of the ICJ, whereby the
salaries of the judges shall be determined by the
General Assembly and not decrease during the term of
office.
We take note of the concerns raised by the
President of the ICJ in the letter dated 3 April
addressed to you, Madam President. We just want to
mention that these concerns will be taken into account
in the discussions on this agenda item in the course of
the consideration of the Secretary-General’s report
under this item at the sixty-second session.
Mr. Adsett (Canada): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ).
The CANZ delegations join the consensus today
on the adoption of draft resolution I, on conditions of
service and compensation for international judges, but
wish to explain their position. The CANZ delegations
have tremendous respect both for the work of the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) and for the quality
and dedication of the judges who sit on that important
body.
As a body dedicated to the promotion of the rule
of law at both the national and the international levels,
the General Assembly must uphold the highest
standards and ensure that its actions are in conformity
with the Charter, upon which it is founded.
Late yesterday, we received a copy of a letter
from the President of the General Assembly attaching a
copy of a letter from Judge Rosalyn Higgins, President
of the International Court of Justice. The letter raises a
number of concerns about the resolution that has just
been adopted, including whether it is in conformity
with the Charter.
It is clear to all of us that the General Assembly
may take only decisions that fall within its mandate
under the Charter and must act in conformity with the
Charter. The issues raised by President Higgins are
important and should be adequately considered.
However, postponing action today would have had the
effect of preventing the General Assembly from
addressing anomalies in the pay structure and the

5

A/61/PV.93

concerns of judges who are disadvantaged by the
current system.
Nevertheless, in the light of the concerns raised
by the ICJ, we are prepared to continue reflecting on
this issue during the sixty-second session.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 117.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/667/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 9 of the
same report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution and on the draft decision. The draft

6

resolution, entitled “Audit and investigative reviews of
the tsunami relief operations conducted by the United
Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes and the
specialized agencies”, was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/265).
The President: We will now take action on the
draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
116.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

07-29679
