S/PRST/2021/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 April 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
On 8 April 2021, in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled “Maintenance of international peace and security”, in accordance with the
procedure agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID 19 pandemic and set out in S/2020/372, the President of the Security Council issued
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with t he Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 2365 (2017) on mine action,
and as well as its relevant resolutions which mandate United Nations mine
action related activities in relevant peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as applicable in line with their mandates and calls on Member States
and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen their efforts to implement
Resolution 2365 as well as other relevant resolutions on mine action.
“The Security Council, in this regard, emphasizes the importance of mine
action and the need to enhance international efforts in this field, particularly in
situations of armed conflict.
“The Security Council remains deeply concerned over the high number of
civilians casualties by landmines, explosive remnants of war (ERW) and
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), as well as personnel participating in law
enforcement, humanitarian, peacekeeping, rehabilitation and clearance
programmes and operations. The Council remains seriou sly concerned by the
threats posed to civilians by landmines, ERW and IEDs in affected countries,
which have serious and lasting humanitarian, social and economic consequences
for the populations of such countries. The Council remains seriously concerned
that insecurity exacerbated by landmines, ERW and IEDs threatens the peace,
security, and stability of Member States and hinders the freedom of movement
of peacekeeping operations as well as humanitarian access, including the
provision of humanitarian assistance, and impedes sustainable economic
development. The Council also expresses concern over the multifaceted,
negative impacts of COVID-19 on mine action activities.
“The Council also calls upon Member States to comply with their
respective international treaty obligations related to mine action, and their
relevant obligations under international humanitarian law. The Security
Council, in this context, reiterates its call for all parties in armed conflicts to

21-04631 (E)

120421

*2104631*

S/PRST/2021/8

end immediately and definitively any indiscriminate use of explosive devices in
violation of international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and international law.
“The Security Council encourages the continued inclusion of mine action,
where appropriate, in ceasefire and peace agreements, stresses the importance
of considering mine action during the earliest stages of planning and
programming in relevant peacekeeping operations and special political missions
including the necessity of establishment of a mine action component, where
appropriate, as well as humanitarian emergency responses that take into account
specific needs of women and children.
“The Security Council underscores the importance it places on the safety
and security of peacekeepers on the ground and the need for troop - and policecontributing countries to, ensure where appropriate, that all peacekeepers in the
field are equipped, informed and trained to mitigate the threat posed by
landmines, ERWs and IEDs. The Council also stresses the need to enhance
measures to combat the illicit procurement of components, explosives and
materials for the construction of IEDs. The Council recognizes the need for the
United Nations and Member States to work together to ensure, where
appropriate, that missions are adequately resourced.
“The Security Council reaffirms the primary role of Member States in
mine action efforts while further welcoming the supporting role of the United
Nations, including the coordination role of the United Nation Mine Action
Service within the UN System, as well as other relevant organizations, in mine
action activities, particularly the mitigation of dangers and risks posed to
civilians by landmines, ERW and IEDs, and notes with appreciation efforts of
the Member States towards rehabilitation of victims of landmines and IED. The
Council encourages Member States, in particular those that have the capacity to
do so, as well as the United Nations system and other relevant organizations and
institutions involved in mine action, to enhance, upon request and as
appropriate, support for mine-affected Member States including through the
sharing of best practices, providing technological and financial assistance to
affected countries. The Council encourages continued partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, to mitigate the threat to civilians from landmines, ERW and IEDs.
The Security Council reaffirms that partnership and cooperation b etween
national authorities, the United Nations and other relevant international actors
including civil society are important to the success of mine action. The Council
acknowledges the efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service and
encourages Member States to continue to support it.
“The Security Council, in commemoration of the International Day for
Mine Awareness and Assistance in Mine Action, reiterates its commitment to
mine action with a view to contributing to the protection of civilians and
supporting stabilization and peacebuilding efforts in armed conflicts and post conflict situations.”

2/2

21-04631
