S/PV.8408

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8408th meeting

Wednesday, 21 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Cordova Soria
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Elé Ela
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi (S/2018/1028)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-39305 (E)
*1839305*

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Burundi (S/2018/1028)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations,
in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1028, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and to assure
you of my full support.
The report that I have the honour of introducing on
behalf of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028) provides
a review of the situation in Burundi, as well as my and
my team’s activities during the period from 10 August
to 30 October. In the report’s political sections, the
Secretary-General takes stock of the tensions that are
affecting the political stakeholders, and primarily the
relations between the Government and the opposition.
In particular, the report discusses the lack of trust and
dialogue between the authorities and the opposition
parties, which are nevertheless acknowledged to be
essential to resolving the ongoing crisis. Since the
publication of the report, the political situation on
the domestic front has been dominated by four major
events.
2/22

21/11/2018

The first is that the Minister of the Interior, alleging
the violation of certain provisions of the law by political
parties, rejected a request by Agathon Rwasa, the
leader of the opposition coalition, for the registration
of the Front national de liberté/Amizero y’Abarundi
party. The second was the appeal on 9 November to
the African Union and the United Nations by the
platform of the Conseil national pour le respect de
l’Accord d’Arusha pour la paix et la réconciliation au
Burundi et la restauration de l’état de droit opposition
party asking them to take charge of the inter-Burundian
dialogue process, partly to prevent any resort to the
use of weapons, which has been advocated by some
members of the opposition. The third was the European
Union’s renewal until October 2019 of its restrictive
measures against a number of Burundian officials and
officers for what are described as serious violations of
human rights, as well as the obstruction of democracy
and efforts to achieve peace. The last was the National
Assembly of Burundi’s renewal until 2022 of the
mandate of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
with the principal aim of examining acts of violence
committed between 1885 and 2008.
More fundamentally, the political situation has
been largely dominated in the past few weeks by
the holding of the fifth inter-Burundian dialogue
session, unfortunately without the participation of the
Government and the majority party and its allies. For
various reasons, the participants adopted their own road
map, thereby de facto rejecting that of the Government,
adopted in August, particularly because of the lack of
any prior consultations on it. Based on a synthesis of the
various proposals, the facilitator and former President
of the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, submitted to the mediator a final report on the
dialogue process that he had conducted. I would like
to take this opportunity to once again pay tribute on
behalf of the Secretary-General to the facilitator and
mediator for their tireless commitment, despite the
fact that it has not yet resulted in the conclusion of an
agreement between the parties involved.
The security situation in Burundi remained
relatively calm during the period covered by the report.
At the beginning of this month, however, the media
reported deadly fighting in Uvira, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, between Burundi’s national
defence forces and the Résistance pour un état de
droit au Burundi-Tabara, an armed rebel group. Those
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

incidents, which were confirmed by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have resulted in several deaths.
The Secretary-General notes in his report that the
human rights situation in Burundi remains a matter
of concern, pointing out that the Government has still
not resumed its cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Violations of human rights and other abuses, such as
arbitrary arrests, forced disappearances and other acts
of intimidation, continue to persist, as does hate speech,
especially against opposition actors. The democratic
space continues to be constrained, except for some
parties allied to the Government. With regard to the
latest report of the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi
(A/HRC/39/63), the Secretary-General deplores the
unacceptable remarks made by the representatives of
the Burundian Government about the report and its
authors.
The humanitarian situation remains worrying.
An estimated 1.7 million people are threatened by
food insecurity. I would also like to reiterate the
Secretary-General’s concerns about the ongoing
deterioration of the country’s socioeconomic situation
and the food insecurity that is affecting many
Burundians. The Secretary-General welcomes the
steps that the Government and various international
non-governmental organizations have taken to relaunch
their cooperation, and we continue to encourage the
Government to be flexible in that regard in order to
ensure the welfare of its most vulnerable populations.
Between January and October nearly 52,260
refugees returned to Burundi under the voluntary
repatriation programme, particularly from Tanzania.
There are still just over 380,000 Burundians in the
region, 227,510 of them in Tanzania. In that regard,
the Secretary-General encourages the Government to
continue collaborating with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to ensure
their voluntary repatriation and dignified return, and
their reintegration into their communities of origin or
host communities.
In sum, the Secretary-General’s report shows that
the situation in Burundi remains fragile, partly because
of the lack of an inclusive political dialogue, but also
owing to its humanitarian, economic and financial
problems and to security threats. After more than three
years of tireless efforts through the inter-Burundian
dialogue process, the United Nations, the African Union,

S/PV. 8408

the subregion and Burundi’s partners must reassess the
ways and means to help Burundi emerge from its current
political crisis, and that assessment should naturally
be initiated first and foremost by the Burundians
themselves and then by the region. The SecretaryGeneral welcomes the East African Community’s
forthcoming summit and fervently hopes that it will
address the issue of Burundi. Based on that meeting’s
conclusions, and especially on its recommendations,
the East African Community, the United Nations and
the African Union must re-evaluate their commitment
to helping Burundi emerge definitively from its crisis,
especially in view of the elections scheduled for 2020.
I would like to thank the Burundian authorities for
the consideration shown to my Office and me, and to
the United Nations family in Burundi in general.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Kafando for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I have the honour
to inform the Council today about my recent visit to
Burundi, which I undertook in my capacity as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) from 5 to 9 November. As per
established practice, for this statement I have consulted
with and received the approval of the 54 members of
the PBC configuration, including Burundi, the country
concerned. Based on those consultations, I focused on
the following issues during my visit: socioeconomic
cooperation on the new national development plan, the
political situation in the aftermath of the fifth round
of the dialogue led by the East African Community
(EAC), the path to the elections in 2020 and the return
of refugees.
In Burundi, I met with the Second Vice-President
of the Republic, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
Minister of Finance, Budget and Privatization and the
President of the National Assembly, as well as former
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, Mr. Evariste
Ndayishimiye, Secretary-General of the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
pour la défense de la démocratie ruling party, and
representatives of the Sahwanya-Front pour la
démocratie du Burundi and Amizero y’Abarundi
opposition parties. I also met with His Excellency
Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the United
Nations, Mr. Basile Ikouebe, Special Representative of
the African Union for the Great Lakes Region, and with

18-393053/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

representatives of the private sector and civil society, as
well as numerous bilateral and multilateral donors and,
of course, the United Nations country team. Owing to
a last-minute change in his schedule, the meeting with
President Pierre Nkurunziza did not take place. From
Bujumbura, I travelled to Pretoria for meetings on 8 and
9 November with representatives of the Government of
South Africa and several think tanks. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank United Nations Resident
Coordinator Garry Conille and Ambassador Albert
Shingiro, Permanent Representative of Burundi, for
the rich and insightful programme that they helped
organize.
During my stay in Bujumbura some of my
interlocutors informed me that the security situation in
the country remains calm and stable, and we encourage
all stakeholders to refrain from violence in order to
safeguard that state of affairs. President Nkurunziza’s
announcement that he would not seek re-election in
2020 was one of the most significant developments
since my last trip to Burundi in March. When I met
with some of the leaders of the ruling party during
my visit, they confirmed the President’s intention, and
some expressed the hope that the announcement would
help to ease the tensions among political actors ahead
of the 2020 elections.
When Burundi’s Foreign Minister Nibigira met
the Secretary-General in late September in New York,
he raised the question of United Nations support for
the Burundian elections of 2020, and I brought up
that conversation when Mr. Nibigira received me in
Bujumbura. He emphasized that preparations for the
elections were already ongoing and indicated that the
international community could play a role in encouraging
those members of the opposition in exile who were not
involved in the coup attempt of May 2015 to return
home and participate in the elections. He mentioned
that in Kayanza in August the leaders of some political
parties had agreed on a road map for the elections. The
representatives of some opposition parties and various
civil-society actors reminded me, however, that not all
the political parties had subscribed to the Kayanza road
map, and expressed concern that the elections of 2020
would not be inclusive, as well as their hope that the
national independent electoral commission will be truly
impartial. Many interlocutors lamented the fact that the
Government had not participated in the fifth and last
round of the EAC-led talks in Arusha in late October,
while the Government, the ruling party and some
4/22

21/11/2018

other political parties justified their absence based on
the fact that October is a month of national mourning
when Burundi commemorates the anniversary of the
assassinations of Prince Louis Rwagasore, the father
of Burundian independence, and Melchior Ndadaye,
Burundi’s first democratically elected President.
My recent visit also offered the opportunity to
pursue the dialogue on the socioeconomic situation
with the Government and Burundi’s international
partners that I initiated two years ago with the thenUnited Nations Resident Coordinator. On 22 August,
the Government launched a new national development
plan for the period from 2018 to 2027. Its objective is
to transform Burundi’s economy structurally in order
to achieve “strong, sustainable, resilient and inclusive
growth capable of creating decent employment for all
and improving social well-being”. Over the next 10
years, that plan will be a key reference document for
Burundi’s development partners. I therefore encourage
the Government and donors to use it as an entry point for
a substantive discussion on development cooperation,
and specifically on the implementation of the national
development plan.
On 6 November, the Government organized a
presentation and round-table discussion on the new
development plan between its authors, the Resident
Coordinator and myself and our teams. I also held
two separate meetings on the plan with bilateral and
multilateral donors, who expressed their readiness
to support it and reiterated their commitment to
remaining engaged in Burundi. At the same time, they
emphasized their desire to have a substantive dialogue
with the Government on the plan’s implementation and
on its expectations of donors. They expressed a desire
to engage more intensively with the Government with
regard to the sectoral implementation of the plan, both
strategically and on a more technical level. They remain
interested in participating in a joint retreat or workshop
with the Government focusing on the main objectives
of the plan and on opportunities for support. The
Government informed me that it is currently preparing
a road map for the plan’s implementation and will reach
out to donors in that regard.
The recent suspension of the work of international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Burundi
was a major subject of many conversations. Government
representatives informed me that about 25 international
NGOs had already adapted to the new regulations
and will be able to resume their work soon, while
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

the relevant authorities are currently considering the
requests of another 60 organizations, which should be
able to resume their operations shortly. Progress has
been made on funding the humanitarian response plan,
which is currently covered to a level of 58 per cent,
compared to just 2 per cent during my visit in March.
Representatives of the Government and the Heads
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) drew my attention
once again to the issue of the return of refugees, mainly
from Tanzania, which is taking place on the basis of
a tripartite agreement between Burundi, Tanzania and
UNHCR. More than 52,000 refugees have been helped
by UNHCR and partners to voluntarily repatriate to
Burundi since August 2017, the vast majority of them
from Tanzania but with some also returning from
Kenya and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Government noted that assistance aimed at supporting
the return and reintegration of refugees was particularly
welcome. The international partners of UNHCR and
Burundi stressed that the voluntary nature of the returns
is essential. In cooperation with Burundi’s authorities,
UNHCR — together with partner organizations such as
the IOM, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme, UNICEF, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Population Fund and
the International Rescue Committee — is offering
assistance to people who decide to return to Burundi,
taking into account the needs of both the returnees
and their communities of origin. Although various
actors, including the Peacebuilding Fund, are financing
international assistance for returns, the programme
remains severely underfunded. Among the challenges
people are facing are food insecurity, difficulties
with enrolment in schools and a lack of means for
rehabilitating shelters.
I also met with the new Head of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) in Bujumbura, who reported allegations
of continuing human rights violations and abuses.
In my meetings with Government officials, I urged
them to conclude the outstanding memorandum of
understanding with OHCHR as soon as possible and to
engage with the Office and other parts of the United
Nations country team on the entire range of human
rights, civil and political as well as social, economic

S/PV. 8408

and cultural. Based on all my recent conversations,
these are my conclusions and recommendations.
First, the 2020 elections are already very much
at the centre of political attention in Burundi. It is
crucial to the country’s future to ensure that they are
free, inclusive, democratic and peaceful and that their
results are widely seen to be legitimate, primarily in
Burundi itself but also internationally. I encourage the
Government of Burundi and its international partners
to pursue their discussions about possible forms of
assistance that the country may need in order to ensure
the conduct of successful elections.
Secondly, the upcoming elections should not
distract from the fact that the country’s socioeconomic
development still requires more attention and additional
efforts. Burundi’s international partners in Bujumbura
unanimously welcomed the fact that the Government
had issued a new national development plan, which
has the potential to contribute to the well-being of the
people of Burundi and enable increased cooperation
between the Government and its international partners.
I encourage the Government and its partners to engage
in open and substantive strategic dialogue on the
plan’s implementation, followed by sector-specific
discussions on concrete projects. I also encourage
bilateral and multilateral partners and the Government
of Burundi to continue their dialogue with a view to
creating conditions conducive to the resumption of
assistance that has been suspended.
Thirdly, the orderly and voluntary return of
Burundian refugees is another element that can
contribute to inclusive and therefore successful elections.
UNHCR and its partners offer crucial assistance for
the voluntary return of refugees by ensuring respect
for international standards and thereby enabling the
sustainable reintegration of returnees. They require
additional resources, accompaniment and support from
the international community for those efforts.
Fourthly and finally, I encourage the Government
and its partners at the United Nations to work in a
constructive and practical manner, based on mutual
trust and respect, towards the full realization of all
human rights — civil and political as well as social,
economic and cultural — and to swiftly conclude the
outstanding memorandum of understanding between
the Government of Burundi and OHCHR. The
Peacebuilding Commission Burundi configuration
remains committed to facilitating the dialogue between

18-393055/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

the Government of Burundi and its international
partners on all the issues I have mentioned, as they
are all essential to peacebuilding. Meanwhile, the
configuration’s focus will remain on the socioeconomic
arena. A more comprehensive report on my latest visit
will be presented to the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Monday 26 November.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for their continuing support to the
configuration and for their interest.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Kafando, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi, and Ambassador Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their important briefings and for their
commitment. On behalf of France, I would like to make
three main points.
I would first like to express our concerns about
various developments in Burundi in recent months.
Secondly, I want to call on the Burundian authorities
to take appropriate measures to enable free and
peaceful elections to be held in 2020. And thirdly, in
this context, I want to support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Security Council remain
seized of this matter, in the understanding that we
should reflect collectively on the best way for the
international community to help Burundi emerge from
this crisis.
My first point is about the latest developments
in Burundi. We would like to once again welcome
President Nkurunziza’s announcement that he will not
stand for re-election in 2020 and will support the next
President to be elected. That positive gesture could
contribute to finding a peaceful way out of the crisis.
However, that does not diminish the fact that the recent
situation presents real concerns, as the SecretaryGeneral has described. The fact that the Burundian
authorities did not participate in the fifth session of the
inter-Burundian dialogue held in Arusha at the end of
October is particularly regrettable. The announcement
that foreign non-governmental organizations in the
country were being suspended for three months has
also given rise to doubts. It is part of a general context
6/22

21/11/2018

of deterioration, as the international Commission of
Inquiry has highlighted, concluding that there have
been serious human rights violations and that the
space in which civil society can act is constrained.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2018/1028)
also points out those serious human rights violations.
In particular, we are concerned about the growing role
played by certain elements of the Imbonerakure, the
youth movement of the ruling party. And we deplore
the threats, intimidation and personal attacks against
the members of the Commission of Inquiry.
We are also worried about aspects of the
humanitarian situation, such as the 3.6 million
Burundians in need and the plight of displaced
persons and refugees. While a number of people have
returned, we reiterate how important it is that they do
so voluntarily, safely and with dignity, in accordance
with the principles of international humanitarian law.
My second point is that we are extending a hand
to the Burundian authorities in asking them to move
forward. We should now all focus on the 2020 elections,
which must be free, fair and transparent. Now is the
time for the Burundian Government to change its
trajectory and make a return to stability possible. In that
regard, we encourage it to resume the inter-Burundian
political dialogue. We also ask it to ensure that all
political parties have fair and equitable access to the
2020 elections. The priority right now is creating the
conditions for free, fair and truly inclusive elections
that respect the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. In that regard it will be crucial to ensure
women’s participation in the whole process. We also
call for respect for fundamental freedoms, particularly
freedom of opinion and expression, which will help to
restore the Burundian people’s trust in their institutions
generally. That is essential to an open, peaceful society
and long-term stability. In the same spirit, we call on
the Burundian authorities to cooperate fully with the
independent mechanisms of the Human Rights Council
and with the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We want to see them act neutrally and
impartially in investigating and prosecuting cases of
human rights violations, whoever the perpetrators may
be.
My third point concerns how the international
community should help Burundi emerge from its crisis.
France shares the Secretary-General’s view that we
must work closely with the East African Community
and the African Union to help Burundi hold fair, free
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

and transparent elections in 2020. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we believe that this issue should remain on
the Security Council’s agenda. Human rights violations
and the importance of the 2020 elections demand
special attention on the part of the Council, because the
stability of both the country and the region depends on
it. We will follow very closely what the Heads of State
and Government of the East African Community say
at their important meeting at the end of the month, just
as we will of course listen with great interest to the
recommendations of the facilitator, President Mkapa.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate France’s support for the
facilitation led by the East African Community, as well
as the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, whom I would like to thank once again.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando
for his briefing on the evolving situation in Burundi.
We listened with grateful interest to the report by
Ambassador Jürg Lauber of Sweden, in his capacity
as Chair of the Burundi country configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), following his trip
to Bujumbura and other countries of the region. We
commend the configuration’s balanced approach, which
has enabled it to remain a valuable channel for dialogue
with Bujumbura, and we support the PBC’s efforts to
revitalize its interaction with the Burundians by focusing
on issues related to socioeconomic development and the
re-establishment of donor confidence.
We believe that overall, Burundi’s internal political
processes are trending towards stabilization. With
regard to the country’s political situation, we want to
point out that on 17 May it held a peaceful, constitutional
referendum. In response to the criticism of that event
from the opposition and a number of Western States, the
voter turnout was a staggering — indeed unprecedented
for an African country — total of 96.24 per cent, of
which an overwhelming majority of 73.26 per cent also
voted for constitutional change. We also understand
that it was preceded by a democratic and transparent
publicity campaign.
In the view of the Russian Federation, the issue of
the presidential and parliamentary elections planned
for 2020 is Burundi’s internal affair. We call on the
authorities and the opposition to refrain from negative
rhetoric and to concentrate on preparing for the
election cycle, especially since President Nkurunziza
has announced that he will not be participating in the
presidential race.

S/PV. 8408

With regard to the problems in advancing the
inter-Burundian dialogue, we want to point out that
ascribing responsibility for it to one side alone is
counterproductive and even dangerous. Rather than
shielding the intransigent opposition, it would behove
the Secretariat and a number of our Western colleagues
to urge all the Burundian parties to work to resume
a full-scale negotiation process, which could lead to
the achievement of sustainable peace and stability in
Burundi, as soon as possible.
In the light of the intention of former President
Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania to consider rethinking his
role in the mediation process, we would like to note that
this does not cancel our commitment to the principle
of African solutions to African problems. We call on
the African community to continue its active mediation
efforts aimed at facilitating constructive negotiations
between the parties.
The fact that the process of the return of refugees
from neighbouring countries to Burundi has begun is
evidence of the gradual improvement in the country’s
situation. At the same time, the humanitarian situation
in Burundi remains problematic. It is regrettable that the
humanitarian appeal for support to the country has not
been fully funded. We urge donor countries to abandon
their double standards. We continue to stand firmly for
the principles of humanism, neutrality and impartiality
in United Nations efforts to deliver humanitarian
assistance with the consent of the host country.
We have taken note of the information in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1028) on the
alleged major human rights violations in Burundi. We
should point out, however, that the information in the
September report (A/HRC/39/63) of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), from which it is borrowed, is far from
unambiguous, and we should therefore draw no specific
conclusions from it. It should be sufficient to point out
that the OHCHR report is based on data that comes only
from representatives of the radical opposition, which has
been an unrelenting critic of the Burundian authorities
for a number of years and also conducts its activities
from outside the country. That can hardly be considered
an impartial source of information. In any case, as we
all know, in accordance with the division of labour in
the United Nations, human rights issues are dealt with
by the Human Rights Council, where Burundi is already
the subject of discussion. We want to point out that the
entire responsibility for ensuring that human rights

18-393057/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

are upheld in the territory of Burundi, including by
armed and non-State entities, belongs to the Burundian
authorities, and needless to say the Security Council
should proceed from that understanding in its work. As
a matter of principle, we support respect for Burundi’s
sovereignty and categorically reject any interference in
Bujumbura’s internal affairs.
In general, we would like to emphasize that the
information we have heard today is not evidence
of the kind of problems in Burundi that would merit
keeping the situation there on the Security Council’s
agenda. We once again urge our colleagues on the
Council to focus on more serious issues. In any
case, we certainly do not see the need for quarterly
discussions on the situation in Burundi. In general, we
believe that the Council’s ongoing focus on Burundi is
becoming counterproductive and is essentially merely a
convenient excuse for the unreconcilable opposition to
complicate its internal political processes.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, in
his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
Bolivia appreciates the efforts by the Special
Envoy to continue the inter-Burundian dialogue in an
inclusive atmosphere. With respect to the fifth dialogue
session in particular, we hope its subsequent road map
and final report will provide a basis for reflection on the
way forward. We also appreciate the respective efforts
of the facilitator and the mediator, former President
Benjamin Mkapa of the United Republic of Tanzania
and President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda. We
acknowledge the work of the East African Community,
which should continue to lead the inter-Burundian
dialogue process in order to preserve the progress made
under the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
We also appreciate the work being done in Burundi by
the Special Representative of the African Union for the
Great Lakes Region, the United Nations country team
and, especially, the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, whom we commend
for his efforts in organizing and facilitating dialogue on
socioeconomic issues between the Government and its
international partners.
8/22

21/11/2018

We are pleased that the security situation in the
country continues to improve and that the referendum of
17 May was held in an atmosphere of calm and inclusion,
without major incidents and with the participation of
all political parties. We also welcome the appointment
of new members to the national independent electoral
commission, as well as the Burundian Government’s
adoption of a road map for the upcoming elections.
We encourage all the parties to work to create the
conditions necessary for an atmosphere of peace and
trust during the upcoming 2020 elections by reinforcing
a spirit of tolerance, taking conciliatory measures and
maintaining a dialogue process with the opposition.
We commend Burundi’s launch of its national
development plan and call on all its partners to work
together with the Government to forge links that
will enable its implementation for the benefit of the
Burundian people. We also note Burundi’s contribution
to peace and security through its deployment of troop
contingents, a testament to its institutional capacity.
The international community should support Burundi
in strengthening that capacity, which goes hand in hand
with its socioeconomic development and its ability to
address its persistent humanitarian challenges. We
encourage the international community to continue to
provide funding for the humanitarian response plan
in Burundi, and we are pleased that 52 per cent of the
required amount has been achieved so far.
We highlight the voluntary return home of more
than 52,000 refugees and encourage the Government,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the United Nations Development
Programme and other United Nations entities to
continue working for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of the hundreds of thousands of refugees who
remain in neighbouring countries. We call on the
international community to support those efforts and in
particular to provide assistance for the refugees’ return
and reintegration.
If these challenges are to be overcome, we need to
create an atmosphere of trust, which involves lifting
the unilateral sanctions on Burundi in accordance
with the appeal by the Heads of State of the African
Union at its July summit. The situation in Burundi
has harmful consequences for the civilian population,
especially vulnerable groups, and negative effects on
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. In conclusion, I believe that the Security Council
and the international community in general should
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

pursue a dialogue in a constructive manner and deal
with the areas where there is still a lack of convergence
for the sake of a peaceful solution based on respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Burundi.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): (spoke
in French): The Kingdom of the Netherlands would
like to thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando and
Ambassador Jürg Lauber for their informed advice
on the situation in Burundi. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/1028) and welcome his
announcement that he will present the Council with
a set of options on the role of the United Nations in
Burundi. I would like to focus on three points — first,
the inter-Burundian dialogue; secondly, the security
situation, the socioeconomic context and human rights;
and thirdly, the way forward.

S/PV. 8408

378,000 Burundian refugees are still living outside the
country. In that context, international aid is vital. We
welcome the leadership of Ambassador Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in continuing to monitor the issue. It
is also essential that Burundi’s partners be able to
continue to provide their support.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains firmly
committed as a development partner of Burundi. The door
to dialogue remains open to resolve misunderstandings
and to restore mutual trust. Dialogue must also be
the answer to the sudden suspension of international
non-governmental organizations, which is a serious
setback to the country’s development activities.

My first point concerns the progress of the
inter-Burundian dialogue. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands expresses its support for the East African
Community facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and
congratulates him on his tireless efforts to promote
an inclusive and acceptable inter-Burundian
dialogue. Despite his efforts, the outcome of the
fifth inter-Burundian dialogue session, held from
25 to 29 October, was disappointing. We agree with
the facilitator that it is regrettable that the Burundian
Government did not take part in the dialogue and that
as a result, many disagreements persist. It is also clear
that there is still no road map for the 2020 elections.
Important issues such as the return of the opposition
diaspora and the protection of the achievements of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement are
still outstanding.

My last point is on the way forward. Today,
the Council is considering the situation in Burundi
for the fifth time this year. There are encouraging
signs, particularly the announcement that President
Nkurunziza will not seek a new term. However, there
is insufficient progress on the most consensus-based
points most consistently highlighted by the Security
Council both in its presidential statement in April
(S/PRST/2018/7) and in its press statement in August
(SC/13461), namely, first, the need for an active and
unconditional commitment to dialogue conducted
under the auspices of the East African Community
(EAC); secondly, reaching an agreement among the
stakeholders before the 2020 elections; and thirdly,
the necessary resumption of cooperation between
Burundi and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the
United Nations Special Envoy and the African Union
observers. At present, such issues are still pending.

That brings me to my second point. The Netherlands
remains concerned about security, the socioeconomic
context and the human rights situation in Burundi. While
the overall security situation has improved, a climate
of repression continues to compromise the calmer
situation. The most recent report of the Commission of
Inquiry on Burundi (A/HRC/39/63) indicates that there
have been disappearances, torture and arbitrary arrests.
It also notes that the main perpetrators of those acts are
Government actors or their proxies, such as the national
security services, the police and the Imbonerakure
militia. Those abuses must stop immediately and must
not go unpunished. In addition, many Burundians
are dealing with a difficult socioeconomic situation.
Approximately 1.7 million people are food insecure and

The ordinary summit of the East African
Community will assess the situation in Burundi at
the end of the month, while time is running out and
the time frame between now and 2020 narrows. The
leaders of the region will have to rise to the challenge
and bring the political process out of the impasse in
which it has become embroiled. They have a key role to
play in determining the future stability of Burundi and
the region as a whole. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
looks to the EAC for leadership and guidance on the
way forward to continue the dialogue. We therefore
welcome the offer by Mr. Benjamin Mkapa to brief the
Council following the EAC summit, as stated in his
letter of 9 November.

18-393059/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

We call on the African Union, the United
Nations and the guarantors of the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement to actively support the
pursuit of a political solution. Inclusive dialogue
remains the only sustainable way to build the necessary
confidence for free, fair and peaceful elections in 2020.
In conclusion, I would like to echo the words of
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa — the Council must remain
seized of this matter.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, and Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their very
important and comprehensive briefings. Let me also to
take this opportunity to express Poland’s full support
for all the efforts of the Special Envoy, Mr. Kafando,
and the PBC’s Burundi configuration, under the able
stewardship of Ambassador Lauber, to ensure peace,
stability and development in Burundi. Allow me to focus
on three key issues, namely, the political process, human
rights and the economic and humanitarian situation.
First, on the political process, Poland commends
all the efforts made by the East African Community
and the facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, to enable the
intra-Burundian dialogue. We deeply regret that the
Burundian Government did not take the opportunity to
make progress on national reconciliation and decided
not to attend the fifth round of negotiations. It goes
without saying that only an inclusive political process
can ensure a sustainable and widely acceptable solution.
It is high time for the Government to prove its
readiness for a political compromise and engage in a
real dialogue with a wider spectrum of the opposition.
It is especially important now with the presidential
elections approaching in 2020, as it is the role of the
authorities to ensure that the electoral process is free,
fair, transparent and truly inclusive.
Secondly, on human rights, let me stress that, in
our view, the issue of human rights lies fully within
the mandate of the Security Council, in line with
the Charter of the United Nations. One cannot speak
about peace and security if one omits human rights
and development. Poland remains seriously concerned
about the reports of political violence and persistent
serious human rights violations and abuses in Burundi.
We are particularly worried about the reported cases of
intimidation of members of the opposition, as well as
10/22

21/11/2018

limitations on political space, an independent media,
civil society and non-governmental organizations.
Against that background, we urge the Burundi
authorities to improve good governance, open up the
civic and democratic space and ensure media freedom
ahead of the elections scheduled for 2020. Following
the statement made by Ambassador Lauber, we would
like to appeal to the Government of Burundi to swiftly
conclude the memorandum of understanding with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We also call on the authorities of Burundi
to fully cooperate and to engage constructively with
the independent Commission of Inquiry on Burundi,
established by the Human Rights Council, as well as
with other mechanisms of the Human Rights Council,
such as special rapporteurs.
Thirdly, on the economic and humanitarian
situation, the ongoing political impasse has a negative
impact on the economy and the humanitarian situation.
We welcome the continuation of the process of
voluntary repatriation of refugees under the tripartite
agreement with Tanzania and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. However,
further efforts to create an environment conducive to
the return and reintegration of refugees into society
are necessary. Poland also commends the launching of
the national development plan for Burundi, which can
contribute to the socioeconomic development of the
country. At the same time, we praise the efforts made
by the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission in that regard.
In conclusion, Poland still believes that the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement remains the
main instrument for peace and stability in Burundi
and in the Great Lakes region as a whole. The country
continuously requires the special attention of the
Security Council and the international community.
We therefore encourage the African Union, the East
African Community and, especially, the guarantors of
the Arusha Agreement to remain engaged in supporting
Burundi in order to find a sustainable political solution
ahead of the presidential elections and to overcome the
causes generating instability in that part of the continent.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Michael Kafando for his briefing on the current
political situation in Burundi. We are also grateful
to Ambassador Jürg Lauber for his briefing on the
socioeconomic cooperation between the Government
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

of Burundi and its international partners. We have been
closely following the political developments in Burundi
and we are very much encouraged by the continued
stable security situation in the country.
Following the statement made by President Pierre
Nkurunziza of Burundi on 7 June, we were very hopeful
that the next step would be the relaunching of the
East African Community (EAC)-led Inter-Burundian
dialogue, with the participation of all stakeholders, to
settle the political impasse in the country. We share
the concern raised by the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/1028) about the lack of progress on the
inter-Burundian dialogue, which was expected to be
launched from 24 to 29 October.
As we have repeatedly stated, the political impasse
in Burundi can be addressed only through peaceful,
inclusive and consensual dialogue. Hence, the decision
on the future of the intra-Burundian dialogue, which
has been facilitated by the EAC with the support of
the African Union and the United Nations, on the basis
of the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and the constitution of Burundi, remains
critical in light of the fast-approaching national elections
in Burundi in 2020. In that regard, it is important
that there be engagement between the Government
of Burundi and the international community based
on a realistic strategy aimed at supporting strong
institutions and creating a climate that is conducive
to the conduct of peaceful and credible elections and
the consolidation of recent gains, without backsliding
into the violence of the past. All Burundian parties
need to demonstrate a spirit of compromise in order
to ensure lasting peace and stability beyond 2020.
On the part of the Government of Burundi, it is
important to have an open-minded engagement with the
international community, explaining the plan to create
an environment conducive to the conduct of free and
fair elections in 2020 as well as the commitment to the
spirit of the Arusha Agreement.
The Council should explore new avenues for
re-engagement with Burundi. It is time that the
Secretary-General be fully engaged in cooperation
with the East African Community and the African
Union. In that regard, we take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a thorough discussion in order to
examine the political process so far, learn the lessons
and chart the way forward. We expect that the East
African Community will take the lead on this and come
up with creative yet workable solutions.

S/PV. 8408

Finally, while we welcome and encourage the
work of the Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission in serving as a bridge
for dialogue between Burundi and the international
community, we request the international community
to do more to alleviate the socioeconomic difficulties
and to address the humanitarian situations of the people
of Burundi.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for the quality of
his briefing. We also thank Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland and Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his briefing on the changing
socioeconomic situation in Burundi.
My country welcomes all the efforts made by
the facilitator to guarantee the inclusiveness of the
inter-Burundian political dialogue. However, it
notes with regret the absence of the Government of
Burundi and some political actors at the fifth session
of the talks, which was held from 24 to 29 October in
Arusha, Tanzania. My delegation therefore urges all
stakeholders to retake their place in the political process
and to create the conditions for a permanent return to
stability in the country.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the commitment
of Mr. Yoweri Museveni and Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
mediator and facilitator, respectively, and expresses
its appreciation for their efforts for peace and stability
in Burundi. In that regard, my delegation supports the
facilitator’s proposal to prepare a consensus document
for consideration by the mediator and Heads of State of
the East African Community at the next summit of the
organization, scheduled for 30 November in Kampala,
including the recommendations of the Kayanza and
Entebbe road maps, which were elaborated by the
Government and the opposition.
The humanitarian question and human rights in
Burundi are matters of concern to my delegation,
despite the improvement in the security situation. Côte
d’Ivoire calls on the Government of Burundi to shed
light on the allegations of human rights violations in
Burundi reported by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and by the
Commission of Inquiry on Burundi of the Human Rights
Council. To that end, we encourage Burundi to engage
in a constructive dialogue with the Commission with a

18-3930511/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

view to implementing the recommendations made by it,
and with a view to improving the human rights situation
in the country and to resuming negotiations with the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for the signature
of the memorandum of understanding for cooperation
with the institution.
My country also welcomes the authorizations
granted on 9 November to 25 international
non-governmental organizations and urges them to
speed up the accreditation process to facilitate the
effective resumption of the voluntary repatriation
programme for refugees. It also calls on the international
community and donors to increase their contributions
to the financing of the 2018 humanitarian response
plan in Burundi so as to enable the improvement of
humanitarian assistance to those in need.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the international
community to continue to support the initiatives of the
East African Community and of the mediator and the
facilitator of the inter-Burundian political dialogue in the
coming stages of the process leading to the preparation
of credible and peaceful elections, scheduled for 2020.
Côte d’Ivoire congratulates Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for the work
done in a difficult context and reiterates its support for
all initiatives for peace and stability in Burundi.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Burundi. We also
thank the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber.
We appreciate the efforts made by the Special
Envoy, as set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1028), which reflects the hard work carried out
by Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda, and
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, as mediator and facilitator
of the dialogue process, respectively, between the
Burundian parties. The updated report sheds light on
and contextualizes the current situation of the country
following the constitutional referendum on 17 May,
which enjoyed widespread popular support. We take
note of all the efforts undertaken by the actors involved
in the ongoing political process for the general elections
of 2020 and the appointment of the new members of
the national independent electoral commission. We
encourage the Government and all other stakeholders to
12/22

21/11/2018

continue encouraging dialogue so that the Burundians
may shape their own destiny.
Equatorial Guinea subscribes to the efforts of the
international community in the search for a peaceful
solution to conflicts. For that reason, any action
aimed at the consolidation of peace and the return
to international legality through dialogue will have
our support. That is why we continue to encourage
and support the Government, political parties, civil
society and national actors involved to continue
strengthening dialogue for the peaceful development of
political activities and for the preparation of the 2020
elections so as to ensure their credibility, transparency,
inclusiveness and the full participation of women.
We believe that compliance with the principles
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
included in the new constitution, the recommendations
of the negotiator and the inter-Burundian dialogue
endorsed by the results of the constitutional referendum,
should serve to address the political dialogue and serve
as a guarantee for the satisfactory preparation of the
elections in an atmosphere of peace, harmony and
security that should continue to grow in solidity in the
electoral and post-electoral process.
With regard to the security situation, we note the
continued improvement and commend the progress
observed after the signing of a tripartite agreement
by Burundi, Tanzania and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which has
enabled the voluntary return of refugees mainly from
Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That demonstrates the commitment of the
Government to continuing to work for the protection
and promotion of human rights. In that regard, we
encourage the Government to promote social cohesion
and urge it to fight and take measures against impunity
so that those responsible for crimes and serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law are
held accountable before justice.
Equatorial Guinea has always believed in and
supported the mediation efforts of all international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
the work of national political actors for a negotiated
solution to the conflict and to channel the political
process in Burundi, within democratic principles and
values, which prioritize the country’s sovereignty,
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law as essential elements of the Partnership Agreement
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

between the members of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States, on the one hand, and the
European Community and its member States, on the
other, as well as the foundations set out in the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance,
and the resolution of 4 November 2016 of the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the
situation of human rights in the Republic of Burundi,
in order to facilitate the protection of civilians, curb
impunity and provide guarantees for the exercise of
fundamental freedoms. In that regard, we urge all
Burundian political actors to pursue their efforts to
restore and strengthen the trust that will facilitate a
national dialogue that is frank, inclusive and transparent.
Let me conclude by commending the President
of Burundi’s decision, announced on 7 June, not to
run as a candidate in the 2020 elections, as well as
the initiative taken by the Burundian Government to
finance those elections. Those actions demonstrate
their willingness to strengthen democracy and return
peace, security and stability to the country and the
region, as can also be seen in their contribution of
troops to peacekeeping operations.
We take this opportunity to strongly urge the
international community to continue resolutely
supporting the Government and other parties that are
directly involved in promoting confidence-building
measures to guarantee an environment that is
conducive to the peaceful holding of elections and to its
commitment to the Constitution and the road map to the
peaceful transfer of power in an atmosphere of peace
and national accord.
Lastly, Equatorial Guinea welcomes the launching
of Burundi’s national development plan, which has the
potential to offer new means of participation and, in
view of the recommendations of the Special Envoy in
the report on the socioeconomic situation in Burundi
(S/2018/1028), we believe that a renewed effort to restore
trust between the Government of Burundi, on the one
hand, and the donor community and development
partners, on the other, is crucial to the establishment of
closer ties in the fight against poverty and ignorance,
which provide a breeding ground for instability.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando, and the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding

S/PV. 8408

Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber of Switzerland,
for their insightful briefings. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Burundi, Ambassador
Albert Shingiro, to the Chamber.
As a member observer of the African Union, we
associate ourselves with the statements made by the
African troika — Ethiopia, Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea — whose representatives have already spoken
before us today.
On the political front, we positively note the recent
achievements in Burundi, notably the political forum
held in Kayanza on 3 August and the appointment of
the members of the Independent National Electoral
Commission. The adoption of the 2018 Kayanza
road map is a positive indicator of the constructive
engagement of the Government and other political
stakeholders. We hope that the signed road map
will be followed by collective actions on the part of
all Burundians.
We commend the decision of the His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of Burundi, not
to run for another term in 2020, thereby helping to
ease the political strain. That measure will certainly
assist in sustaining peace, security and democracy in
the country. We encourage the national authorities to
continue their efforts to preserve the constitutional
order in the country and build democratic institutions
in the spirit and letter of the Arusha Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation.
We express concern over the slow progress in the
inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue and urge all political
actors to pursue it further, with meaningful engagement.
That nationally owned process should be held in an
environment of confidence and nationwide consensus,
with the participation of all political stakeholders,
in order to ensure durable peace. Constructive and
inclusive political dialogue is the most important and
only viable means for the peaceful resolution of the
political situation in Burundi. It should be conducted in
an environment of tolerance and restraint.
We further stress the importance of the committed
efforts of the African Union and the East African
Community in facilitating the political process in
Burundi. We encourage regional and subregional
organizations and the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts and contribute to
a political solution, while respecting the sovereignty,

18-3930513/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

political independence, territorial integrity and unity
of Burundi.
We commend the activities of the facilitator, His
Excellency Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, the third
and former President of Tanzania, and the mediator, His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda,
as well as the team of the joint technical working group
in promoting confidence-building measures. We need to
continue to encourage African-led and African-owned
solutions to African problems. We also emphasize the
importance of respecting the fundamental rights and
freedoms of all citizens, and reaffirm the primary
responsibility of the Burundian Government to provide
security to and thereby protect its population.
At the same time, while the security situation is
generally calm in Burundi, the issues of a large number
of internally displaced persons, refugees and people in
need of assistance must be addressed by the international
community. They also need the attention of bilateral
and multilateral partners and financial institutions.
Such collective effort is needed for investments in
development, which must be rigorously undertaken.
There is no security without development and there is
no development without security. We propose utilizing
that nexus as one of the major three elements of the
combined strategy to prevent and address conflicts in
Africa and elsewhere, along with a revamped regional
approach and the One United Nations principle.
We also commend the regional host countries for
their assistance in the repatriation of refugees, which
must be voluntary and in accordance with the principles
of respect and dignity, as enshrined in international
law and human rights law. Close coordination
among the United Nations, the African Union and
other subregional structures can, if effectively
implemented, have a significant impact on political and
humanitarian dimensions.
Finally, we note the committed efforts of the
Government of Burundi to stabilizing the economic
situation in the country, including the adoption of
the national development plan. We need to assist the
nation to overcome existing economic challenges. That
platform may become the basis for confidence-building
between Burundi and its partners. We also acknowledge
the significant role of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
Burundi configuration and the United Nations system
in addressing existing challenges in Burundi, for which
the support of international partners is critical.
14/22

21/11/2018

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Jürg Lauber, for their
valuable briefings, in which they informed us on recent
developments in Burundi.
In my statement today, I shall focus on four issues.
First, on the political situation, the Republic
of Burundi is experiencing outstanding political
developments, including the constitutional referendum
held on 17 May. The situation in the country is relatively
calm and much improved from that of 2015. We hope
that the state of calm will prevail in Burundi, leading
to the holding of presidential elections in 2020, which
we hope will include all categories of the Burundian
people and enjoy the participation of all political
parties. We also hope that the elections will be free,
fair, transparent and credible and ensure the freedom
of expression and the participation of actors from civil
society, including young people and women along, with
regional and international organizations.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the East African Community
(EAC) to reach a peaceful solution to the political
and security situations in the Republic of Burundi.
That would be achieved through a comprehensive
dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, signed on 28 August 2000, and
the country’s Constitution. We also highly appreciate the
efforts led by the President of Uganda, Mr. Museveni,
as facilitator and by Mr. Mkapa as mediator in the
political dialogue.
Undoubtedly, the engagement of the Burundian
Government
with
international
and
regional
organizations, such as the United Nations, the AU, the
European Union (EU) and the EAC, is significant and
fraught with important implications that could lead to
achieving the aspired stability. Such collaboration is
considered to be one of the main factors in reaching a
sustainable solution before the presidential elections in
2020. We are quite confident that the inter-Burundian
dialogue will contribute significantly to facilitating the
political process, while its positive effects will reflect
on the security, economic and living conditions in
the country.
Moreover, Government’s reconciliation efforts, the
promotion of tolerance among all Burundian parties
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

and the call for national reconciliation will have a
positive impact that will undoubtedly contribute to
the resolution of the political crisis in Burundi. That
includes the release of certain political prisoners who
were detained during the violent events in 2015.
Secondly, the security situation in the Republic of
Burundi is improving, despite some continued violent
acts perpetrated by armed groups. We hope that the
security situation will continue to improve and that
the Government will seize on the improved security
situation to intensify national dialogue efforts and bring
all political parties together, while ensuring the holding
of the elections in 2020 in a secure and credible manner
free of violence. We hope that the outcome of the EAC
Heads of the State summit, to be held late this month,
will contribute to strengthening the security situation,
advancing the inter-Burundian dialogue and identifying
a mechanism to facilitate national reconciliation, in
collaboration with regional and international partners.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the Republic
of Burundi, despite having improved since 2017,
including through the reduction of food insecurity, is
still a cause of concern. Almost 1.7 million people are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance, while human
rights violations continue to occur, accompanied by acts
of killing and violence, in violation of the principles
of human rights and international law. We call for an
end to such acts and for the perpetrators to be held to
account and brought to justice as soon as possible.
As for refugee situation following the signature of
the tripartite agreement by Tanzania, Burundi and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, we commend the gradual, voluntary return
of refugees and reiterate the need for the Government
to step up its efforts to ensure the economic and social
reintegration of those who have returned and the return
of the remaining refugees to their homes and regions.
Fourthly, we underscore that socioeconomic
development is a key factor for any Government that
wants to develop and advance its society towards
a bright and secure future. The adoption by the
Government of Burundi on 22 August of the national
development plan for the next 10 years is a step in the
right direction towards genuine cooperation among
factions of the Burundian community to the benefit of
all. We therefore hope that the development plan will
lead to significant progress in the Burundian economy
and contribute to greater stability in the security and

S/PV. 8408

economic situations so that its positive effects will
improve the standard of living of the Burundian people.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings delivered by Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Michel Kafando and Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, on his
recent visit to the country.
Peru underscores the importance of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, and hopes that the Government
will reconsider its position that the dialogue has become
obsolete under the new Constitution and subsequently
decided not to participate in its latest meeting. We
believe that an inclusive process of inclusive dialogue
is indispensable to improving the political situation and
building sustainable peace in Burundi.
In that regard, we stress the importance that the socalled 2018 Kayanza road map, on the organization of
the 2020 general elections, include all political forces
in the country in its drafting and implementation. We
also consider it important to expedite the dialogue
between the Government and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights so that the agency can
resume its activities in Burundi, in a context of ongoing
reports of human rights violations and abuses.
On the other hand, we acknowledge the
Government’s efforts to strengthen the economy of
the country through the national development plan,
with a view to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, thereby addressing the root causes of conflicts
and reaching sustainable peace. We underline the
importance of the international community’s support
for that plan, which seeks to promote development in
Burundi’s rural areas, taking into account governance,
the sustainable management of the environment and
planned land use. In that regard, we highlight the work
of Ambassador Lauber and the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Finally, we believe that it is important for the
Council to monitor developments in the country closely,
and that regional organizations and neighbouring
countries support them more closely in order to ensure
an environment conducive to the holding of credible,
transparent and inclusive elections in 2020.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank our
briefers, Special Envoy Kafando for his update and

18-3930515/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

Ambassador Lauber for updating us on his trip to
Burundi and the region, and for so clearly setting out
his recommendations. I would also like to welcome the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028),
which provides a valuable record of factual information
on the current situation in Burundi, and we look forward
to discussing the set of options that the SecretaryGeneral will present to the Council on the United
Nations continuing role in Burundi.
The United Kingdom agrees with the SecretaryGeneral and so many Council members here today
that the East African Community (EAC)-led
inter-Burundian dialogue, led by the region, is the only
viable option to guarantee open and inclusive elections
in 2020. We also recognize the importance of the
African Union in supporting the EAC efforts in that
regard. We commend the EAC for its engagement so far
and the efforts of the EAC facilitator, former President
Mkapa, and Special Envoy Kafando, despite the many
challenges to progress. There is still a long way to go
before inclusive, fair and credible elections can take
place in 2020, and the credibility of those elections will
be essential for the stability of Burundi. Citizens must
have faith in their political process in order to accept
its results.
For that reason, we share the disappointment of the
representative of Peru and many other speakers here
today that the Government of Burundi did not attend
the fifth round of the inter-Burundian dialogue. Its
participation is crucial to making that process a success.
We therefore encourage the EAC to redouble its efforts
to remain engaged and continue to push for a tangible
inclusive dialogue. A harmonized road map that all
parties can support and which preserves the gains of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement is
crucial. We hope that discussions on how to achieve
that will take place at the summit of the EAC Heads
of State. We also call on the Government and its allied
parties to continue to engage in dialogue with the region
and, in doing so, send a clear signal of its continued
commitment to resolving the ongoing political crisis.
We continue to be deeply concerned by reports
of human rights violations, abuses and related crimes
that have continued since our last briefing in August
(S/PV.8325). The Special Envoy mentioned that issue
during his own briefing. The recent suspension of
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
is of deep concern. Those NGOs support the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable in Burundi, including
16/22

21/11/2018

refugees and those with infectious diseases. The
humanitarian situation will inevitably deteriorate
without those actors, and therefore we hope that the
registration of the NGOs can continue without delay.
I would also like to agree with my Polish colleague
when he spoke about the centrality of human rights
issues to the work of the Council. We heard earlier this
year from Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, former United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, that
human rights violations and abuses can often be the
canary in the coal mine when it comes to predicting a
conflict; therefore, it is very important that, as a Council,
we remain seized of these issues. I also note that many
speakers have noted the role that the Human Rights
Council has to play on Burundi. I would therefore urge
the Government of Burundi to cooperate fully with the
Human Rights Council’s mechanisms, including the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
It is clear from the Secretary-General’s report — and
from wider discussion here today — that Burundi
should remain on the Council’s agenda. Although the
security situation may have improved, armed attacks
continue, and we have deep concerns about the political
crisis and the humanitarian and human rights situation.
As we have seen many times before, those are often
the root causes of conflict and must be addressed by
the Council.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I wish to
thank Special Envoy Kafando and Ambassador Lauber
for their briefings. We deeply appreciate the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
dated 15 November (S/2018/1028), submitted pursuant
to resolution 2303 (2016). We look forward to the next
written report.
The United States is disappointed, as are so
many others, that the Government of Burundi did
not participate in the fifth round of the East African
Community (EAC) inter-Burundi dialogue in
October. Among the reasons cited for its absence, the
Government said that it was unable to attend due to a
period of national mourning to remember fallen national
heroes: Prince Rwagasore and President Ndadaye. For
our part, we can think of no better way to honour their
memory than by seeking to bridge Burundi’s political
divides and putting the country on the path to peace
and sustainable development. In their own way and in
their own time, both of those men attempted to promote
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

mutual understanding, leading to independence, peace
and development and inspiring millions of Burundians,
giving us all hope for Burundi’s future.
We welcome the efforts of the EAC dialogue
facilitator and former President, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
to seek consensus on a road map to elections in 2020.
We encourage the Government of Burundi and the
opposition parties to renew their commitment to the
dialogue in order to reach consensus on such a road
map. In the aftermath of the fifth round of the dialogue,
we also encourage leaders in the region to send a clear
signal of their continued engagement and support for
peaceful, free, fair and credible elections in 2020.
The situation in Burundi has undermined the
significant gains achieved through the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement. We encourage the
Arusha guarantors to reinvigorate their diplomatic
engagement in support of the Agreement. Additionally,
we take note of the Secretary-General’s report reference
to the fact that the United Nations continues to receive
allegations of human rights violations and abuses. We
are particularly disturbed that more than 45 bodies
were discovered throughout the country in the wake of
various attacks, murders and disappearances. We also
remain deeply concerned about restrictions on civic and
political space in Burundi, especially in the media and
through the use of harsh prison sentences to intimidate
human rights defenders. We are worried by reports of
the increasing role of the ruling party’s youth wing, the
Imbonerakure, in committing human rights abuses.
We are deeply concerned by alleged cross-border
attacks by individuals or groups operating between
Burundi and Rwanda. That situation remains volatile
and requires the Council’s attention in the lead-up to
elections. We also remain concerned by constitutional
provisions adopted this year that imposed restrictions
on the opposition, and we call on the Government of
Burundi to respect the rights of opposition members.
At the same time, we encourage opposition political
actors to commit to non-violent participation in the
2020 elections. With that in mind, we once again renew
our call for the Government of Burundi to resume
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Government of
Burundi’s decision to ban three members of the United
Nations commission of inquiry from accessing the
country by deeming them persona non grata represents
another example of a prolonged unwillingness to
cooperate with the United Nations on human rights

S/PV. 8408

issues, despite the extension of the commission’s
mandate by one year.
The United States also remains deeply concerned
by the Government of Burundi’s suspension of all
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
That decision has adversely affected long-standing
initiatives that aim to improve conditions for the
Burundian people, including programmes to prevent
and treat malaria, HIV/AIDS and malnutrition. We
recognize that more than 30 NGOs have had their
suspensions lifted. We urge the Burundian Government
to lift all remaining suspensions to ensure the
continuation of vital services to the Burundian people.
There is significant will in the Council to work
with the Government of Burundi and the region to
address old wounds and to build a brighter future. The
elections represent a clear opportunity for Burundi’s
leaders to reset their relationship with the international
community by engaging in good faith in a political
process that includes all Burundians. We hope that they
will seize it.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
join others in welcoming Ambassador Lauber and
Special Envoy Kafando back to the Security Council
today, as well as thanking them for their useful
briefings. They both have our strong support in their
important endeavours. We also appreciate the solid
and comprehensive update in the written report by the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1028). Let me also recognize
the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Burundi, Ambassador Shingiro.
Since the crisis in 2015, the situation in Burundi
has improved and is now — as was stated by the
Special Envoy — relatively calm. However, reports of
human rights violations and abuses, acts of violence
and intimidation and restrictions of the democratic
space continue. The humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation is dire and deteriorating. Mistrust and
divisions continue to run deep in Burundian society,
but also with neighbours and international partners.
It was therefore deeply disappointing to learn
that, since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8325), the
Government did not participate in the fifth session of the
inter-Burundian dialogue in Arusha. The Government
has chosen to embark upon confrontation with United
Nations human rights mechanisms rather than engage in
dialogue. In addition, there are still no memorandums of
understanding in place for African Union (AU) observers

18-3930517/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

or for resumed cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It was also disappointing to learn that the activities of
international non-governmental organizations were
suddenly — albeit temporarily — suspended. That
trajectory of confrontation must change if we are
to avoid a repetition of the crisis in 2015. Restoring
confidence and trust is urgent and critical, including
in preparations for peaceful and credible elections
in 2020.
As has been stated by others today, an inclusive
political dialogue among all stakeholders remains the
only way towards peace and stability in Burundi. Trustbuilding measures among all parties remain absolutely
key. In that regard, it is important to continue to
build on the progress made within the framework of
the inter-Burundian dialogue, including by ensuring
that women are represented in the dialogue. The
achievements of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement have laid the foundations for peace, security
and stability in Burundi and in the broader Great Lakes
region. They must be safeguarded.
In that regard, continued regional efforts are critical.
We commend the East African Community (EAC)
mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, former President Mkapa, for
their tireless efforts. We now look forward to President
Mkapa’s recommendations on the way forward,
including the envisaged joint road map for elections.
We strongly believe that the EAC-led mediation efforts
must continue, and we look forward to the outcome of
the EAC summit at the end of this month. The AU also
has an important role to play, including by supporting
the EAC, and we welcome the recent visit by the AU to
Bujumbura. We reiterate the need for the memorandum
of understanding to be signed so that the AU observers
can work effectively and meet their objectives.
Continued international attention, support and
engagement is key. The launch of the national development
plan anchored in the Sustainable Development
Goals is welcomed and provides an opportunity for
engagement, as well as for socioeconomic dialogue. In
that regard, the efforts of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, under the stewardship
of Ambassador Lauber, should be actively supported.
The PBC offers a unique platform for engagement and
can help contribute to a common understanding of the
political and socioeconomic situation, as well as the
most urgent peacebuilding needs.
18/22

21/11/2018

An international presence and support in Burundi
is important, including in order to contribute to building
trust. The United Nations country team continues to be
an important partner. The process of completing the
United Nations Development assistance framework
is therefore important. We call on the Government
to cooperate with all United Nations human rights
mechanisms. The presence of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to carry
out objective human rights monitoring and capacitybuilding will be key, and we hope that the memorandum
of understanding can be swiftly concluded. It is
also important to continue the process of allowing
international non-governmental organizations to return
and continue their important humanitarian work.
As the Secretary-General concludes in his report,
the situation in Burundi remains fragile. That has
implications as well for peace and security in the
broader region. It is therefore important that the Security
Council remain constructively engaged. The Council’s
continued support for regional efforts is crucial. We
must together continue to encourage and facilitate
genuine and inclusive national dialogue, ensure respect
for human rights and an end to violence and promote
the opening of political space. Only through progress
on all those fronts can peaceful and credible elections
in 2020 be held, and longer-term stability, peace and
prosperity be achieved.
I would like to direct my concluding remarks to
Ambassador Shingiro. The doors for constructive
partnership with the region and with the broader
international community to assist in Burundi’s national
efforts are open. The East African Community, the
African Union, the United Nations, including the
Peacebuilding Commission, and the European Union
all offer opportunities for constructive international
engagement. Moving forward, international support
will be needed to build trust and overcome the deep
divisions. We therefore strongly encourage Burundi
to make use of all that goodwill and begin a new era
of cooperation.
The President: (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China thanks the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi, Mr. Kafando, and Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

The current situation in Burundi is generally
calm. The Government of Burundi has been actively
promoting the political process to implement the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement and
maintaining domestic peace and stability. Important
progress has been made. A large number of refugees
have returned to their homeland. Over 20 Burundian
political parties have jointly formulated a road map for
the elections to be held in 2020, while the Independent
National Electoral Commission has been established in
accordance with the new Constitution. The momentum
for national reconciliation, social cohesion and political
inclusion is becoming ever stronger.
China welcomes those achievements, which
fully demonstrate that the Government and the
people of Burundi have the full capacity and resolve
to independently settle internal political problems
and maintain their country’s peace and stability.
The international community should fully respect
Burundi’s ownership and leadership in handling its
own affairs and effectively respect the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Burundi. In particular,
with regard to issues relating to the elections and the
political process, the international community should
fully respect the choice of the Government and the
people of Burundi.
China welcomes the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations — including the
African Union, the East African Community, and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region — in providing mediation in the Burundian
political process. We hope that all the relevant regional
actors will continue to enhance their communication
and consultation with the Burundian Government and
provide constructive assistance.
China notes that, during the General Assembly’s
general debate this year, the Foreign Minister of
Burundi stated that the current political and security
situation in the country was completely calm, stable
and under control and that, as such, it had long ceased
to be a threat to international or regional peace and
security (see A/73/PV.14). He also expressed his view
that Burundi should be removed from the agenda of the
Security Council. The Security Council should heed
the voice of Burundi, view the country’s situation in
a comprehensive, just and objective manner and make
the necessary adjustments in a timely fashion and
according to the evolution of situation on the ground,
so as to send a positive message.

S/PV. 8408

At the same time, due to the suspension of
cooperation and assistance by some countries and
organizations, Burundi is faced with challenges in terms
of socioeconomic development and the humanitarian
situation. Development is the guarantee of peace. As
Ambassador Lauber pointed out, peace, stability and
progress in the political process in Burundi cannot be
achieved without socioeconomic development. The
international community should continue to provide
support and assistance to Burundi according to the
country’s needs. We call on the relevant international
organizations and agencies to reinstate their economic
cooperation and development assistance to Burundi as
soon as possible.
China welcomes the formulation of a 10-year
national development by the Burundian government, a
plan that not only shows the blueprint for the country
in the years to come but also provides guidance with
regard to international assistance to Burundi. We
hope that the international community and Burundi’s
international partners will honour their commitments
with timely actions, tailor their assistance to Burundi’s
development plan and prioritize support to areas
such as agriculture, infrastructure, education and
environmental protection.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
the Peacebuilding Commission are important bridges
between Burundi and the international community. We
hope that they will continue to leverage their respective
advantages and enhance their communication and
consultation with the Government of Burundi. As
always, they can count on China’s support going
forward.
The Chinese Government has all along been
supportive of Burundi’s peace process and has provided
assistance to the national reconstruction of Burundi
within the scope of our capacity. In fulfilment of our
commitment made during the Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China Africa Cooperation, China recently
provided ¥300 million in free assistance, as well as
¥50 million in humanitarian food assistance, to the
Burundian Government. China stands ready to continue
to play a constructive role in achieving peace, stability
and sustainable development in Burundi.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

18-3930519/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I take the floor under your
presidency, Mr. President, I would like to extend my
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November.
My delegation would also like to thank all the
members of the Council that have never ceased to
uphold respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations in addressing the situation
in Burundi here in the Council. We are very grateful
for that. We regret the fact that, for three years now,
certain delegations remain unwilling to acknowledge
the progress we have made. We hope that their stance
will change in line with the pace of the situation on
the ground.
I would also like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his constructive
contribution at this meeting, and we renew our full
cooperation with him. I cannot help but thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General. Mr. Michel Kafando,
for his briefing and for the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1028), even though I do not agree with all of its
content — indeed, there is a wide gap between what the
report describes and the real situation on the ground
in Burundi.
The purpose of my briefing is to share with the
members of the Council the new developments since
the previous meeting on the situation in Burundi, held
on 9 August (see S/PV.8325).
At the political level, preparations for the 2020
elections are continuing normally and in a relaxed
and peaceful atmosphere. The Kayanza road map
for peaceful elections in 2020 and the Independent
National Electoral Commission are already in place. As
far as financing is concerned, Burundians themselves
are mobilizing the necessary resources to finance that
major electoral event. The fact that the financing for the
2020 elections is virtually complete serves to highlight
the will of the Burundian people to take full ownership
of the electoral process — their own electoral process.
As for the creation of an environment conducive
to the successful holding of the 2020 elections,
everything will be done to guarantee that the elections
are democratic, credible, inclusive and peaceful, which
will in turn ensure the political and economic stability
of our country. Since the beginning of 2018, the
20/22

21/11/2018

Government of Burundi has made a number of concrete
gestures of goodwill towards the general easing of
tensions in the country. The announcement by the Head
of State to not stand for re-election in 2020 — even
though he has the right to do so — is a commendable
gesture of high political and democratic value. The
release at the beginning of the year of more than 2,000
prisoners, including the insurgents of 2015, is also part
of the ongoing momentum of reconciliation, social
cohesion and political tolerance in the country. Both
a moral virtue and a political principle, tolerance is
also a conduit for peace that we must foster, maintain,
strengthen and perpetuate in Burundi.
With regard to the inter-Burundian dialogue
towards democratic, transparent, inclusive and peaceful
elections in 2020, my delegation would like to recall that
using dialogue as a tool for achieving consensus-based
solutions to problems is a culture that is woven into
the daily lives of Burundians. Last month, facilitator
Benjamin William Mkapa concluded the last round
of the East African Community-led inter-Burundian
dialogue, which took place in Arusha. We are very
grateful to him for the efforts he made for the past
nearly three years to support Burundi in its peace- and
democracy-building process. I would like to take this
opportunity to remind the Council, for all intents and
purposes, that the key mandate of the Special Envoy
was to support the dialogue process, which was just
concluded on 29 October.
Our projections indicate that, by and large, the year
2019 will focus on planning for the 2020 elections and
on implementing Burundi’s national development plan.
In the spirit of national ownership, which is the guiding
principle of peacebuilding, political consultations
towards the holding of free, transparent and inclusive
elections in 2020 will continue in Burundi in an open
and constructive manner that gives a voice to all of
the stakeholders involved. In that regard, Burundi
encourages the political actors still in exile who were
not involved in the failed coup of 13 May 2015 to return
to participate in the 2020 elections and contribute to the
ongoing efforts towards socioeconomic development
in the country. There is no doubt whatsoever that the
successful outcome of the 2020 electoral process will
mark a new and glorious chapter in the history of our
country and turn the dark page on 2015 once and for all.
On the security front, as the Council is aware,
the situation in Burundi is calm, stable and fully
under control. That is the truth — I am not spreading
18-39305

21/11/2018

The situation in Burundi

propaganda. By and large, all the subregional and
regional organizations whose high-level delegations
recently visited Burundi to inquire about the real
situation in the country found that things had returned
to normal. The 2015 crisis is over. It is behind us,
even though there are challenges with regard to
socioeconomic development that still need to be
addressed. Some partners that are still hesitant should
have the courage to accept the return to normal, turn
the page on 2015 and look to the country’s future from
a vision- and approach-based perspective.
With regard to the freedom of expression, my
delegation would like to inform the Council that Burundi
has a very rich tradition of freedom of expression and
a very active civil society. That is reflected by the
more than 20 local public and private radio stations,
five community radio stations, 10 radio-television
broadcasters, 17 local news and communication
agencies, 24 public and private newspapers, 26 websites,
eight web television channels, four magazines and 12
professional press associations and bodies that operate
in our country. In addition to our local private radio
stations, four foreign radio stations are also authorized
to broadcast freely in our country. Even the number of
people employed in the media sector increased to 122
in 2018, as compared to 94 in 2015, for a substantial
increase of 28 media sector workers in three years. To
the delegations that were asking questions concerning
the freedom of expression, we hope that this paragraph
gave them their answers.
With regard to civil society, the Government
has already approved more than 6,500 non-profit
organizations, more than 100 of which have been
approved since January 2016 alone. I would also remind
the Council that 15 non-profit organizations that had
been under investigation since the failed coup d’état
of 13 May 2015 were allowed to reopen. The approval
in accordance with national law of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) is continuing at a reasonable
pace. Thirty-eight NGOs have already been approved
and are operating as I speak. Several other foreign
NGOs that have seen their agendas grow significantly
are expected to resume their activities shortly.
As for the return of refugees, since 2016 about
250,000 refugees have returned home. That figure
includes the 55,495 refugees who have returned to
the country since the August 2017 Burundi-TanzaniaOffice of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) tripartite agreement. The voluntary

S/PV. 8408

return of refugees, who are coming home mainly from
Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, is at a pace of more than 1,000 people
returning per week. Nevertheless, my delegation would
also like to reiterate its legitimate request to UNHCR
and Burundi’s friends in the region to intervene in
certain host countries — we all know very well which
ones they are — that are holding hostage our fellow
compatriots in exile by creating artificial barriers to
prevent their voluntary return home; and, above all
to ensure that refugee camps maintain their civilian
character in accordance with the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees. UNHCR must ensure
that refugee camps are not forcibly transformed into
military or paramilitary training camps.
With regard to protecting human rights, the
Government of Burundi attaches great importance to
human rights issues. We have adopted a zero-tolerance
policy with regard to human rights violations and we
are currently working to implement it. We adhere with
conviction to the principles of objectivity, universality,
non-selectivity and the non-politicization of human
rights. We recognize that isolated cases of human rights
violations can occur, just as they can in other countries.
For those reasons, in addition to its independent
national commission on human rights, the Government
has set up judicial commissions of inquiry to shed light
on certain human rights violations alleged to have
occurred since the beginning of the insurgency in 2015.
Nevertheless, the Council will agree with me that
promoting human rights is a long and arduous process
that is sometimes fraught with difficulties. It is an ideal
that we all strive to achieve. No nation has perfected
it, even after more than a century of democracy. For
Burundi, a democracy that is barely 13 years old,
there is still a long way to go, but the willingness to
succeed is there and it is tangible. The Independent
National Human Rights Commission is operational and
contributes enormously to improving the human rights
situation in our country.
With regard to the socioeconomic situation, the
Government of Burundi has just adopted a national
development plan for 2018-2027. The national plan is
a reference document that sets out the main directions
to lead us towards the sustainable development
that we wish to see by the year 2030. In view of the
challenges presented by that new development plan,
the Government of Burundi launches a fervent appeal
to all bilateral and multilateral partners to support our

18-3930521/22

S/PV.8408

The situation in Burundi

country in implementing the national development
plan in a spirit of mutually beneficial and, above all,
respectful cooperation.
With respect to cooperation on the three pillars of
United Nations work, the human rights pillar remains
the weak element in the good cooperation. Burundi
believes that the discordant and tense relations between
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Geneva and Burundi are
counterproductive for both parties. Disproportionate
pressure based on politically biased reports has never
contributed to the promotion of human rights anywhere
in the world. For us, dialogue and mutually respectful
cooperation are the only appropriate way to find
solutions to issues that require coordinated responses
between Geneva and Bujumbura. It is a two-way road,
where each user must strive to avoid head-on collisions
by respecting, of course, the code of conduct, which in
this particular case is the Charter of the United Nations.
Concerning the development pillar, Burundi
appreciates the work of the United Nations country
team, which continues to support the country in its
socioeconomic development efforts. The United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for the period from
2019 to 2023 was developed and adopted by mutual
agreement of the Government and the United Nations
country team in Bujumbura. Today, the UNDAF is now
the main tool for strategic integration and for the United
Nations response to our national priorities. That United
Nations presence to address development is very useful
to Burundi. However, any presence of a political nature
is inappropriate. Determining the political future of
Burundi is exclusively a national matter.
With regard to the peace and security pillar,
Burundi is proud to actively and successfully participate
alongside other countries in United Nations and

22/22

21/11/2018

African Union peacekeeping missions. More than 6,000
Burundian men and women are deployed in various
peacekeeping operations, mainly in the Central African
Republic and Somalia. The excellent work of our brave
soldiers in peace missions, who have willingly chosen
to sacrifice their lives to save those of others far from
their native land and in particularly hostile conditions,
must be duly appreciated.
I cannot conclude my remarks without once again
reiterating our appeal to the Security Council to have
the courage to remove Burundi from its agenda. The
current political and security situation in the country
is calm and stable. It is far from posing a threat to
international peace and security, which is the Council’s
area of competence. To justify keeping Burundi on the
Council’s agenda because of the holding of elections in
2020 would mean including on the agenda more than 20
other countries that will have elections in the same year
as Burundi. The elections therefore are not grounds to
justify the Council remaining seized of the situation in
Burundi.
The convening of inappropriate meetings on
Burundi on the basis of an obsolete resolution that no
longer fits the reality on the ground could become a
destabilizing factor for the country. Most Member
States, some of which are members of the Council,
disregard the real reasons behind the disproportionate
hounding of Burundi, a country whose return to
normalcy is well established. History will remember
that my country was kept on the Council’s agenda
unfairly in order to satisfy foreign interests. As I clearly
said on 9 August in the Chamber (see S/PV.8325), the
valuable time that the Security Council generously
devotes to Burundi should be allocated to other areas of
tension and conflict, which are rife in other countries.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

18-39305
