S/PV.8564

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8564th meeting

Wednesday, 26 June 2019, 9.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 13 June 2019 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/488)
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/492)
Letter dated 21 June 2019 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/514)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-19419 (E)
*1919419*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8564

The meeting was called to order at 9.45 a.m.

Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent
Representative of Belgium, in his capacity as Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

Letter dated 13 June 2019 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/488)
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2019/492)
Letter dated 21 June 2019 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/514)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. João
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2019/488, which contains
the text of a letter dated 13 June 2019 from the Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2019/492, which contains the seventh
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015); and
S/2019/514, which contains the text of a letter dated
21 June 2019 from the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; His Excellency
2/25

26/06/2019

Ms. DiCarlo: The Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear issue, endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), is
the result of 12 years of intense diplomatic efforts and
technical negotiations. The Secretary-General regards
the plan and the resolution as hard-won achievements of
successful multilateralism, nuclear non-proliferation,
dialogue and diplomacy. He welcomes the latest report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which
states that Iran continues to implement its nuclearrelated commitments.
At the same time, the Secretary-General is
concerned about recent developments. He regrets
that the United States recently decided not to extend
waivers with regard to the trade in oil with Iran and not
to fully renew waivers for non-proliferation projects
in the framework of the JCPOA. Those actions may
impede the ability of Iran and other Member States to
implement certain provisions of the Plan.
The Secretary-General also regrets Iran’s
announcement on 8 May that it would not commit itself
to respecting the JCPOA limits on its enriched uranium
stockpile and heavy water reserves at the current stage,
and that it would further suspend compliance with the
uranium enrichment limits and measures to modernize
the Arak heavy-water reactor should other participants
not fulfil Iran’s demands, especially in the areas of
banking and oil, within 60 days. He further regrets the
subsequent announcement on 17 June that Iran may
surpass on 27 June the limit on its enriched uranium
stockpile set under the JCPOA. Such actions are not
in the interest of the participants of the Plan and may
not help preserve it. The Secretary-General encourages
Iran to continue to implement all its nuclear-related
commitments despite the considerable challenges
it faces.
The Secretary-General welcomes the initiatives
of the other participants, which should be given full
effect as a matter of priority. It is essential that the Plan
continue to work for all its participants, including by
delivering tangible economic benefits to the Iranian
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8564

people. Member States and other relevant actors should
also work effectively with JCPOA participants towards
the preservation of the Plan. At the same time, the
Secretary-General encourages Iran to carefully consider
and address the concerns expressed by Member States
about its activities in relation to the restricted measures
contained in annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).

France, Germany, Iran, Israel, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom and the United States. Those
Member States conveyed their views on Iran’s test-firing
of a medium-range ballistic missile on 1 December
2018, flight tests of additional ballistic missiles from
December 2018 to February 2019 and launches of
space-launch vehicles in January and February.

Recent events in the Gulf are a reminder that we
are at a critical juncture. The Secretary-General calls
on Member States to avoid actions that may result in
a further deterioration of the current situation. He
urges all parties to engage in dialogue and diplomacy
to address their differences, exercise maximum
restraint and de-escalate current tensions to avoid the
risk of miscalculation and accidents. In that regard,
the Security Council has an important role to play. As
stated by the Secretary-General in his briefing to the
Council on 13 June,

The information provided reflects divergent
views among those Member States as to whether those
launches are inconsistent with annex B, paragraph 3,
which calls on Iran not to undertake any activity related
to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of delivering
nuclear weapons, including launches using such ballistic
missile technology. In addition, the report reflects our
analysis of subcomponents retrieved from ballistic
missiles launched at the territory of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia by the Houthis from March to June
2018. We ascertained that those subcomponents were
produced from 2000 to 2010 and that some were sold as
recently as 2012. In our assessment, those productionand sale-date ranges are incompatible with the Scud
missiles known to be in Yemeni stockpiles prior to the
outbreak of the current conflict in early 2015.

“If there is one thing the world cannot afford,
it is a major confrontation in the Gulf region.”
(S/PV.8548, p.3 )
Let me now turn to the seventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2019/492). As guided by the Security
Council and consistent with our previous reports, the
one before the Council today is focused on annex B to
the resolution.
First, with regard to the implementation of the
nuclear-related provisions, we have not received new
reports on the supply, sale or transfer of items to Iran
contrary to annex B, paragraph 2. The procurement
channel established for the transfer of nuclear-related
items to Iran remains an important mechanism for
transparency, and all States and the private sector are
encouraged to fully utilize and support it.
In that connection, the Secretary-General noted
the 3 May announcement by the United States that
involvement in certain activities set forth in annex
B, paragraph 2, may now be exposed to its national
sanctions. He points out that the exemption provisions
in paragraph 2 allow for the transfer of such items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology required
for the nuclear activities of Iran under the JCPOA,
subject to the relevant notification requirements.
Secondly, with regard to the ballistic missile-related
provisions, the report reflects information provided
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council by

Thirdly, in terms of arms-related provisions, the
report reflects information regarding individuals found
guilty in the United Kingdom of exporting combat
aircraft parts from the United States to Iran through
companies located in various countries. The Secretariat
also examined a number of additional arms and
related materiel recovered in Yemen. Those included
a second surface-to-air missile, wings for a new type
of unmanned aerial vehicle and a new unmanned
surface vessel with explosives. On the basis of design
characteristics, markings and types and manufacturers
of specific subcomponents, the Secretariat is confident
that those arms and related materiel, or parts thereof,
are of Iranian manufacture. However, the Secretariat
has no indications as to whether those items were
transferred from Iran after 16 January 2016.
Furthermore, the Secretariat examined samples of a
shipment of small arms and light weapons seized by the
United Arab Emirates in Aden in December 2018 and
observed that part of the items had characteristics of
Iranian manufacture. The Secretariat is still analysing
the available information on that shipment and intends
to report back to the Council accordingly.
The report also noted a televised speech of the
political leader of Hamas, Yahya Sinwar, and a statement

19-194193/25

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8564

by the Al-Quds Brigades spokesperson, Abu Hamza, in
May that pointed to ongoing Iranian military support
to Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Gaza. Any
Iranian arms transfers after 16 January 2016 would have
been undertaken contrary to the provisions of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). The report also highlights the
continued participation of Iranian entities in foreign
arms defence exhibitions.
Fourthly, the report provides additional information
on previous and new travel allegedly undertaken by
the Commander of the Al-Quds Force of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard, Major General Qasem Soleimani.
It also reflects information received by the Secretariat
on an individual and several entities on the 2231 list
that may have violated the assets freeze or travel-ban
measures. To facilitate the implementation of those
measures, the Secretary-General recommends that the
information related to individuals and entities on the
2231 list be updated by the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Marc Pecsteen
de Buytswerve in his role as Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and to
assure him once again of our full support. I would
also like to thank the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission for our
continued cooperation.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Vale de Almeida.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: . I am honoured to address
the Security Council today on behalf of the High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica
Mogherini, in her capacity as Coordinator of the Joint
Commission established by the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA).
First of all, I extend my warm thanks to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Pecsteen de
Buytswerve for the great collaboration on these files
over the past few months. Additionally, I would like
to convey my sincere gratitude to the colleagues in
the Secretariat for their dedication and support, in
particular in relation to the procurement channel and
their work to prepare the latest report of the Secretary4/25

26/06/2019

General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2019/492).
We are just a couple of weeks away from 14 July,
when it will be four years since the historic conclusion
of the JCPOA in Vienna by the Foreign Ministers of
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, China, Russia,
the United States and Iran, as well as the EU High
Representative. At this particular challenging moment,
it is important to remind ourselves of the achievements
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. It rolled back
Iran’s nuclear programme, blocked access to plutonium
and highly-enriched uranium and established the most
robust verification mechanism by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
The JCPOA is a key element of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture and was endorsed
unanimously by the Council through the adoption of
resolution 2231 (2015). It is the only tool available to
provide the international community with the necessary
assurances on Iran’s nuclear programme.
That is why the European Union is resolutely
committed to the JCPOA. That is why we continue to
support it and why we are determined to work with the
international community to preserve it. The European
Union has been consistent in its commitment to the
continued full and effective implementation of the
agreement, as long as Iran abides by its commitments.
That has been repeated in numerous statements and
in our most recent European Union Foreign Affairs
Council conclusions in February.
The JCPOA has been delivering on its nuclear
goal of providing the international community with
the necessary reassurances on the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. As confirmed by
15 consecutive reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, Iran has continued to implement its
nuclear-related commitments, and it must continue to
do so.
With reference to the Chair’s statement after the
6 March Joint Commission meeting, the remaining
participants of the JCPOA recognize that, both
the implementation by Iran of its nuclear-related
commitments and the lifting of sanctions to allow for the
normalization of trade and economic relations with Iran
constitute essential parts of the JCPOA. In that regard,
the European Union and all its 28 member States deeply
regret the withdrawal of the United States from the
agreement. The subsequent reimposition by the United
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

States of unilateral sanctions and its decisions to not
extend waivers with regard to trade in oil and to not fully
renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects are
having a significant impact on Iran’s economy.
As she recalled in her statement on 4 May, the High
Representative — together with the Foreign Ministers of
France, Germany and the United Kingdom — remains
committed to contributing to provide tangible results
and economic dividends to the Iranian people. The
operationalization of the Instrument in Support of
Trade Exchanges, a special-purpose vehicle conducive
to effective financial channels, is moving ahead and
will enable legitimate trade with Iran, consistent with
international and European laws and regulations.
At the same time, the European Union notes with
great concern the various announcements made by
Iran on 8 May regarding its commitments under the
JCPOA. As stressed in the joint statement by High
Representative Federica Mogherini and the Foreign
Ministers of France, Germany and the United Kingdom
on 9 May, the EU remains committed to the JCPOA. It
does not accept any ultimatums and will assess Iran’s
compliance on the basis of that country’s performance
regarding its nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
A number of projects are being implemented in
support of annex III of the JCPOA on civil nuclear
cooperation, particularly in the field of nuclear safety
and regulatory support. Annex III helps us get a better
understanding of Iran’s nuclear needs and gradually
build confidence in Iran’s programme. It also plays a
significant role for Iran, as it balances the limitations of
the nuclear programme with civil nuclear development
and longer-term engagement.
Established under annex IV of the JCPOA, the
procurement channel remains a unique non-proliferation,
transparency and confidence-building instrument. It is
a key mechanism for preventing the misuse of nuclear
or dual-use items and to ensure that exports of such
items are consistent with the JCPOA. We recognize
the challenges brought about by the United States
withdrawal from the JCPOA and the reimposition of
sanctions. The procurement channel, however, remains
a Security Council mechanism, and the decision on a
proposal for transfer is endorsed by all 15 members.
In the seventh report of the Joint Commission to
the Security Council on the status of the Procurement

S/PV. 8564

Working Group’s decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2019/488), submitted to the Facilitator
on 13 June and subsequently circulated as a Council
document, the remaining participants stated their
commitment to continuing to review proposals in an
impartial and independent manner. In that context, it
is a positive signal that the channel keeps receiving
proposals, albeit at a decreased pace. Forty-four
proposals have been submitted to date.
A substantial amount of outreach has been
conducted during the past few years, and countries
around the world are aware of the procedures of the
channel. Our outreach efforts will continue, together
with colleagues from the Security Council secretariat
and the Facilitator. We expect that all Council members
will continue to support the preservation of the channel,
in line with resolution 2231 (2015).
While
the
JCPOA
addresses
nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a series of events outside
the nuclear domain are increasingly worrying. The
European Union consistently calls for reducing tension
and regional military build-up by all actors. The
European Union has repeatedly urged Iran to refrain
from activities that could deepen mistrust, such as
ballistic missiles tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).
The European Union is a strong promoter of
multilateral diplomacy and continues to advocate for
dialogue and constructive engagement. Thanks to
the JCPOA, the EU has been able to hold discussions
with Iran on regional issues. Five EU-led discussions
with France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom
have already taken place, with a focus on exchanging
views with Iran on regional stability. It is thanks to the
JCPOA that this dialogue, as well as other channels of
communications between the EU and Iran, has been set
up and provides useful platforms for discussions.
Today, we may be at a critical juncture regarding
the future of the JCPOA. Yet, it should be recalled that
the JCPOA is a nuclear agreement that has been working
and delivering on its goals. There is also no credible,
peaceful alternative to it. The European Union , together
with other partners of the international community, will
continue to work relentlessly to preserve the JCPOA as
long as Iran abides by its commitments.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Vale
de Almeida for his briefing.

19-194195/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

I now give the floor to Ambassador Pecsteen
de Buytswerve.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I am
speaking here in my capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). That resolution, adopted in July 2015, endorses
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
which entered into force in January 2016.
The Plan of Action is the result of the diplomatic
efforts of China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom, the United States, the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and it represents a comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
As the Secretary-General recalls in his report
(S/2019/492), the Plan of Action is a major achievement
in nuclear non-proliferation and in dialogue and
diplomacy. It is a cornerstone of multilateralism,
peace and international security. Since its entry into
force to this day, it has guaranteed the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. It
is therefore an honour for me to have taken on the role
of Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) in January. In carrying out this task, I have been
able to rely, first of all, on the excellent work done by
my colleague of the Netherlands, my predecessor as
Facilitator, as well as on the unwavering support of the
Secretariat. To them, I offer my thanks.
During this mandate, my ambition is to support
and improve the implementation of the resolution on
behalf of the Security Council by following the three
guidelines inherited from my predecessor: facilitation of
dialogue between the parties, transparency in our work
and support for trade through the procurement channel.
That is not an easy task: the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action currently faces many challenges. I will come
back to that point.
I now turn to the seventh report of the Facilitator
(see S/2019/514), which was approved by all members
of the Security Council after a comments period and
a no-objection procedure. The report informs the
Council about the activities carried out and the status of
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) between
12 December 2018 and 15 June 2019, in conjunction
with the reports of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
and the Joint Commission (see S/2019/488). As the
text is rather technical in nature, I will not review all
6/25

26/06/2019

the elements that make it up. My report is at Council
members’ disposal for reference and full information.
However, allow me to mention the following three points.
First, I would like to recall the two meetings of the
Council in the 2231 format during the reporting period.
On 3 April 2019, the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission came to
make a presentation on the procurement channel. On
24 June, the Security Council discussed the findings
and recommendations contained in the seventh report
of the Secretary-General, prior to its public release.
Secondly, in my role as Facilitator, I also held
several bilateral consultations with Member States and
their representatives, including the Islamic Republic of
Iran, to discuss issues related to the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Thirdly, there are also references in my report to
the two reports issued by the International Atomic
Energy Agency during the reporting period, in
February and May 2019. In its most recent report,
the Agency certifies, for the fifteenth time, that Iran
is in compliance with its nuclear commitments under
the Plan of Action. I wish to underline the central
role — impartial, factual and professional — played by
the Agency in the implementation of the Plan.
Let us be realistic: the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action is at a crossroads, and my role as an
honest broker is not to look away from that reality but,
rather to identify, with full impartiality, the points of
disagreement so that the parties can find an agreed
solution. The various letters circulated within the 2231
format reflect the state of deliberations among the
parties. The communications are listed and summarized
in my report, including the responses received from the
Permanent Mission of Iran. The points of disagreement
with respect to the restrictive measures set out in annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015) stand out upon examination.
First, with regard to Iran’s activities related to
missiles and space launchers, as referred to in the report
of the Secretary-General, I note the various letters sent
by several Member States describing those activities
as inconsistent with annex B and Iran’s counterarguments based on a different reading of paragraph
3 of that annex. The differences in the interpretation
of paragraph 3 constitute a major and recurring point
of contention. Other letters focused on possible Iranian
arms transfers in the region, which are another source
of disagreement.
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

The exchange of correspondence also included the
latest developments with respect to compliance with
the entire Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
resolution 2231 (2015). I note the concerns expressed
following the strengthening of the economic sanctions
imposed by the United States since its withdrawal
from the Plan, and, more recently, the end of some
exemptions for non-proliferation nuclear projects,
which affects compliance with resolution 2231
(2015). I also note concerns expressed on the recent
announcements by Iran on its non-compliance with
some of its commitments. Lastly, I take note of the
concern expressed by some Member States, as well as
by the Joint Commission in its report, on the impact
of the sanctions reimposed by the United States on the
work of the Procurement Working Group of the Joint
Commission. The procurement channel is definitely at
the heart of the Plan of Action mechanism: it ensures
that the transfers approved through it comply with the
provisions of the resolution.
In conclusion, I join with the other bodies
responsible for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), the Secretary-General and the Joint Commission
in strongly regretting the deterioration of the current
context, which affects compliance with resolution 2231
(2015) and the Plan of Action. Questions of international
peace and security require collective responses, which
is the raison d’être of the Security Council. The Plan
of Action and resolution 2231 (2015) constitute one
of those responses and enjoy very broad support
within the international community. Therefore, while
referring to paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015), I
call on all Member States, regional organizations
and international organizations to take such actions
as may be appropriate to support the implementation
of the JCPOA, including by refraining from actions
that undermine the implementation of commitments
under JCPOA.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
this morning.
The United Kingdom welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s seventh report on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/492). We extend our
thanks to the Secretariat staff for their continued

S/PV. 8564

professionalism and the support they provide to the
Secretary-General in producing a thorough and wellevidenced report.
When I last addressed the Security Council in
this format in December (see S/PV.8418), I explained
that the policy of the United Kingdom towards Iran
was motivated by three objectives. The first, and
most critical, of those objectives was to uphold the
global non-proliferation regime and prevent Iran from
achieving a nuclear capability that would threaten
the Middle East and Europe beyond it. The United
Kingdom participated in negotiations on, and we remain
committed to, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). We believe that is the best way to prevent
the emergence of a nuclear-armed Iran. The JCPOA
is an essential part of the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is critical for our national security and
for the shared security of our partners and allies.
We therefore once again express our regret at the
United States decision to leave the JCPOA, reimpose
sanctions on Iran and not fully renew waivers for
nuclear non-proliferation projects in the framework
of the Plan. Those actions are contrary to the goals
set out in the Plan and in resolution 2231 (2015). We
continue to work hard to operationalize the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges (INSTEX) to ensure
that legitimate business with Iran can continue. We
have also participated in core projects within the deal,
including taking on a co-chairing role on the Arak
modernization project.
As long as Iran remains in full compliance, the
United Kingdom will do everything it can to support
the deal. We are working extremely hard on INSTEX
with our E3 partners, France and Germany.
We welcome the latest International Atomic
Energy Agency reports of February (see S/2019/212)
and May (see S/2019/496) and the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/492), which confirm that Iran continues
to uphold its commitments under the JCPOA, as we
heard from our briefers this morning. But we are deeply
concerned that this meeting is taking place just as Iran
is threatening to cease performing its commitments
under the JCPOA by exceeding its low-enriched
uranium stockpile limit. If Iran does go over these
limits, the non-proliferation benefits of the deal will be
eroded. I therefore urge Iran not to undertake activity
that will go beyond the limits specified in the JCPOA
and to continue to implement its commitments in full.

19-194197/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

The second United Kingdom objective, as I shared
with the Council in December, was the necessity to
constrain Iran’s actions, which threaten the stability
of the region. I made clear that while resolution 2231
(2015) was an endorsement of the JCPOA, it was
understood by all in the Council at the time of adoption
that it was designed not just to address nuclear issues,
but to continue to impose binding restrictions to curb
Iran’s ballistic-missile and proliferation activity, which,
as I said earlier, threaten the region and beyond.
As we also heard this morning, Iran continues to
conduct ballistic-missile activity that is inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015). Iran has denied that these
activities are inconsistent with the resolution because
it claims it does not intend to put a nuclear weapon on
those missiles. As the Secretary-General’s report notes,
the United Kingdom, France and Germany have set out
clearly in letters to the Council how these missiles are
designed to be capable of delivering a nuclear payload.
To be clear, “designed to be capable” means having the
capabilities by virtue of technical design. The stated
intent is irrelevant.
As our letters set out, we use Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR) Category 1 to make our
assessment of nuclear deliverability. The technical
specifications under MTCR Category 1 constitute
the only widely internationally accepted definition
of nuclear deliverability. In addition to the 35 States
participating in the MTCR, these criteria have also been
widely adopted among non-MTCR Governments with
respect to implementing obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). These are therefore the most objective
criteria available to assess consistency with resolution
2231 (2015).
Just to quote from the criteria: in the context of
resolution 2231, and consistent with the MTCR criteria,
“designed to be capable of delivering a nuclear weapon”
means capable of carrying a payload of 500 kilograms
or more over a range of 300 kilometres or more.
Iran has also transferred missiles to a number
of armed groups, in violation of several Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2231 (2015),
2216 (2015) and 1540 (2004). The latest report of the
Secretary-General contains concerning information
regarding the firing of a surface-to-surface missile
in January from the area of Damascus towards the
Golan Heights and the transfer of technical know-how
for unmanned aerial vehicle production to Iraq, in
8/25

26/06/2019

violation of arms-transfer restrictions. It also mentions
the attack on Abha airport on 12 June, although the type
of projectile used in the attack has yet to be determined.
The United Kingdom considers the transfer of such
weapons to be in contravention of Security Council
resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2216 (2015). There is
firm international consensus that such proliferation of
missile technology to non-State actors is destabilizing
for the region and escalates already high tensions. We
call for these activities to stop.
The actions are part of a pattern of Iranian
behaviour that poses a serious danger to peace and
stability in the region. On Monday, I told the Council in
closed consultations that following our own assessment
of a range of evidence, the United Kingdom had
concluded that it was almost certain that the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps carried out attacks on two
tankers on 13 June. We are also confident that Iran bore
responsibility for the 12 May attack on four oil tankers
near the port of Fujairah.
There can be no justification for attacks on
maritime traffic that contravene international rules on
freedom of navigation and maritime transport and that
further threaten peace and security in the region. The
current tensions and instability serve no one. As the
Secretary-General has made clear, the world cannot
afford a conflict in this region. Therefore, I want once
again to call for de-escalation, for dialogue and for full
respect for international rules.
The final objective I set out in December was
the hope that Iran could normalize its economic and
diplomatic relations with the region and beyond and
assume its rightful role as a prosperous, responsible
Power constructively engaged. We still believe that this
is possible.
The United Kingdom will continue to play its full
part alongside international partners to find diplomatic
solutions to reduce the current tensions and to uphold
the landmark JCPOA nuclear agreement. I urge Iran to
join us and do the same.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I should like to begin by thanking Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her seventh semi-annual report and the
Secretary-General for his report on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/492). Let me also
congratulate our colleague Ambassador Marc Pecsteen
de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of Belgium,
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

in his capacity as Facilitator, for his outstanding work
thus far to promote the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). It is also my pleasure to welcome Ambassador
João Vale de Almeida, Head of the European Union
delegation and Coordinator of the Joint Commission.
Four years after its conclusion and its endorsement
by the Security Council through resolution 2231 (2015),
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
the aim of which was to address the concerns of the
international community regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme, is more than ever at a critical juncture.
Indeed, the concerns regarding the viability of the
agreement are being stoked by a series of adverse events
as we prepare to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
The unilateral withdrawal of one of the key actors
and the mounting tensions in the Persian Gulf are
undermining the foundations of the agreement, which
was secured after many long years of multilateral
negotiations. Despite the oft-reaffirmed commitment of
the other parties, the combination of the aforementioned
negative factors is undermining the Iranian nuclear
agreement. Like any other human endeavour, it is
imperfect; however, it remains an inclusive framework
designed to temper the military nuclear ambitions of
the Iranian side.
For that reason, Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that we
must pool our efforts to prevent the undermining of the
consensus around the JCPOA and therefore, despite the
stumbling blocks, maintain the level of international
mobilization and support for the agreement, which, in
our view, is fully in keeping with multinational efforts
to tackle nuclear proliferation.
Côte d’Ivoire fervently hopes that responses to the
potential shortcomings of the JCPOA will be crafted
within the framework of the Joint Commission, as
provided for in annex IV, so as to devise dynamic,
consensus-based solutions, taking account of the
observations and concerns expressed by all parties. My
country holds the deep conviction that a multilateral
approach is the only way to dispel, through frank and
proactive dialogue, mutual distrust and come up with
mutually acceptable solutions.
My country holds the view that keeping the Iranian
nuclear agreement alive is contingent on the commitment
of the signatory parties and a de-escalation of current
tensions, which have the potential to spark an armed

S/PV. 8564

conflict with potentially disastrous consequences
for the Middle East in particular and for the world
in general.
Given our strong commitment to the peaceful
resolution of disputes through dialogue, my delegation
would like to urge the parties concerned to exercise
restraint and to refrain from any hostile action that
would undermine international peace and security. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore condemns the recent attacks on oil
tankers in the Strait of Hormuz and the threats that they
pose to the security of international trade. We call for
an impartial investigation to identify the perpetrators
and bring them before the relevant judicial bodies.
My country encourages the Iranian authorities to
uphold their commitments under the JCPOA and to
continue to cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). In that regard, we note that
the fifteenth report of the IAEA on the verification
of Iran’s nuclear-related commitments (S/2019/496,
annex), circulated on 14 June, concludes that Iran is in
compliance with its commitments under the JCPOA,
in particular with regard to its enriched uranium
quota. That is why Côte d’Ivoire sincerely hopes that
the Iranian authorities will renounce any decision to
withdraw from the agreement.
The history of international relations teaches us
that the greatest tragedies experienced by humanity
often stem from the inability of nations to engage
in constructive dialogue, which is essential to the
reconciliation of partisan interests so that peace
prevails in the world.
At a time when belligerent rhetoric is increasing
and becoming more radical, with the prospect of an
armed conflict looming in the Gulf region, Côte d’Ivoire
would like to join the urgent calls for the establishment
of a robust dialogue between the parties in order to
protect humanity from the ravages of a major conflict,
which we can do without.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ambassador Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Pecsteen de
Buytswerve, Ambassador of Belgium, in his capacity
as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) for their very enlightening briefings. I also wish
to commend the professionalism and commitment of

19-194199/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

26/06/2019

the Secretariat, which has produced a high-quality,
very detailed and balanced report (S/2019/492).

nuclear proliferation and would further destabilize
the region.

The challenges that bring us together within the
Council are more numerous and more serious than
ever and our responsibilities are immense with regard
to both non-proliferation issues and all regional issues
with which we have to deal. In that context, our
responsibility is to be fully engaged in preventing and
resolving crises. From 2003, at the initiative of the E3
and with the support of the Council, that collective
commitment and engagement made it possible to chart
the way for negotiations with Iran, which led to the
adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) in 2015. The agreement was formalized by
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), which was
supported by the five permanent members of the
Council, reflecting their unity and our collective unity
on non-proliferation issues, which are at the heart of
our security. France remains firmly committed to
the preservation of that framework and will actively
continue its efforts to implement its obligations under
the JCPOA, with its partners in the European Union, as
long as Iran respects its nuclear commitments.

As France has said in the Chamber on many
occasions, the preservation and full implementation of
the agreement must go hand in hand with compliance
with all the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015),
which endorses it. Everyone knows that the collective
commitments made in 2015 do not end with the JCPOA
framework. In that regard, I would like to express
France’s concern over the various elements identified
by the Secretary-General in his report concerning
Iran’s continued non-compliance with several of the
provisions, in particular with regard to its ballistic
activities and the transfer of various arms to other
actors in the Middle East. Iran is conducting highly
destabilizing missile activities, whether it be its efforts
to develop a ballistic missile programme, contrary
to resolution 2231 (2015), or transfers to State and
non-State actors in the Middle East, which place Iran in
breach of several resolutions of the Council, including
resolution 2231 (2015). It is therefore essential that
Iran cease such activities and fully comply with the
resolutions adopted by the Council.

The JCPOA, which put an end to a serious nuclear
proliferation crisis, is a cornerstone for the stability of
the entire Middle East and an essential non-proliferation
instrument. As we witness a worrying increase in
tensions in the region, everyone must refrain from
statements and measures that could weaken the JCPOA
and precipitate an escalation. The withdrawal of the
United States from the agreement last year, followed by
the American sanctions, started a very worrying period
of uncertainty. France, in conjunction with its partners
and in line with the Secretary-General, has clearly
expressed its regret and concern about the decisions of
the United States.

Allow me to make an urgent appeal for pragmatism
and clear thinking. Given the risk of escalation caused
by the incidents in the Gulf of Oman, it is crucial that all
the actors concerned exercise the utmost restraint and
prioritize the path of dialogue and peaceful settlement,
thereby urgently contributing to regional de-escalation.
France encourages and supports all mediation efforts
between the parties. Ways must be found towards
pacification through the efforts of all the actors
involved. The crisis should also be an opportunity to
pursue regional stabilization and security mechanisms.

In that context, recent Iranian announcements
with regard to non-compliance with the provisions
of the JCPOA, which the Secretary-General has also
regretted, are extremely worrying. I would like to
reiterate my country’s position on that point: it is
imperative that Iran continue to fully and rigorously
implement its nuclear obligations. Apart from the
announcements, Tehran must refrain from any measure
that would constitute a violation of its commitments.
The JCPOA is the outcome of a fragile balance. Any
suspension, even partial, of Iran’s commitments would
have negative repercussions in terms of the threat of
10/25

The collapse of the JCPOA would represent a
dangerous step backwards, bringing uncertainty and
potentially far-reaching consequences for the region,
the non-proliferation regime and our collective security.
We must all work to prevent such a scenario, the price
of which we would all pay, and to preserve the nuclear
agreement. I call on everyone around this table to rally
behind that goal.
As members know, France advocates a
comprehensive approach, supported by the European
Union, which seeks to ensure the preservation of the
JCPOA while also addressing the long-term framework
of the Iranian nuclear programme and Iran’s conduct in
the ballistic sphere and in regional conflicts.
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

Given the worrying developments under way, I
would like to conclude by calling, on behalf of France,
for all stakeholders to exercise restraint, disengage
their autopilot and shoulder their responsibility through
respect and dialogue in order to find common ground
and achieve de-escalation. Let us not sleepwalk into a
military confrontation but be actors in an exclusively
political solution. The Council may rest assured of
France’s resolute commitment to that end.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank all our
briefers this morning for their insightful presentations.
Germany welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/492) on the ongoing implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). It is a key
contribution to monitoring compliance with resolution
2231 (2015), and we consider its current scope and
methodology fully appropriate. We also welcome the
update on the activities of the procurement channel and
remain fully committed to the procurement channel
process. It is important to recall that resolution 2231
(2015) endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA strengthens the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is an
important contribution to the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is an important asset to security in the
region and beyond.
This is a key moment for the JCPOA and for the
efforts of the international community to preserve it.
Along with our European partners, Germany remains
fully committed to the JCPOA and its implementation,
provided Iran stays in full compliance with its
JCPOA commitments. Germany deeply regrets the
unilateral decision of the United States to leave the
JCPOA, reimpose United Nations sanctions on Iran,
cease extending the waivers with regard to the trade
in oil with Iran and discontinue the full renewal of
waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects. The
non-proliferation waivers are crucial to ensuring the
JCPOA’s non-proliferation function and are key to our
shared security.
We are deeply concerned about Iran’s
announcement that it will not commit to respecting the
limits of enriched-uranium and heavy-water reserves.
We urgently appeal to Iran to fully respect its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA and to refrain
from any steps that would result in a breach of those
commitments. On that basis, Germany will continue to
work together with the remaining JCPOA participants

S/PV. 8564

to ensure that Iran can receive economic benefits
from sanctions relief. In that context, the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges (INSTEX) is part of
European efforts to preserve and safeguard the JCPOA,
and as we heard this morning, INSTEX will soon be
operational. The full and effective implementation of
the provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015) in
all their aspects is also of key importance to regional
and international stability. We encourage all States to
continue taking appropriate steps to ensure that they
are respected and complied with.
Germany agrees with the Secretary-General
that issues not directly related to the nuclear deal
should be addressed without prejudice to preserving
the agreement. Those issues can be most effectively
addressed while the nuclear deal remains in place.
Regarding Iran’s transfer of arms, including missile
technology, to non-State actors in the region, and
considering Iran’s ongoing transfers and ballisticmissile activities, the findings of the Secretary-General
are cause for deep and serious concern. Those activities
have a destabilizing effect in the region and also
negatively affect all European security interests.
Germany is concerned about the possibility of
Iran continuing to advance the scope and precision of
its ballistic-missile arsenal. We consider that Iran’s
programme for developing ballistic missiles continues
to be inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), and we accordingly call on Iran
not to conduct any further ballistic-missile launches
or related activities inconsistent with resolution 2231
(2015), and to refrain from unacceptable rhetoric
accompanying those activities.
We note with concern the indications in the
Secretary-General’s report of Iran’s transfer of ballisticmissile technology to the Houthis in Yemen and of
possible transfers to Palestinian factions in the Gaza
Strip. Such transfers would constitute violations of
resolution 2231 (2015) and transfers to the Houthis, in
particular, may also constitute a violation of resolution
2216 (2015). In that context, we also want to recall
that resolution 1540 (2004) forbids the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery
to any non-State actor. Furthermore, the transfer of
arms and missile technology to the Houthis endangers
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
in Yemen. Beyond that, the proliferation of missile
technology to increasing numbers of non-State actors
in the Middle East is a deeply worrying development.

19-1941911/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

If not stopped, it will have the effect of exacerbating
current and future armed conflicts in the region.
Germany therefore strongly urges Iran to refrain
from any transfers of ballistic missiles or missile
technology, as well as the transfer of any other arms or
related material from Iran, and to fully respect annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015). We have taken note of
the Secretary-General’s suggestion in his report that
updated and more detailed entries would facilitate the
implementation of the annex B restrictive measures
of resolution 2231 (2015). Germany stands ready to
support efforts to provide factual updates and clarifying
specifications to the list of entries as needed.
Before concluding, I would like to say once again
that Germany remains fully committed to the JCPOA
and to the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
We call on all States, and Iran in particular, to make
greater efforts to build trust with its neighbours and
play a more constructive role in the region. All of us,
including the Council, must focus on de-escalation
and dialogue, and we call on all actors to remain levelheaded and work to prevent any actions that could lead
to a military escalation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/492) on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) and Mr. João Vale de Almeida
for his briefing. We note the work of the Permanent
Representative of Belgium as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of the resolution’s
provisions. We share the Secretary-General’s position
on the withdrawal of the United States from the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
the reimposition of unilateral sanctions against Iran,
which are contrary to the aims of both the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015), and undermine Iran’s ability to
comply with their provisions. We want to remind the
Council once again that the JCPOA and the Council’s
unanimous adoption on 20 July 2015 of resolution
2231 (2015) constitute a historic achievement of global
diplomacy and multilateralism in general. They have
proved that even the most acute problems and crises
can be overcome by political means if the will to do so
is there.
Iran is conscientiously fulfilling its obligations
under the agreements in the framework of the JCPOA.
Numerous reports of the Director General of the
12/25

26/06/2019

International Atomic Energy Agency attest to that.
In that sense, the JCPOA has become an extremely
important instrument for ensuring the international
non-proliferation regime, and Iran is one of the most
verified countries in the world. Currently, the only
way to preserve the JCPOA is for all its remaining
States parties to fulfil their voluntary commitments in
good faith. In this context, we note that the SecretaryGeneral’s report clearly testifies to Iran’s strict
observance of all its nuclear-related commitments,
albeit in the face of considerable challenges.
In every international forum we have repeatedly
condemned irresponsible attempts to torpedo
agreements and expressed the hope that matters of global
security and stability will no longer be held hostage to
the domestic political intrigues of individual States.
Unfortunately our appeals have been ignored and the
unique potential of the JCPOA has been jeopardized.
Having unilaterally withdrawn from the JCPOA and
undermined its agreements, which are fundamental to
regional and global security, the United States is now
trying to shift the blame onto everyone else. Not only is
it refusing to implement resolution 2231 (2015), which
it endorsed, it is also trying to inflict worse punishment
on every other Member State for implementing Security
Council decisions. And from Iran, on the other hand, it
is demanding that Iran absolutely and unquestioningly
fulfil all obligations. However, there are many similar
examples of doublethink in the steps taken by the
American Administration. It proclaims that no one is
planning regime change in Iran while simultaneously
threatening obliteration and new sanctions. It calls
for dialogue and at the same time publicly declares its
intention to increase its military presence in the region.
Such signals, which are beyond the skill of even an
experienced cryptologist to decode, can only bring the
situation to a point of no return.
The only practical step that can be taken to save
the JCPOA is the remaining parties’ implementation
of their obligations under the agreement. We must
abandon fear and selfish motives and prioritize the tasks
of maintaining the viability of the JCPOA. We believe
that constantly raising the stakes and one-upping each
other about who cares most about the agreement will
only result in extreme attitudes. The forces that believe
that the only way to resolve any international issue is
with political pressure, economic strangulation and
blackmail through military might must not be allowed
to gain the upper hand.
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

Since the very moment that the JCPOA was
concluded, its effectiveness has been defined by the
unity and political will of all its participants and their
joint focus on the end result. It means that today we
must also work together to create the conditions that
will enable us to confidently resolve the challenges
facing those who remain committed to the JCPOA. We
are in favour of preserving the JCPOA, and we want
Iran to remain committed to it. But we understand
Tehran’s deep disappointment with the situation that
has developed, whereby its full compliance with its
obligations is demanded with nothing proposed in
exchange, which was why the deal was made in the
first place. On top of that, this is going on against the
backdrop of Washington’s efforts to strangle Iran with
economic sanctions, not to mention military threats. All
of the parties to the JCPOA must make genuine rather
than token efforts to ensure that Iran understands what
it is implementing its obligations under the JCPOA for.
That is a legitimate demand from Tehran.
We are sorry to see that the report suffers from a
chronic lack of evidence in the parts concerning Iran’s
missile programme, supposed arms shipments out of
Iran as well as various alleged violations that Tehran
has permitted of the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015)
on assets freezes and travel bans on individuals. The
problem of amateur inspections by representatives of
the Secretariat who do not have the necessary skills or
mandate to conduct them persists. The language about
confidence in the Iranian origin of various missiles and
other weapons that representatives of the Secretariat
were allowed to study ultimately proves nothing. The
problem is compounded by the reservations about issues
that the Secretariat is not in a position to confirm, to
the effect that Iran sent the aforementioned missiles or
the wings of some military drones overseas after the
JCPOA had entered into force. Which leads one to ask
why, if the Secretariat cannot confirm or produce the
necessary expertise to show that there was a violation
of resolution 2231 (2015), does it constantly include
these subjects in its reports?
We can see that the situation in the Persian Gulf is
being artificially ramped up and is jeopardizing peace
and security in the region, as well as international
efforts to resolve the conflicts there. We are not
convinced by the so-called proofs presented of Iran’s
guilt. In general, the impression we get is that a casus
belli is being conjured up. The loud rhetoric about
Iran’s ties to Al-Qaida and the attacks on tankers,

S/PV. 8564

which should be of less interest to Iran than anyone,
are increasingly reminiscent of the events of March
2003, when arguments were fabricated to justify an
invasion of Iraq. We all know what the consequences
of that were.
We believe that there is an alternative to those
provocative actions. We have to strengthen the general
atmosphere of trust in the region. We would like to point
out that in resolution 598 (1987), the Security Council
instructed the Secretary-General to work together with
the States of the region on measures to enhance its
security and stability. That work is now needed more
than ever. Russia is ready to support that by working
in contact with our regional partners and all interested
parties. The ultimate aim must be to form a genuinely
inclusive security architecture that encompasses every
State in the region. Our concept for strengthening
security in the Persian Gulf under international
guarantees remains relevant, and its implementation
could begin with the holding of a conference with the
participation of the States of the subregion with a view
to eventually including other States in the Middle East.
Needless to say, we support the Secretary-General’s
call for taking every possible step that could lead to
de-escalation.
In conclusion, I would particularly like to emphasize
that the Russian Federation remains committed to the
unconditional implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. We support the Secretary-General’s call
in his report for refraining from provocative statements
and actions that could have a negative impact on regional
stability. We will continue to strive for dialogue aimed
at finding compromises and a balance of interests. That
is the only way. Only coordinated collective efforts can
bring the current situation back under control.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to begin
by thanking the briefers for their detailed and insightful
presentations. My delegation joins others in welcoming
the seventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
I want to reaffirm South Africa’s commitment to its
full implementation.
South Africa welcomed the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as the greatest diplomatic
achievement in the area of nuclear non-proliferation
since the signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty in 1996. The JCPOA is a milestone deal,

19-1941913/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

reached on 14 July 2015 after 12 years of intense
diplomatic efforts and complex negotiations by China,
France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom, the United States and the European Union
with the Islamic Republic of Iran. In that regard, my
delegation fully supports the Secretary-General’s
view, expressed in paragraph 2 of his report, that such
“diplomatic efforts and hard-won achievements must be
preserved and built upon”.
South Africa welcomes the fact that Iran has
complied with all its nuclear-related commitments as
confirmed by the fifteenth report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, submitted to the Council on
31 May. It continues to be crucial for Iran to continue
to comply with the provisions of the JCPOA. It is
important that all the remaining parties to the JCPOA
fully implement and comply with the provisions of
the agreement.
South Africa deeply regrets the decision by
the United States to withdraw from the JCPOA.
Furthermore, we share the disappointment expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report regarding the
decision of the United States not to renew waivers for
nuclear non-proliferation projects in the framework of
the JCPOA. It is our view that the decision by the United
States will affect Iran’s ability to fully implement the
provisions of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
It is important to recall that the lifting of sanctions,
especially on certain nuclear-related materials, was
part and parcel of the JCPOA.
While we commend the benefits of the JCPOA as
an essential instrument of nuclear non-proliferation,
we want to stress that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only guarantee that they will never again
be used by anyone under any circumstances. South
Africa would like to remind the Council that nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually
reinforcing processes. The lack of progress on nuclear
disarmament will inadvertently affect the gains made
on nuclear non-proliferation. South Africa underlines
the importance of respecting the inalienable right of
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
South Africa is a staunch supporter of nuclearweapon-free zones as one of the major contributors to
nuclear non-proliferation and critical building blocks
towards the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
14/25

26/06/2019

In that regard, we want to highlight the urgent need
for the establishment of a zone in the Middle East
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction. South Africa welcomed General Assembly
decision 73/546 of November 2018, mandating the
convening of a conference to establish such a zone, to
be held in November 2019. We call on all countries of
the region to actively participate in good faith to ensure
that the conference is indeed a success. South Africa
wishes to reiterate the fact that the 1995 resolution
on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the NPT, as
well as other agreements made during subsequent
Review Conferences, remain valid until they are fully
implemented by all of us.
Finally, regarding the broader security of the
region, South Africa joins others in expressing its
concern about the growing tensions in the Persian Gulf
and its impact on international peace and security.
South Africa urges all parties involved to exercise the
utmost restraint and not to allow the situation to get out
of hand. The Council must support initiatives aimed at
the restoration of peace and stability, not only in the
Persian Gulf but also in the broader Middle East region.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings given by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ambassador João Pedro
Vale de Almeida. We also thank Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his valuable briefing as
well as for his work as Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Peru attaches high priority to compliance with and
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), by which
the Council endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme.
We are of the view that the Plan, and the subsequent
verification and monitoring regime, reveals the value of
multilateralism and diplomacy in peacefully resolving
international disputes and in maintaining international
peace and security, and in that regard must be preserved.
We are paying close attention to the implementation of
the Plan, both within the scope of the Security Council
and that of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors. In that respect, we take
note of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/492), and
we wish to emphasize that, as verified by the IAEA, the
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

Islamic Republic of Iran has been complying with all
the provisions of the Plan.
However, like the Secretary-General, we regret
the withdrawal of the United States from the Plan
and the taking of other actions that may impede the
ability of the parties to implement certain provisions
of the JCPOA and of resolution 2231 (2015). In the
face of the decision of other parties to the JCPOA
to maintain their commitment to the Plan and their
support for the verification work of the IAEA, we
regret the announcement made on 8 May by Iran that it
would not commit to respecting the limits on enriched
uranium and heavy water reserves at the current stage
if the other parties to the agreement failed to meet its
demands within 60 days.
On the other hand, we stress the need for strict
compliance with all the restrictive measures set out
in annex B to the resolution, which include transfers
related to nuclear energy, ballistic missiles and
weapons to or from Iran, as well as provisions on the
freezing of assets and travel bans. Specifically, and
in line with annex B, paragraph 3, to resolution 2231
(2015), we urge the Iranian authorities not to undertake
any activity related to ballistic missiles designed to
launch nuclear weapons, including launches using
such ballistic missile technology. We consider it of the
utmost importance that the Iranian authorities conduct
themselves with prudence and moderation, bearing in
mind that the development of their ballistic missile
programme may be perceived as a provocation and/
or an arms race, capable of increasing tensions in a
particularly unstable region. We support the work that
the procurement channel has been developing as a vital
transparency and confidence-building mechanism that
ensures that transfers are consistent with the provisions
and objectives of the Plan and resolution 2231 (2015).
We underscore how important it is that the Council
remain united in its duty to guarantee full respect for
the JCPOA and the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), with a view to guaranteeing the validity of the
non-proliferation regime and maintaining international
peace and security.
Finally, given the delicate situation that has arisen
in the Persian Gulf, we join others in calling all parties
to exercise caution, de-escalate tensions and resolve
differences through dialogue.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today’s briefers — Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-

S/PV. 8564

Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Ambassador João Vale de Almeida — for
their respective, very informative briefings. Allow me
also to thank Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
for his work as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). Poland supports the procurement
channel and the Procurement Working Group, as well
as the coordinating role of the European Union.
Poland welcomes the seventh report of the
Secretary General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (S/2019/492). Similar to
previous reports, it is a thorough and balanced
document. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), which constitutes an integral part of the
resolution, is an important achievement of multilateral
diplomacy, a key element of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture.
We welcome the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s efforts to strictly monitor and verify the
commitments of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
order to guarantee the peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme, in line with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the JCPOA.
We note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency has reported that Iran is effectively
implementing its nuclear-related commitments under
the Plan and the fact that the Agency itself continues
to verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities in Iran. However, in that context, we are
extremely concerned about Iran’s announcement that
it will not commit itself to respecting the limits on
enriched uranium and heavy water reserves and that
it will furthermore suspend compliance with uranium
enrichment limits and measures to modernize the Arak
heavy water reactor. We share the Secretary-General’s
view that such an ultimatum is counterproductive and
may not help preserve the Plan or the interests of the
Iranian people. It will be difficult for the international
community to defend the JCPOA after Iran ceases to
fully implement it.
We call on Iran to refrain from actions that could
undermine further implementation of both the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015), which is even more
important now, as it refers not only to the activities
under the scope of annex B. We urge Iran to uphold
its commitment never to seek, develop or acquire any
nuclear weapons and to continue to apply the additional

19-1941915/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

protocol to its Safeguards Agreement and formally
ratify the protocol in the near future.
The restrictive measures described in annex B
constitute an integral part of resolution 2231 (2015) and
need to be implemented thoroughly. We believe that
more needs to be done by all regional actors to find
lasting, peaceful solutions to regional conflicts, given
the fact that the high level of confrontation across the
region can have extremely dangerous repercussions not
only in the region, but elsewhere as well. In that regard,
we note Iran’s engagement in the provision of military,
financial and political support to non-State actors across
the region. Bearing in mind Iran’s important role in the
region, we encourage Iranian authorities to cooperate
closely and constructively with the international
community in efforts aimed at de-escalating the current
tensions in the Middle East.
Iran’s ballistic missile activity, especially as related
to long-range missiles, goes far beyond its defence
purposes. Ballistic missile launches are inconsistent
with the provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004), 2216
(2015) and 2231 (2015). Together with other members
of the European Union, we underline that tensions
and distrust in the Middle East should not be further
exacerbated. We call on Iran to play a constructive role
in that regard and avoid unhelpful rhetoric.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador
Vale de Almeida of the European Union delegation
and Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium,
in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
briefings to the Council on the implementation of the
resolution 2231 (2015). We also thank Ms. DiCarlo and
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve for presenting the reports
(S/2019/492 and S/2019/514).
I think that everyone would agree that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a historic
achievement in multilateralism, or, in the words of
the Secretary-General, a hard-won achievement of
successful multilateralism, nuclear non-proliferation,
dialogue and diplomacy. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, we continue to support the full implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2105) as a whole.
We commend Iran’s compliance, which to date has
been verified by 15 reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope that Iran will
16/25

26/06/2019

continue to comply with the JCPOA and cooperate
with the IAEA in the performance of its verification
mandate. We of course deeply regret the withdrawal of
the United States from the JCPOA, which continues to
present difficulties with regard to its implementation.
On the one hand, we understand that challenge; on the
other, we are also concerned about Iran’s intention to
reduce its JCPOA commitment. It is in the interests of
all parties to preserve the JCPOA. Therefore, we would
like to urge all parties to refrain from taking actions
to the detriment of the implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) as a whole. We further urge
all JCPOA participants to live up to their commitments
to preserve the JCPOA by faithfully fulfilling their
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015).
Secondly, we strongly urge all parties to continue
engaging in constructive dialogue to resolve differences
that arise from the interpretation and implementation of
the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Implementing
sanctions, in particular unilateral ones, is essentially
not the way forward sought by the international
community. In the same vein, we ask Iran to consider
relevant concerns when carrying out its activities in
order to sustain stability in the region.
Thirdly, we should keep other issues not directly
related to the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015)
separate. We need to be very cautious in addressing the
issue of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015), as its
implications might go beyond the issue of the Iranian
nuclear programme. Their delicate balance needs to
be preserved. It is also our collective obligation to
ensure that the proper consideration of the JCPOA
issue contributes to improving the overall situation in
the region. We acknowledge that, to some extent, the
situation in the region influences the implementation of
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). In that regard, we
urge all parties to exercise restraint and refrain from
taking actions that could exacerbate the situation. It
is pertinent for us to create stability and a conducive
environment for the full and effective implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). That
responsibility does not exclusively fall upon the
JCPOA participants or Council members, but the entire
international community.
Let me conclude by reiterating our main objective
of ensuring the peaceful use of nuclear energy by Iran
and protecting the legitimate interests of Iran. Within
a broader scope, our objective is to maintain peace and
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

stability and uphold the rule of law in order to enjoy a
safe and prosperous world for all.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Vale de
Almeida and Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve of
Belgium, in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.
I commend the parties concerned for their
work. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) — a multilateral agreement endorsed by the
Security Council — has the effect of international law.
It is an important achievement of multilateralism and is
of crucial importance for safeguarding the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and maintaining peace
and stability in the Middle East. The implementation of
the JCPOA is currently at a critical stage. The parties
concerned must bear in mind the overarching and longterm goal, remain committed to resolutely upholding
and implementing resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA
and fulfilling their responsibilities and obligations.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has
verified on 15 consecutive occasions Iran’s compliance
with its nuclear-related commitments and the JCPOA.
The coordination between the Council and the
procurement channel has been going well. China
appreciates Iran’s efforts to implement resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA and hopes that Iran will continue
to implement it. China hopes that other parties will
effectively honour their commitments, respect Iran’s
legitimate requests and take positive measures to
maintain the balance of rights and obligations under
the JCPOA. China regrets the United States withdrawal
from the JCPOA and its unilateral sanctions on Iran.
We call on the parties concerned to properly address
the difficulties related to maintaining normal economic
and trade ties with Iran.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
is an integral part in implementing resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral calls on all parties to jointly preserve the
JCPOA, safeguard free and lawful trade with Iran,
support the procurement channel and maintain regional
stability. China views that positively. Given that, China
believes that the report should provide an objective,
balanced and complete picture of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and fully accommodate the
legitimate concerns of Iran.

S/PV. 8564

The Secretariat should fulfil its functions strictly as
mandated. In the current circumstances, all parties must
address with caution Iran’s missile and space-launch
issue and accurately interpret the relevant Security
Council resolutions to prevent an impact on the larger
picture, namely, the implementation of the JCPOA.
China has noted that, on many occasions, Iran
has indicated that its missile programme is of a
conventional and self-defensive nature. We encourage
Iran to engage in dialogue on an equal footing with the
parties concerned so as to jointly maintain regional
peace and stability.
China appreciates the efforts of the Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and his
team. We have taken note of the most recent report of
the Joint Commission to the Security Council on the
status of the Procurement Working Group’s decisions
and on any implementation issues (see S/2019/488).
China will continue its active participation in the Joint
Commission and the Procurement Working Group.
Recently, the situation in the Middle East has
escalated, which is worrisome. China calls on the parties
concerned to remain calm and exercise restraint, resolve
disputes through dialogue and consultations and refrain
from any action that might escalate tensions. Ensuring
the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA is
not only a requirement in resolution 2231 (2015), but
also a realistic and effective way to defuse tensions in
the Middle East and resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.
We hope that the parties concerned will take concrete
measures to preserve and implement the JCPOA, in the
best interests of the international community.
China has always favoured political and diplomatic
means to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. We are
committed to consolidating the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and safeguarding international
and regional peace and stability. China has recently
engaged in close coordination and cooperation with
the parties and facilitated major new progress in the
modernization of the Arak heavy-water reactor. China
will continue to work in an objective, impartial and
responsible manner. We will work tirelessly, alongside
the international community, to uphold and implement
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation warmly thanks Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. João Vale de Almeida,

19-1941917/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

Ambassador of the European Union to the United
Nations; and Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve,
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Belgium, in his capacity
as Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), for their comprehensive and
detailed briefings.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the contribution of the balanced and comprehensive
seventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
which characterized an intense diplomatic effort
on the part of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and culminated in the agreement called the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The
resolution, adopted unanimously by the Council on
14 July 2015, was the result of the persistent efforts
of the international community. It is an important
achievement in the sphere of non-proliferation and
remains a vital element in the global architecture of
multilateral diplomacy.
We continue to commend the rigour, professionalism
and impartiality of the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), an autonomous organization
mandated to verify, monitor and lend unwavering
support for the full implementation of the JCPOA and
provide confirmation to the international community of
its effective supervision of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
in the light of resolution 2231 (2015). In fact, in several
reports submitted to the Council from January 2016 to
date, the Agency confirms that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has been fulfilling its nuclear energy commitments
under the JCPOA. We welcome the Agency’s
confirmation that Iran also continues to comply with
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement.
On the other hand, we continue to note with concern
the impact of the withdrawal of the United States from
the JCPOA on 8 May 2018, its subsequent decisions
and their consequences. We nevertheless appeal to
the Islamic Republic of Iran to continue fulfilling its
obligations under the JCPOA.
It should be noted, however, that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action represents only a
fraction of resolution 2231 (2015). Several of the
provisions set forth in its annex B — which sets out
restrictions applicable to nuclear-related transfers,
ballistic missile-related transfers and arms-related
transfers to or from the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well
18/25

26/06/2019

as assets freeze and travel ban provisions — continue to
raise concerns for some Member States, especially with
regard to alleged violations of the travel ban by listed
individuals, in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015).
In that connection, we call on the relevant institutions
with the appropriate mandate to update that list in
the proper forums, thoroughly and comprehensively
analyse any information that may or may not corroborate
those concerns and inform the Security Council of
their findings in due course, and we urge the Islamic
Republic of Iran to duly reflect upon the concerns of
annex B.
The current climate, characterized by a spirit of
greater tension, clashes in the Middle East and the
recent announcement by the Iranian side that it will
soon surpass the established allowable limit of enriched
uranium under the nuclear agreement signed in 2015, is
quite alarming and of concern to my Government. We
therefore encourage regional and international actors
to mobilize to safeguard the JCPOA, a fundamental
tool for regional and international peace and security.
Therefore, through dialogue and diplomacy, we appeal
to the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
reconsider this new position.
Finally, pursuant to my country’s foreign policy
goals and ideals of peace and stability, we reaffirm our
commitment to preventive diplomacy, non-interference
and respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States. We therefore encourage
all parties involved to continue to work effectively
with the participants in the JCPOA, to promote unity
and create the necessary conditions for safeguarding
the agreement.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the Permanent
Representative of Belgium and the Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations
for their briefings.
The seventh report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/492) reflects the same tone of concern and
increasing alarm of many Member States over the past
several weeks. The report comes as Iran continues to
destabilize the Middle East, not only through support
to terrorist groups and proxy forces but now through
attacks on commercial shipping. The findings and
information presented in the Secretary-General’s report
add to the deeply troubling picture of Iran’s behaviour.
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

The report details the Secretariat’s inspection of
arms and related material, recovered in Yemen, that
were clearly manufactured in Iran, including a new
type of unmanned aerial vehicle and a new unmanned
surface vessel. The inspection negates the repeated
excuse that that weaponry was in Yemen’s arsenal prior
to the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015). It clearly
was not.
Groups supported by Iran still openly talk of the
military assistance they continue to receive from Tehran,
in violation of the United Nations arms embargo. The
report cites a televised speech by Hamas leader Yahya
Sinwar and an Al-Quds Brigades spokesperson in May,
each of whom spoke of Iran’s military shipments to
Hamas and to Palestinian Islamic Jihad in the Gaza
Strip. Pursuant to the arms embargo in resolution 2231
(2015), all Member States must take the necessary
measures to prevent arms transfers from Iran unless
they are approved by the Security Council.
Coordinating Iran’s military support efforts is Major
General Qasem Soleimani, Commander of the Al-Quds
Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, whom
the report notes continues to travel freely in the Middle
East despite the travel ban provisions of resolution 2231
(2015). That is not the first time the Secretary-General
has reported to the Security Council on the Major
General’s travel. The report notes that other designated
Iranian officials are also travelling in violation of the
travel ban. The fact that those violations continue for
years on end is evidence of lax implementation of the
restrictive measures outlined in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015).
Meanwhile, we see concrete examples of how Iran
is destabilizing the region by threatening international
shipping and air space, prolonging the violence in
Yemen and supporting the expansion of terrorist groups
and proxies throughout the Middle East. These data
points lead us to the conclusion that Iran continues
to send weapons across the Middle East, in blatant
violation of the Council’s resolutions.
On 8 May, Iran announced that it would take steps to
cease performing certain core nuclear commitments — a
step that most agree threatens to undermine peace and
security in the region and beyond. As a first such step,
Iran said it plans to expand its stockpile of low-enriched
uranium beyond 300 kilogrammes by 27 June. It also
said that, if its conditions are not met, Iran will also
start enriching uranium to higher levels in a return to

S/PV. 8564

a nuclear-reactor project at Arak that was well suited
to producing plutonium. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has already reported that Iran
has installed additional advanced centrifuges and is
operating them in numbers that violate its agreed limits
on such mechanical testing.
Iran is taking these steps even as it refuses to
acknowledge that it hid and preserved a secret nuclearweapons archive from the world. Had Israel not
removed that archive from Iran, it could have been a
source from which Iranian scientists could have drawn
should the regime decide to reinitiate its previous
nuclear-weapons programme. Iran’s actions are deeply
counterproductive and will increase it Iran’s isolation.
Notably, resolution 2231 (2015) provides a mechanism
for the Council to address significant non-performance
by Iran of its nuclear commitments.
Iran’s defiance of the Security Council and its
reckless behaviour threatening peace and security
globally must not be downplayed in the name of
preserving a deal that does not fully cut off Iran’s
path to a nuclear weapon. Iranian provocations
have been relentless and its excuses for every
provocation — from launches using ballistic missiles
technology to procurement of prohibited items, to
support for the Houthi, to flagrant violations of the
arms embargo — strain credulity. Responsibility for
Iran’s economic woes belongs to Tehran, whether
through gross economic mismanagement, corruption
or the redirection of its money for militaristic purposes
around the region. Iran’s own behaviour has caused its
economic decline.
The false narrative that the United States is to
blame for Iran’s economic woes strays beyond the
bounds of annex B’s intention in resolution 2231 (2015).
References in the report to other Governments’ efforts
to work around those measures are inappropriate.
The report of the Secretary-General outlines in detail
some important facts: that are Iranian arms and
related materiel are showing up beyond its borders in
conflict zones in the region, that its missiles and related
technologies are hitting civilian targets, and that its
terrorist proxies, Hizbullah and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, are speaking openly of the support Iran provides
to them. Does anyone really believe that Iran is not
behind these transfers?
The United States has made clear its willingness
to engage in dialogue with Iran to negotiate a deal that

19-1941919/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

will better serve international peace and security. But in
the meantime, we will not — and the Security Council
should not — sit idly by while Iran perpetrates attacks
on our partners in the region and on commercial vessels
in the Gulf. We intend to do everything in our power
to curb malign Iranian behaviour, including through
updates to the sanctions regime established pursuant
to resolution 2231 (2015), which, as the report of the
Secretary-General highlights, are necessary to ensure
implementation. We hope our partners on the Council
will join us.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I will now speak in my national capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo and the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union for their briefings.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a
masterpiece of multilateralism. It is above all one of
the great successes of nuclear non-proliferation. Since
its entry into force more than three years ago, it has
guaranteed the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian programme, as has just been confirmed for
the fifteenth time by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It is also the result of 12 years of
intense diplomatic activities based on dialogue and
respect for the parties. The Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action is more than a nuclear agreement; it is a
confidence-building tool.
We share the concerns of our European partners
with regard to Iran’s activities in the ballistic field. We
call on Iran to refrain from such activities, in particular
ballistic-missile launches, which are in contradiction
with resolution 2231 (2015). These activities reinforce
mistrust and do nothing but contribute to growing
tensions in the region.
We are concerned about Iran’s activities that
contribute to regional instability, including in the area
of missile and arms transfers to State and non-State
actors in the region, in particular the Houthi in Yemen.
We call on Iran to comply with all relevant Council
resolutions and engage in a serious dialogue on these
concerns, including with other actors in the region.
Let me come back to the nuclear agreement. Like
the Secretary-General and the members of the Council,
Belgium regrets the withdrawal of the United States
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. It also
20/25

26/06/2019

regrets the reimposition by the United States of unilateral
sanctions and the recent lifting of exemptions in the
nuclear sector, which prevent not only Iran but also
other States Members of the United Nations — parties
and non-parties to the JCPOA — from implementing
their commitments under resolution 2231 (2015), agreed
by all members of the Security Council and supported
by a large majority of the international community.
Belgium is extremely concerned about Iran’s
announcements of non-compliance with some of its
commitments. We understand Iran’s difficult economic
situation, but like our European partners, we reject a
“less-for-less” approach and call on Iran to comply fully
with resolution 2231 (2015), including the restrictive
measures set forth in annex B of the resolution.
Belgium calls on stakeholders to exercise restraint.
Dismantling a working nuclear agreement would not
put us in a better position to discuss regional issues or
provide an immediate solution to the risks it already
addresses. We also call on them not to underestimate
the devastating and counterproductive effects on the
entire existing and future non-proliferation regime.
Non-proliferation and conflict resolution require joint
negotiated solutions, developed collectively, in full
respect of the Charter of the United Nations. There is
no credible alternative to this approach, which is the
very foundation of the Security Council. There is no
credible alternative to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, and our duty is to preserve it.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the briefers for their
presentations today and for their hard work in carrying
out their respective functions.
First of all, we would like to support the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), which is a successful outcome of
multilateralism, diplomacy and dialogue, and represents
a breakthrough in the non-proliferation regime.
Similarly, we wish to highlight the commendable
monitoring work being done by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) as well as its efforts to ensure
that nuclear energy is used only for peaceful purposes.
In this vein, we welcome the commitment and
determination shown by the parties to the full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA. The Plan of
Action has worked, and it has been possible to achieve
the primary objectives it established, despite the great
challenges the Plan faces, including the withdrawal
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

of the United States, which has generated significant
challenges for the Plan’s implementation and brought
about economic restrictions that directly affect the
Iranian people. We also note with satisfaction that all the
reports issued by the IAEA since the entry into force of
the JCPOA to date have shown that Iran has complied
with its commitments under the Plan and the Additional
Protocol to the IAEA Safeguards Agreement and is
under the most stringent monitoring and verification
regime in the world.
However, we are concerned about the information
provided in the seventh report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/492) and the allegations made by
various countries with regard to Iran’s activities that
contravene the provisions established in paragraph
3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), in particular
the test flights of ballistic missiles capable of carrying
nuclear weapons, the launching of ballistic missiles
against other neighbouring countries, and the transfer
of Iranian-manufactured arms and unmanned aerial
vehicles to various countries in conflict in the
Middle East. We are likewise concerned by activities
involving the transfer of weapons — unmanned aerial
vehicles manufactured by Iran — to various conflictaffected countries in the Middle East. We therefore
call on Iran to refrain from taking measures that could
undermine the agreement, such as involving itself
in hostile activities that destabilize the region and
engaging in aggressive rhetoric, which could lead to
mistrust among the signatories to the JCPOA and the
rest of the international community. It should also
refrain from actions that contravene the obligations set
out in resolution 2231 (2015).
We are concerned at the statements made by Iran’s
authorities that it would not commit itself to respecting
the limits on its enriched uranium stockpiles and heavywater reserves and that it would suspend compliance
with the uranium enrichment limits and measures to
modernize and upgrade the Arak heavy-water reactor,
if its demands are not met by the other parties to
the JCPOA.
We deplore this situation and hope that Iran will
maintain the commitment that it has shown so far and
continue to abide by the agreement and the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015) fully and effectively.
Furthermore, we echo the call of the Secretary-General
on States that use and fully support the procurement
channel, as this is the key mechanism for building
confidence and transparency.

S/PV. 8564

Finally, we call for a continuation of the cooperation
that has been shown by the parties to the agreement
so far. In that respect, we highlight the laudable role
played by the European States in the implementation of
measures that promote economic activity, so as to ensure
compliance with the commitments in the agreement,
including the lifting of the sanctions, with a view to
delivering economic benefits to the Iranian people.
The failure of the JCPOA would have negative
effects in terms of non-proliferation and international
security, and we must therefore endeavour to ensure its
preservation, because this is a shared responsibility on
the part of the States that are signatories to the agreement
and the other States Members of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
I should like at the outset to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing
on the biannual report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/492).
I also thank the representative of Belgium, as Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and the
representative of the European Union, on behalf of the
Joint Commission, for their briefings.
As we hold this meeting under the item
“Non-proliferation”, the State of Kuwait stresses once
again our steadfast and principled position vis-à-vis
all issues pertaining to nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, namely, we condemn the use of nuclear
weapons and all weapons of mass destruction, which is
a grave violation of international law. The establishment
of world peace, security and stability will not be
possible as long as such weapons exist.
Based on these principles and constants, we
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015),
despite our knowledge that the agreement did not
meet all of the concerns of countries of the region that
continue to suffer from escalating tensions, insecurity
and instability. However, we preferred to support the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) based on
our belief in multilateralism and full commitment to
all United Nations resolutions and efforts to achieve
security and stability in the Middle East.
The Middle East region continues to suffer from
instability and insecurity and is today experiencing

19-1941921/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

great tension that threatens international navigation
routes and the provision of fuel supply. with respect
to recent developments in the Gulf, we welcome the
unified position that the Council expressed to the media
two days ago, condemning the attacks on oil tankers as
a violation to international law and a dangerous threat
to international peace and security.
We have read the current report of the SecretaryGeneral and welcome its content on the continued
implementation by Iran of its commitments with
regards to its nuclear programme, as certified by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in its
fifteenth report. It is important that Iran continue to
implement all of its commitments under the JCPOA,
including by adhering to the limits on enriched uranium;
to comply with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its comprehensive
safeguards agreements with the IAEA; and to ratify
the additional protocol, which would guarantee its
continued status as a non-nuclear-weapon State.
In accordance with the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015), the report of the Secretary-General is
not restricted to aspects pertaining to nuclear matters
but follows up on the implementation of controls
on ballistic missile technology activities and the
transfer of conventional weapons. We are concerned
about information contained in the report on the
specifications and origin of the ballistic missiles that
targeted the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well as the
weapons seized in international waters.
Despite the fact that the Secretariat has not been able
to pinpoint the date of the transfer of the missiles and
weapons mentioned in the report, this is an extremely
serious issue that threatens international and regional
peace and security. We condemn the repeated targeting
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia through the launching
of ballistic missiles, which undermines its security
and threatens the lives of its civilians. The most recent
attack targeted Abha international airport. We express
our full solidarity with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and our support for all measures necessary to protect
its security and stability.
We also recall the relevant decisions of the League
of Arab States requesting Iran to end any activities that
undermine the security and interests of the countries
of the region, while taking steps to build trust with
its neighbours and establish relations based on good22/25

26/06/2019

neighbourliness, cooperation, mutual respect and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait emphasizes
the importance of the Security Council continuing
to shoulder its responsibilities to follow up on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in a
comprehensive manner that ensures that Iran and
other States comply with their obligations vis-à-vis
not only nuclear non-proliferation, but also other areas
mentioned in the resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having organized
this meeting, which deals with an important issue
for the whole international community, namely, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which,
according to the Secretary-General, is a demonstration
of successful multilateralism and a major achievement
in dialogue and diplomacy.
As the Council is well aware, the JCPOA is founded
on two pillars: Iran’s nuclear-related commitments and
the commitments of other participants, which should
bring about economic benefits to Iran. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is mandated to verify
and monitor the implementation of Iran’s nuclearrelated commitments, and it is doing so. The IAEA’s
15 consecutive reports have confirmed Iran’s continued
full compliance with its commitments. Therefore, the
first pillar is completely fulfilled, with the highest
possible standards.
But what about the second pillar? Has it been
realized? This pillar is composed of two complementary
commitments: the lifting of sanctions and the promotion
of normal economic and trade relations with Iran. This
fact has twice been stipulated explicitly in the JCPOA,
which states:
“The JCPOA will produce the comprehensive
lifting of all United Nations Security Council
sanctions as well as multilateral and national
sanctions related to Iran’s nuclear programme,
including steps on access in areas of trade,
technology, finance, and energy”.
Likewise, resolution 2231 (2015) emphasizes that
“the JCPOA is conducive to promoting and facilitating
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

the development of normal economic and trade contacts
and cooperation with Iran”. In addition, the resolution,
“Underscoring that Member States are
obligated under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations to accept and carry out the Security
Council’s decisions,
...
“2. Calls upon all Member States ... to take
such actions as may be appropriate to support the
implementation of the JCPOA, including by taking
actions commensurate with the implementation
plan set out in the JCPOA and this resolution
and by refraining from actions that undermine
implementation of commitments under the JCPOA.”
As Security Council sanctions can be annulled only
by itself, this organ, through resolution 2231 (2015) and
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, terminated
all its sanctions against Iran. Regarding multilateral
sanctions, under the JCPOA, the European Union (EU)
and its member States are committed to adopting “an
EU regulation, ... terminating ... all nuclear-related
economic and financial EU sanctions”. Likewise, on
national sanctions, according to the JCPOA, the United
States is committed to “ceasing the application of the
statutory nuclear-related sanctions”.
In addition, in accordance with the JCPOA, the EU,
its member States and the United States will “refrain
from any policy specifically intended to directly
and adversely affect the normalization of trade and
economic relations with Iran” and will not “undermine
the successful implementation of this JCPOA”.
Furthermore, according to the JCPOA, the United States
will “make best efforts in good faith to sustain this
JCPOA and to prevent interference with the realization
of the full benefit by Iran of the sanctions lifting”.
But what has happened in practice? The United
States withdrawal from the JCPOA and the imposition
of its illegal sanctions rendered the JCPOA almost
completely ineffective with respect to Iran’s benefits,
which is of course a clear violation of the United States
commitments under the JCPOA and a breach of its
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015).
The United States also brazenly continues to
threaten other States to either violate resolution
2231 (2015) or face punishment. That irresponsible
conduct by a permanent member of the Council,
unprecedented in the history of this organ, is a frontal

S/PV. 8564

attack on resolution 2231 (2015), violates the Charter
of the United Nations and international law and further
erodes trust and confidence in the Council. As a result,
the United States itself is not fulfilling its obligations
under resolution 2231 (2015), is not allowing Iran to
implement certain parts of the JCPOA and is preventing
other States from implementing their obligations under
the resolution.
Nevertheless, over the course of a year after the
United States withdrawal, Iran’s only reaction was to
give the remaining JCPOA participants, mainly the E3,
at their request, week after week and month after month
an opportunity to compensate for the consequences of
the United States withdrawal. However, Iran’s goodwill
and maximum restraint, as well as the repeated promises
by other participants to seek practical solutions, yielded
no concrete results.
By exercising its policy of strategic patience in
order to preserve the JCPOA, Iran has paid a heavy
price as a result of the United States economic war and
its so-called maximum pressure policy, including its
attempts to cut Iran’s oil exports to zero and to disrupt
free trade with Iran. In practical terms, the JCPOA has
become an agreement that is being respected by only one
party. A multilateral agreement cannot be implemented
unilaterally. Iran has done a great deal and much more
than its fair share to preserve the nuclear deal. Iran
alone cannot and will no longer shoulder all the burdens
to preserve the JCPOA.
Therefore, in order to protect the security and
national interests of the people of Iran and to bring a
balance to the JCPOA, on 8 May Iran decided to limit,
in the first phase of its plan, the implementation of
its commitments in two cases, namely, with regard to
the level of reserves of enriched uranium and heavy
water as identified in the JCPOA. At the same time, I
must stress that this decision is in full conformity with
paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA, according to which,
in the case of a reintroduction or reimposition of the
sanctions or such an imposition of new nuclear-related
sanctions, Iran will have the right “to cease performing
its commitments under this JCPOA in whole or in part”.
In fact, as stated by the President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, that is a minimum measure that Iran
could adopt a year after the United States withdrew
from the JCPOA and reimposed its illegal sanctions. In
line with Iran’s decision, if adequate practical measures
are not taken by the other JCPOA participants and the

19-1941923/25

S/PV.8564

Non-proliferation

international community in general within 60 days,
Iran will be forced, in the second phase of its plan,
to “suspend compliance with the uranium enrichment
limits and measures to modernize the Arak heavy
water reactor”.
As stated in our Supreme National Security Council’s
statement, the Islamic Republic of Iran entered into
negotiations in good faith, agreed to the conclusion of
the JCPOA in good faith, implemented its commitments
in good faith and, after the United States withdrawal,
provided the remaining JCPOA participants enough
time to shoulder their responsibilities with goodwill.
The remaining JCPOA participants, particularly the E3,
must now either demonstrate their goodwill by taking
timely, adequate, serious and practical steps to preserve
the JCPOA, which is now in a critical condition or,
along with the United States, accept full responsibility
for any possible consequences.
While Iran is determined to vigorously secure
its interests against the economic terrorism of the
United States and all its mischievous plots and plans,
the international community should also resist United
States bullying and lawlessness if we want our world to
be governed by the rule of law, not the rule of power,
and by the force of logic instead of the logic of force.
We should not allow the fabrications, disinformation or
deception of the United States to set the agenda.
One example is its disinformation campaign and
the hue and cry about Iran’s missile programme in
relation to resolution 2231 (2015). Iran’s missiles are
designed to deliver conventional warheads and are not
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
Accordingly, they are outside the purview of resolution
2231 (2015). To develop a conventional ballistic missile
programme is an inherent right under international law
and is neither prohibited nor limited by resolution 2231
(2015). Living in such a volatile region as the Middle
East, the Islamic Republic of Iran will not compromise
its security or its conventional defence capability, as no
other country does.
American officials claim that the sanctions are
not intended to hurt the people of Iran but, in practice,
entirely the opposite is true. The sanctions are basically
designed to harm the general public, particularly those
who are vulnerable, such as women, children, the elderly
and patients. The sanctions harm the poor more than
the rich, the ill more than the healthy and infants and
children more than adults. In short, those who are most
24/25

26/06/2019

vulnerable suffer the most. For instance, patients who
have severe conditions and therefore need scarce and
expensive medicines and advanced medical equipment,
which in most cases must be imported, suffer the most.
Just one example among thousands is the dire
need of a 38-year-old Iranian woman for a certain
medicine that is not available in Iran. In 1987, during
the Iran-Iraq war, when she was seven years old, her
neighbourhood in an Iranian border city was bombed
and she was wounded by the chemical agents provided
to Saddam Hussein by some Western States. To
breathe normally, she needs a certain medicine that
now cannot be imported because all possible ways are
blocked by the United States despite its claim that such
cases are exempt from sanctions but, in practice, they
are not. That is the real meaning of not hurting the
Iranian people — true hypocrisy. The United States is
weaponizing food and medicine against civilians, which
is a clear manifestation of the collective punishment of
an entire nation, amounting to a crime against humanity
and thus entailing international responsibility.
Now, let’ us delve into the Americans’ claim
of negotiations without preconditions and their
demand for us to meet diplomacy with diplomacy.
What do they mean by diplomacy and negotiations
without preconditions? For them, diplomacy means
withdrawal from a deal that was recognized globally as
a significant achievement of multilateralism; it means
the reimposition of sanctions, in violation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015); it means punishing other
States for implementing that resolution; it means the
so-called maximum pressure policy; it means imposing
sanction after sanction; it means collective punishment
of an entire nation; it means waging a true and allout economic war against an entire nation; it means
economic terrorism; it means military adventurism
and sending spy drones into Iranian airspace; it means
more military build-up in the Persian Gulf; it means
designing more plots to divide regional countries and
create further tension among them in order to sell more
arms to the region. The list goes on and on.
We are a nation that, as attested by our history, resists
aggression, intimidation and coercion. Conversely,
we respond very well to civilized behaviour, respect
and honesty. Trust is the main prerequisite and the
minimum requirement for entering into a meaningful
dialogue. This can be represented only in deeds, not in
deceptive and sugar-coated words. As long as illegal
19-19419

26/06/2019

Non-proliferation

sanctions are in place, one cannot be expected to trust
the offer of an honest and genuine dialogue.
Finally, our observations on Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/492) are contained in a letter that I sent
to Your Excellency yesterday, which covers our views
on issues that I have not addressed in my remarks today.
Last but not the least, today the United States
representative repeated again a few of his country’s
baseless allegations against Iran. As my country has
responded to those allegations, either through our
Foreign Ministry or at relevant international forums, I
do not want to dignify them with an answer. However,
some accusations have been raised for the first time
in an open meeting of the Security Council at which
we are present. I must also put on record our view on
those subjects.
With respect to the United States spy drone, as I
mentioned in my letter of 20 June to the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Security Council, our
credible, detailed and precise technical information on
the path and points of intrusion of the drone leave no
doubt that, when targeted, it was flying over Iranian
territorial waters. We have maps here that clearly

S/PV. 8564

indicate that the drone entered four miles deep into
our airspace. On 21 June, the debris of the targeted
drone was retrieved from Iran’s territorial waters and
displayed to the media. In regard to that incident, Iran
acted in self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations and in full conformity
with international law. Instead of rejecting credible
technical information, the United States must accept
the responsibility for its wrongful act.
With regard to the oil tanker incidents, we have
already rejected the baseless United States claim, which
is part and parcel of its Iranophobic campaign by which
it resorts to deception, fabrications and disinformation.
The United States claim in that regard has not even
been supported by some of its closest allies. Today,
one country of the region distanced itself from the
United States claims and officially stated that it could
not honestly point the finger at any country because it
did not have evidence. Neither fabrication nor blaming
others can change the reality. The United States must
stop its military adventurism and false-flag operations
in the broader Persian Gulf region.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-1941925/25
