UNITED NA TIONS

fJ P””1,-;,;
,,.I,.I,<):‘;> -..;j

SECURITY COUNCIL
0FFICIGL

RECORDS

1937th

MEETING:

29 JUNE 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l937)

. . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , , . . . , . . , . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376(XXX)(S/12090)........................,.....................

1

S/PV. 1937

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official RecoA of The Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

jl
:

!
:.

‘8
,,

,“_

_,“--”

”

,~.

.-

1937th MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 29 June 1976, at 10.30 am.
President:

Mr. Frederick

R. WILLS

(Guyana).

Presefzt: The representatives of the following
States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
union
Of SOVkt
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1, Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l937)

of the agenda

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX)
(S/12090)

Adoption

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of Czechoslovakia, in which
he asks to be invited to participate in the discussion.
Accordingly, I propose, in accordance with the usualpractice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
the representative of Czechoslovakia to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

of the agenda

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/l2O9O)1

3. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite the representative of
Czechoslovakia to take the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding
hyt he will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is his turn to speak.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1924th, 1928th and 1933rd to 1936th
meetings, I shall now invite the Chairman and other
members of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the representatives
of Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Yemen,
Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Guinea,
Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritania, Morocco,
Oman, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates and
Yugoslavia to participate in the Council’s discussions
without the right to vote.

4.

Mr.

DATCU (Romania) (itrtop,‘ctcrtion ,fkml
The delegation of Romania is profoundly
happy at seeing this important debate of the Security
Council being held under the exalted leadership of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana, a State with
which my country has close ties of friendship and cooperation. Your presence as President, Mr. Minister,
suggests both the particular importance of the problem we are now considering and the primary responsibility of the Council for establishing a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. Your tireless, devoted
bfforts, as well as those of Ambassador Jackson,
which we hope will be crowned with success, once
again emphasize the deep attachment of independent
and non-aligned Guyana to peace and to the building
of a better and juster world.

Fwndr):

I

8. In the course of the last few years, the international community has had to realize that it is essential
to create the conditions which are required to enable
the Palestinian people freely to exercise its right to
self-determination.
The General Assembly gave
expression to this requirement by defining this right
and establishing the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. The
report containing the considerations
and recommendations of the Committee is now before the Security Council, which, because of its special role in
the establishment of peace in the Middle East, has a
duty to deal with them with the highest sense of responsibility.

5. My delegation, like those which preceded it,
wishes to extend to the representative of the United
States our most heartfelt, and sorrowful condolences
upon the tragic death of the American Ambassador in
Beirut, Francis Meloy, and his colleagues.
6. The events of the last few years have strikingly
brought out the fact that the Palestine question is a
key element in the Middle East situation. The very
wording of the Council’s agenda item reflects an
awareness on the part of Member States of the importance of .the problem and the urgency with which it
must be settled. The Palestinian component, which
has been ignored and avoided for too long, is finally
occupying its proper place in the concern of the
United Nations for a political settlement of the Middle
East conflict. The urgency of such a settlement is
increased by an awareness of the fact that there is no
rational alternative. The perpetuation of the situation
of conflict now prevailing could lead to new military
confrontations
which would entail for all the combatants vast material destruction and loss of human
life and would gravely jeopardize international peace
and security. There are, therefore, strong reasons for
the parties concerned to act resolutely with a view to
achieving, as soon as possible, an over-all settlement
of all the problems connected with the present situation in the Middle East.

9. As a member of the Committee Romania participated in the consensus which was achieved on the
Committee’s report. In our opinion, its considerations
and recommendations,
which reflect the spirit of
realism and of moderation in which the meetings of
the Committee were held, should be viewed as a
positive contribution to the efforts made on a more
genera1 level in the United Nations to achieve the
peaceful settlement of the Middle East situation.
10. The Committee took care that its recommendations should be based on United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council, on the problems of the Middle East and the Palestinian question.
In its first recommendation,
for example, regarding
the return to their homes of the Palestinians displaced
as a result of the June 1967 war, the Committee proposes that the Council should request the inmediate
and unconditional
implementation
of its resolution
237 (1967). The recommendation
on the withdrawal
by Israeli forces from all the Arab territories occupied
in 1967 is also based on a relevant Council resolutions
regarding the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
territory by war.

7. The position of my country in regard to the solution of the Middle East problems was reaffirmed two
days ago by President Nicolae Ceaugescu, who decl ared :
“It is a matter of profound anxiety for us that the
situation in the Middle East continues unresolved.
Romania has contantly pronounced itself in favour
of a political solution ofthe Middle East conflict. It is
in favour of Israel’s withdrawal from the Arab territories occupied as a result of the 1967 war. It is for
a solution of the problem of the Palestinian people,
including
the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, and it is for the establishment of
a just and lasting peace which will guarantee the
integrity and sovereignty of all States in the region,”

11. I should also like to emphasize the significance
of the recommendation
of the Committee regarding
the broadening and strengthening of the role of the
United Nations and its organs in the search for an
equitable solution of the question of Palestine and in
the implementation of such a solution, This suggestion
is in perfect accord with a conviction widely shared
at the United Nations that the world Organization
-and, above all, the General Assembly, the Securily
Council and the Secretary-General-should
play an
even larger role in all efforts to resolve the Palestinian
problem and to establish a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. The United Nations should make a
greater contribution to the resumption and acceleration of peace negotiations; it should undertake peacekeeping operations and should effectively guarantee
the peace arrangements to be negotiated under its
auspices by the parties directly concerned.

Stressing that the situation in the Middle East has
become more complicated as a result of the tragic
events in Lebanon, President Ceaugescu stated:
“Romania
realizes that it is necessary to halt
fighting in that country as soon as possible; that
adequate arrangements should be made among the
political and social forces in Lebanon which would
guarantee the integrity and sovereignty of that
country, and its independent economic and social
development. Such a solution of the problems of
Lebanon should exclude any foreign intervention
in the internal affairs of that country. Basically, the
attainment of a lasting peace in the Middle East wi]]
have a positive influence on the independent economic and social development of all States.”

12. In this context, paragraph 55 of the report is
noteworthy since it stresses the need for the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization on an
2

equai footing with the other participants in all efforts,
deliberations and conferences on the Middle East
under the auspices of the United Nations.

played by your country, having worked
with your
brilliant Ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Jackson. 1 hope that under your presidency the debate on
this important question will come to a most successful conclusion.

13. Considering that the work of the Security Council also represents an effort to establish peace in the
Middle East, the Committee makes the suggestion in
paragraph 56 that the parties concerned, evincing a
genuine desire to negotiate, should make use of this
unique circumstance to meet and draw up constructive measures towards a settlement.

19. Allow me on this occasion also to extend to the
delegation of the United States the sincere ‘condolences of my delegation on the senseless murder of
Ambassador Meloy and two of his colleagues during
the recent tragic events in Lebanon.

14. In reviewing the Committee’s
report, the Council is called upon to make its own contribution to the
formulation of a programme the implementation
of
which would lead to an equitable solution of the Palestinian question and, accordingly, to the peaceful settlement of the problems of the Middle East. The adoption by the Council of decisions likely to facilitate the
exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
rights would therefore constitute an important and
necessary complement to its past resolutions on the
Middle East. Efforts to establish a just and lasting
peace in that region could thus be pursued on a more
adequate and realistic basis, and that in turn would
pave the way for the success of those efforts.

20. General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX) is
unique in the annals of the United Nations.
It is a
resolution the sole objective of which is the iniplementation of other resolutions. The task of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People established under that resofution
is also unique. That Committee was not entrusted with
any discussion, debate or analysis or with reaching a
verdict on a given subject. it was entrusted only with
the task of recommending a programme of implementation for an already defined and recognized set of
rights of and for the Palestinian people. The recommendations of the Committee,
based completely, as
they are, on previously adopted resolutions of the
General Assembly and Security Council, should therefore raise no difficulty or objection from any side,
except inasmuch as they might be alleged to depart
from those resolutions.

15. It is true that it will not be possible for all the
Committee’s recommendations
to be implemented at
once. The implementation
of those recommendations
will ‘require time and persevering, unflagging efforts.
But we deem it extremely important that the Council
has started to discuss the question of the exercise by
the Palestinian people of its inalienable national rights
and, in particular, its right to self-determination,
since
this means that the existence of those rights is now
an undeniable fact. We are convinced of the need
for the Council, in its efforts to establish a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, to take duly into
account the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the Committee’s report.

21. The need which prompted the General Assembly
to establish a special committee
in order to recommend methods for the implementation
of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people is in itself symbolic
of the reasons for the continuation
of the Palestinian
tragedy for nearly three decades now. The tragedy
of the Palestinian people continues
not because its
rights are not recognized or defined but simply because
they are not implemented.
As a matter of fact, this
is the whole story of the Middle East conflict, of
which the Palestinian question is only the cause and
origin: defiance, disobedience and non-implementation. The basic elements for a just and lasting setflement are known to everyone, and widely supported,
but, again, not implemented.
The solution is there,
but the responsible party lacks the will to put it into
effect. That is why in my statement of I5 March before
the Committee I said:

16. Romania is determined to support, how and in
the future, every constructive effort in that direction
and to make its contribution to the peaceful solution
of all the problems of the Middle East.
17. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

“Thus your task is, at the same time, easy and
difficult, simple and complicated.
It is easy and
simple because the rights of the Palestinian people
are already defined and recognized. You do not
need to debate them, to debate their justification ,or
their legitimacy. This is in fact what the United
Nations itself has indeed been doing”-or
trying
to do-“ during the last 28 years.”

18. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, permit me first of all to say how honoured my
delegation is to address the Council today, during
this important de.bate, under your presidency. Your
presence here, at the head of the Council, while it is
engaging in this vital debate, is only one more example
of the constructive and pioneering role your country,
Guyana, is playing in the cause of international peace
and security. I have in the past had the good fortune
to acquaint myself with the constructive role being

“Yet your task is also difficult and complicated
because the United Nations has been unable all
these long years to implement
its own resolutions _
3

or to make the usurper of the Palestinian national
and human rights cease its aggression and heed the
repeated wishes and directives of the international
family.“2

was the racist regime of South Africa. This is how the
fate of the Palestinian people was decided-in
its
absence and against its will and aspirations.
26. Yet, Israel was not satisfied with the 56 per cent
offered to it by the partition plan. Through a continuation of aggression, expansion, usurpation and annexa;
tion, the Zionist entity kept expanding year after year,
waging in between three successive wars of aggression
in 1948, 1956 and 1967 until it managed to occupy the
whole Palestinian territory as well as large portions
of Syrian and Egyptian territory.

22. Difficult or not difficult, that task was completed
by the Committee in the most honourable and admirable manner. Under the able and wise chairmanship
of Ambassador Fall of Senegal, the representatives
of 20 countries from Africa, Asia, Latin America and
Eastern and Western Europe laboured for nearly three
months to carry out their important task. The Syrian
Arab Republic participated actively as an observer in
the work of the Committee and, with the permission
of the Committee’s Chairman and its members, delivered a comprehensive statement on 15 March of
which I have just quoted a passage.

‘27. More than nine years have elapsed now and the
Zionist aggressors continue to occupy Arab land and
to violate the rights of the Palestinian people which
they expelled from its homeland more than 28 years
ago. Nearly 200 resolutions have been adopted during
these years by the General Assembly and the Security
Council alone on the Palestinian question and the
Middle East conflict, most of which remain a dead
letter, especially those containing any elements of
human or political rights for the Palestinian people.

23. In that statement the views of the Syrian Arab
Republic on the causes of the Palestinian
tragedy
were fully explained. I do not intend to go now into
the details of that tragedy, unprecedented in history,
that befell the people of Palestine and that uprooted
3.5 million people, rendering them homeless, denying
them their most elementary human rights and wounding
them in the.very heart of their national dignity. Where
else has an innocent, peaceful and tolerant indigenous
people been gradually, creepingly,
outnumbered,
overwhelmed and, finally, expelled from its own land
by the very immigrants to whom it had offered refuge
from persecution and tyranny? Where else has an
aggressive entity proclaimed openly and shameIessly
that religion is the only basis for building a State and
that only those who belong to a particular religion
have a right to become citizens, even if they never
before set foot on that land, while the real indigenous
inhabitants who lived there for centuries-they,
their
fathers and ancestors-are denied the right to live and
exist only because they happen to follow a different
faith?

28. How much longer does the people of’palestine
have to wait in order to have its rights restored? Probably, the newly born Palestinian child of the late
194Os, who at the time of the first Palestinian exodus
in 1948 might have been carried to the relative safety
of the refugee camps in the arms of his terror stricken
mother, is now a 20-year-old youth-most
likely a
Palestinian freedom fighter-counting
the days and
the hours until he can return to his liberated land.
But how much longer has he to wait? How much more
death, destruction, misery and agony has the region
to go through before Israel realizes that the Arab people will never surrender an inch of their territory to
the aggressor or accept the usurpation of the simplest
right of the Palestinian people?
29. The Arab people does not have any illusions
about the real intentions of Israel. No people can
permit itself the luxury of false hopes when faced as
we are every day with further proofs of Zionist expansion and aggressive designs. How many more settlements does Israel have to establish in our occupied
territories for the world to realize at last that Israel
does not really intend to withdraw from the territories
it has occupied by force and aggression, that every
word the Zionists utter about negotiations and peaceful settlement is merely a calculated manoeuvre in
order to gain time to perpetuate, the occupation of
Arab territories and to face the Arab people and the
world with a fait accompli?

24. The United Nations was only two years old
when the last chapter of the Zionist conspiracy against
the people of Palestine culminated in the adoption in
1947, under the pressure of world Zionism and imperialist Powers, of the partition plan that dismembered
Arab Palestine into an Arab State, a Jewish State and
the internationalized City of Jerusalem. Of course, the
Zionists accepted the plan right away. Why should
they reject half, or more than half, of a territory which
had never really belonged to them? As for the Arabs,
was it at all surprising that thy should reject the
dismemberment of their country? What nation would
agree to part with even the slightest part of its homeland?

30. I say this because of the concern reDeatedly
expressed from undoubtedly well-meaning &quarters
about the possible negative effect of any text or measure which seeks the mere implementation
of United
Nations resolutions on the so-called established forum
for negotiations-meaning,
of course, the Geneva
Conference.

25. In partitioning
Palestine, the United Nations
violated the principle of self-determination
enshrined
in, its Charter, even before the ink had dried on the
San’ Francisco document. Among the 33 countries
who voted for the partition plan, there were only one
Asian State and two African countries, one of which
4

31. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) are quoted also on every occasion by those wellmeaning representatives as the two resolutions which
marked the beginning, as well as the end, of history,
Nothing ever existed before them and nothing else will
ever exist now that these two sacred instruments of
marvellous
wisdom and striking clarity have been
adopted. To see the aura of holiness and sanctity with
which certain countries-and
even Israel-surround
these two resolutions, one is tempted to think that the
faithful advocates of these two super-resolutions have
long ago implemented,
them, or secured their implementation by others, and that what they are at present
concerned about is only to avoid any disruption or
hindrance of the smooth functioning of their vital provisions. Nothing is farth&r from reality, Resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), in spite of their many shortcomings, have never been implemented by Israel and
Israel has never been pressured by its supporters to
implement
them.
32. In spite of the fact that the mandate of the Committee was confined, under paragraph 4 of resolution
3376 (XXX),
to the elaboration of a programme of
implementation
designed to enable the .Palestinian
people to exercise the rights recognized and enumerated in resolution 3236 (XXIX), the Committee
nevertheless took into account in formulating its recommendations
all relevant resolutions, including,
among others, General Assembly resolutions 181 (II),
194 (III), 273 (III), 3236 (XXIX), 3375 (XXX) and 3376
(XXX), as well as Security Council resolutions 237
(1967), 298 (1971) and 381 (1975). The two pet resolutions-242
(1967) and 338 (1973)-were not ignored
either. Their call for negotiations and for secure and
recognized boundaries for all States in the region is
clearly envisaged in paragraph 34 of the Committee’s
report. Subparagraph (c) of paragraph 52 also speaks
of “Appropriate
arrangements., . to guarantee.. . the
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and political independence of all the States in the area and their right
to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries”, as one of the fundamental principles for a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. Lastly, in paragraph 72 k), the United Nations, in co-operation with
the States directly involved, including the Palestinian
entity, is requested to make further arrangements for,
among other things, “the resolution of outstanding
problems and the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the region, in accordance with all relevant
United Nations resolutions”.
It is obvious that the
term “all
relevant United Nations resolutions”
covers not only resolutions such as General Assembly resolutions
3236 (XXIX) or 3375 (XXX) or 3376
(XXX),
but also all Council resolutions, including
resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973)-or
perhaps
those who claim the contrary do not regard the two
latter resolutions as relevant.
33. Of course, we do not accept an interpretation
of resolution 242 (1967) or 338 (1973) that is Contrary
to the principles of the Charter or the principles on

which those very two resolutions were based. For
examPle, the principle of the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by war does not, in our view,
allow for any ambiguity, intentiona or not, about
Israel’s absolute obligation to withdraw from all the
occupied Arab territories, whether one refers to them
as “territories”,
“the territoriis”
or “al1 the territories”, If the acquisition of territory by war is inadmissible, then each and every inch of territory thus
occupied has been illegally acquired and must be
returned. If a thief robs you of a million dollars, you
do not say to him: “Dollars stolen during the recent
robbery must be returned”. In any case, however you
Put it, YOU want to recover all the money that has
been stolen from you; you do not want to leave any 1
tip for the thief as a reward for his act of aggression.
34. As for the concept of secure and recognized
boundaries, I should like to quote from my statement
before the Council on 26 January, at the conclusion
of the important debate on the Middle East problem
including the Palestinian question. I said:
“The concept of security cannot be related to
any element of geographical or strategic position
or situation, because the term ‘secure boundaries’
would then be nothing more than a veiled invitation
to expansion and annexation. . . . Boundaries can
be secure only if they are recognized. They can be
recognized only if they are legal and not imposed
by the force of aggression.” [1879tll meting,
ptrrtr. 183.1
35. The Committee’s

recommendations,
based as
they are on numerous United Nations resolutions-as
is stated in paragraph 65 of the report-cannot
be
validly objected to by any party, if that party is really
sincere about its proclaimed search for a just and
lasting solution of the Middle East conflict. For
enabling the people of Palestine to enjoy its national
inalienable rights is, as affirmed by the Committee as
well as by the overwhelming majority of countries. a
condition sirrc qrra ~1 for the establishment of a
lasting and just peace in the region.
36. It is most significant that Israel, which always
claims that it seeks discussions and negotiations with
the Arabs for a peaceful settlement, chooses to boycott meetings of the Council every time a substantive
and meaningful discussion is undertaken by the organ
with the primary responsibility for international peace
and security. It did that during the important debate
last January
on the Middle East problem including the
Palestinian question. It is doing SO now while the
Council is engaged in a serious consideration of how
to ensure the Palestinian rights as a prerequisite to a
just
and peaceful settlement.
37. ln spite of certain reservations, which relate to
emphasis or procedure rather than to substance, mY
delegation
finds the Committee’s recommendations,
coming as they do from a body established by the

the nightmare with which the region has been living
for three decades. The Council must endorse and
guarantee the implementation
of the proposed programme, possibly through action in accordance with
the relevant chapters of the Charter. If any obstruction
should be raised by the Council itself owing to the
abuse of the right of veto by one or more of its permanent members, then the Committee should recommend in its subsequent report that the General Assembly itself should carry out its responsibilities
in
accordance with the Charter and existing precedents,

General Assembly, most fair and reasonable. The
Palestinian people is entitled, exactly like any other
people, to self-determination,
national independence
and sovereignty. The Palestinians are entitled also to
return to their homes and property, whether they
were dispersed in 1948 or in 1967. The Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination
cannot be implemented unless Israel, first, withdraws from the Palestinian territory it has occupied by force, contrary to
the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations
and, secondly, permits the refugees and the displaced
Palestinians who were uprooted or expelled or fled
during and after the hostilities of 1948 and 1967 to
return to their homes and property.

42. The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to a just
settlement which takes into consideration,
first and
above all, the attainment of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people and the total liberation of the occupied Arab territories. Only then would
it be possible to establish a just and lasting peace,
that much awaited and desired just and lasting peace,
in the region where all countries and peoples should
live together in security, development and prosperity.

38. The Palestinian people was deprived of its right
to national independence and sovereignty in its homeland, Palestine. To enable the people of Palestine to
regain its national independence and sovereignty, it is
indispensable to liberate its territory from alien occupation and to end the exodus of the Palestinian refugees. It is up to the people of Palestine, in the exercise of its right to self-determination,
to decide when
and how its national independence should be expressed
within an independent entity of its own and in its territory, Palestine. No other party has the right to dictate to the Palestinian people the form, status or
system of its entity: nor can such a third party claim
the authority to permit or to prevent the establishment
of the Palestinian independent entity in accordance
with the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations.

43. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the People’s Democratic
Republic
of Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
44. Mr. ASHTAL
(Democratic Yemen): Mr. President, it is highly symbolic that the question of Palestine, in its entirety, is now being discussed under
your wise and energetic leadership. Guyana is today
struggling to consolidate its independence and to fight
against the manifestations of neo-colonialism.
Palestine has merely changed hands under colonialism and
a whole people is now living under Zionist bondage.
Your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, as well as that of Ambassador Jackson, is
not only a tribute to your country but is also a source
of inspiration for the Palestinian and African peoples
to continue their ,determined struggle against coloriialism, Zionism and aportheiti.

39. Another element of the principle of equal sover.eignty of the Palestinian people is its absolute right
to choose its own representatives and authority. The
Palestine Liberation Organization has been recognized by the Palestinian people, the United Nations,
the League of Arab States, the Organization
of African Unity and the overwhelming
majority
of all
nations as the legitimate representative of the people
of Palestine. That fact has been fully taken into account in the Committee’s recommendations.

45. It has been said that, in its protracted struggle
against the Zionist colonization of Palestine, the Pales;tinian people has many targets but one aim. That aim
is the establishment of an independent and secular
Palestinian State in Palestine-a
State in which every
Palestinian will enjoy political, cultural and socini
rights, without regard to religion, race or ethnic or
social origin. That is the only viable proposition thelt
can finally bring peace and prosperity to the Middle
East.

40. .Among those recommendations,
in the opinion
of my delegation, that in paragraph 72 (cl), which refers
‘to the necessity of securing the evacuation of the Arab
territories according to a specific time-table is the most
important. The deadline for that evacuation was to
be I June 1977. That date would mark the accomplishment of 10 years of Israeli occupation of Arab territories. Unless the international community
would like
on that date next year to celebrate the first decade of
Israeli occupation of Arab territories,
the Council
should act quickly in order to endorse and guarantee
the implementation
of the Committee’s
recommendations.

46. The targets are many and they include intern&
tional recognition of and support for the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty in Palestine;
international recognition of and support for the Palestine Liberation Organization as the sole representative and vanguard of the entire Palestinian
people;
the consolidation of the independent policy and poliltical and military integrity of the Palestine Liberation

41. The situation in Palestine and the Middle East
has never been so dangerous or so inflammable.
It is
about time the Security Council, and in particular its
permanent members, undertook some action to end
6

Organization and of its resistance to any kind of
tutelage or trusteeship, whether regional or international; the struggle against all sorts of political propositions, especially the imperialist-oriented
propositions, or solutions which may in any way prejudice,
deter or distract the Palestinian
people from the
attainment of its final aim; and the diligent military
vigilance of the Palestine Liberation Organization to
engage in a protracted popular military and political
resistance in order to achieve the right to self-determination and sovereignty in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).

General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX),
which
defined the mandate of the Committee,
was adopted
by a substantial majority. The right of the Palestinian
people to return to their homes and property, and their
right to self-determination,
national independence and
sovereignty have been reaffirmed by the Gaeral
Assembly over and over again. Can we then say that
the overwhelmIng majority of the .General Assembly
is biased? If so, then the majority of Member States
are biased in favour of the principles of self-determination and justice-principles
which are upheld by the
Charter and resolution 1514 (XV). As to the second
contention, those who invoke resolution 242 (1967)
as a total political prescription for all aspects of the
conflict in the Middle,East
are well aware that that
resolution does not even refer to the Palestinian people as such, It merely reflects the balance of powe,r in
the Middle East at that,given time, after the 1967 war.
The fact‘that even the &hors of that resolution now
talk about the need to incorpo;ate the Palestinian issue
in resolution 242 (1967) indicates how biased it is
against the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
to national independence. It also indicates that resolution 242 (1967) cannot be a basis for the settlement of
the conflict in the Middle East.

47. In this multifaceted struggle the Palestine Liberation Organization has registered a number of victories, thanks to the perseverance and courage of the
Palestinian people, the continued support of the Arab
masses, the progressive Powers and the socialist
countries, and the entire anti-colonial
world public
opinion. For too long, the Palestinian people waited
and longed for freedom and independence, but the
world community, and notably the Security Council,
treated its case with indifference and apathy. The
United Nations, which initially baptized the partition
of Palestine, managed only to establish a relief agency
to deal with the consequences of the forcible displacement of the Palestinian people. In its resolution
242 (1967), the Council relegated the whole question
of Palestine to the status of a refugee problem, albeit
without that name. The Zionists all but denied the very
exis’tence of a Palestinian people.

50. The Security Council is entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. That mandate cannot be
fulfilled by adopting resolutions that do not take into
account the principles and purposes of the Charter
or the resolutions of the General Assembly and its
organs. Furthermore, in carrying out its duties the
Council acts on behalf of the Member States. It therefore has the duty to reflect the unanimous opinion of
the General Assembly. The report of the Committee,
whose Chairman I should like to congratulate warmly,
contains useful ideas which should be seriously considered by the Council.

48. Today, hardly anyone can be ignorant of the fact
that the Palestine question is at the root of the evolving
conflicts in the Middle East. Even the Zionists’
patrons and arms suppliers now recognize that the
Palestine question is not a refugee problem, much less
a humanitarian one. No one can deny that it is a political issue that continually endangers international
peace and security as long as it is left without ajust solution. That is why the Security Council is called upon
to deal with the Palestine question as a whole. It is a
rare occasion when this Council debates not the consequences and manifestations of the Zionist occupation
of Palestine, or the problems of human rights in the
occupied territories, but rather the self-determination
of the Palestinian people. It is also a rare occasion
for this Council today to be seized of the whole question of Palestine, not in the wake of a major war, or
under the imminent shadow of another major war. The
Council .is therefore called upon to pronounce itself
on the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people-a report
which reflects the unanimous opinion of the Committee.

51. The cessation of armed conflict in the Middle
East does not constitute peace. The danger of war,
which may have serious international
repercussions,
is still looming. A durable peace can only be based on
justice. The Palestinian people has been the victim of
a grave injustice for a long time. Peace in the Middle
East will remain elusive as long as the national rights
of’the Palestinian people are ignored. It is both a challenge and an opportunity for,the Council to deal with
the problem at the core of the conflict in the Middle
East. The Committee’s report provides a reasonable
basis for the achievement of a just and durable peace
in our area, in so far as the national rights of the Palestinian people are concerned.
52. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

49. In the course of this debate, it was said that the
Committee’s report was-biased and that resolution 242
(1967) remained the only framework within which a
solution for the Palestine question could be found.
Let us now question the first of these contentions.

53. Mr. HUSSEN
(Somalia): Mr. President, allow
me to begin my statement by telling you how pleased
we are by your presence among us here today as you
7

Middle East, Nevertheless, it would have been a futile
effort, like so many others before it, had the General
Assembly not adopted its historic resolution 3376
(XXX), It was in this resolution that the Assembly
decided to establish the Committee
on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
In paragraph 4 of that resolution, the Committee is
requested to conduct a comprehensive
study of the
question with a view to recommending
“a programme
of implementation”
that would enable the Palestinian
people to exercise those rights which have been
recognized and reaffirmed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
resolution 3236 (XXIX). That requested programme
‘of implementation
has already been submitted to the
Secretary-General and is now before the Council as
Part Two of the Committee’s
report.

direct the deliberations of this Council. It is indeed
an honour for me to participate on behalf of my delegation in a Security Council debate over which the
Foreign Minister of Guyana is presiding. Your country
has always been known for its strict non-alignment
and for its staunch support for, and identification with,
the struggles of all oppressed peoples and for their
inalienable right to regain their self-determination,
independence and human dignity. I am confident that,
with your exceptional qualities of leadership and your
dedication to the cause of justice and humanity, YOU
will successfully lead the Council to the formulation
of a positive and constructive course of action. On
behalf of my delegation, I wish you good luck in your
formidable task, For our part, my delegation wishes
you to rest assured of our unqualified
support and
co-operation. Allow me also to thank you and the
members of the Council for having given my delegation the opportunity to address the Council on the item
before it today.

58. As we have mentioned earlier, this report constitutes, in our opinion, the first substantive study of
the question to be conducted by an organ of the United
Nations. As such, it is a highly commendable
work
and a viable first step in the right direction, for which
the Committee
merits our express appreciation.
Although it did not, unfortunately,
meet with the total
satisfaction of some of the most concerned delegations, it undoubtedly contains a good number of basic
points as a programme that can pave the way for a
final and just settlement of the question of the Palestinian people and, ultimately,
of the problem of the
Middle East.

54. But before I turn to the question at hand, let me
also extend, on behalf on my delegation, our deep and
profound condolences to the United States delegation
on the tragic deaths of Mr. Meloy, the American
Ambassador, his Economic
Counsellor
and their
driver in Beirut on 16 June.
55. My delegation requested to be allowed to participate in this debate because we believe that in the
interest of a stable and secure world there must be,
inter diu, a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
that in order to establish justice, peace and stability
in that region, a just solution must be found for the
restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination,
independence
and
nationhood; and that such a solution cannot possibly
be found so long as Israel, in its well-known arrogant
defiance of the will of the international
community,
and in contravention of the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
continues to
occupy Arab territories and persists in its refusal to
allow the Palestinian people to return to their ancestral
homeland.

59. We agree with the Committee
on the strong
emphasis it placed on certain indisputable
basic
elements that are, in our view, crucial. In explanation
of these basic elements, since I cannot state them
more clearly than the Committee
itself, allow me to
quote from the report. In paragraph 18 the Committee
states:
“It was emphasized that the inalienable
rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination
could
be exercised only in Palestine. Consequently,
the
exercise of the individual right of the Palestinian
to return to hid homeland was a conditio sine cpa non
for the exercise by this people of its rights to selfdetermination,
national independence
and sovereignty.”

56. Since 1947, the Palestinian question has been
with us in one form or another and the United Nations
has been seized of it, directly or indirectly. But it was
only in 1974 that the General.Assembly,
in its resolution 3236 (XXIX), adopted its strongest and most
unequivocal reaffirmation of the Palestinian people’s
rights. In that resolution, the Assembly strongly reaffirmed and recognized’ the following inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people: the right to self-determination without external interference; the right to national
independence and sovereignty-and
most important
of all-the right to return to their homes and property
from which they have been displaced and uprooted.

60. It is obvious, of course, that the right to selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty
cannot possibly be exercised if Palestine continues to
remain under the illegal Israeli occupation. The importance of understanding and appreciating
this basic
factor is further elucidated in paragraphs 33,34 and 35.
61. MY delegation has no desire to enter into a
detailed analysis of the report at this stage, Rather,
ours is an attempt aimed at demonstrating
the Committee’s firm grasp of the basic elements that are
crucial to the implementation
of any programme which
is designed to enable the people of Palestine to exercise their inalienable rights. We wish, therefore, to

57. This was the first time that the United Nations
addressed itself in a substantive manner to one of the
questions that are the real core of the problem in the
8

express our gratitude and commendation
to the Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Fall, and to all its other
members for their objectivity,
impartiality
and diligence.

69. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Mr. President
Permit me first to thank you and the members of thl
Council for allowing my delegation to participate in
this highly important debate. It is a source of great
satisfaction for us that this debate should be held
under the wise and enlightened guidance of yourself
and your distinguished colleague Ambassador Jackson. Guyana is an outstanding representative of the
progressive and liberal forces of the great Latin American continent and an admirable defender of the principles
. . of the non-aligned movement. We look forward
with great Pleasure and expectation to your forthcoming visit to our country. It will be an honour and
a Privilege for us to welcome you in Baghdad, and we
are sure that your visit will greatly contribute to the
consolidation of the friendly ties that already exist
between our two countries.

62. It should be further noted that for the first time
we have been offered a concrete proposal in our quest
for a just solution of the major problem involved in
the Middle East situation. We are, today, in a position
to test the .action or inaction of the Council in this
vital and urgent matter.
63. My delegation urges the Council to rise to the
occasion and to follow in the footsteps of the General
Assembly by reaffirming the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian
people, including the right to national
independence and the right to return to their homes
and property from which they were forcibly uprooted
and displaced.

70. 1 should like to pay a tribute to the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, Ambassador Fall of
Senegal, for the lucid and brilliant manner in which
he presented the report of the Committee to the Council [f924t/7 nlc>etingl. I should also like to express our
appreciation to the Rapporteur and to all the members
of the Committee for the genuine concern they have
demonstrated for the fate and future of the Palestinian
people.

64. It is a fact of human nature that whenever a
group of people is denied its basic right to determine
its own future for itself, when a group of people is
deprived of all human dignity, circumstances inevitably lead to confrontation and violence. The situation
in South Africa, where, as a result of the constant
frustration of the natural aspirations of human beings,
pent-up emotions continually
erupt in violence and
war, is a perfect example of this fact.

71. The members of the Council are aware of the
historical development of the events that led to the
expulsion of the indigenous people of Palestine and
the emergence of the Palestine question. Today we
note with satisfaction the equitable steps adopted
during the last few years to recognize the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
The resolutions adopted on this subject by the United
Nations and by other international bodies indicate
that the world at large has begun to reassess its position with regard to the great agony and ordeal of the
Palestinian people. In this connexion I should like to
recall General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX).
and 3376 (XXX) by which the Committee was established.

above
65. It is the duty of the United Nations-and,
all, of the Security Council as its highest executive
organ-to
avoid the repetition of such a drama. The
Arab people in the Middle East, and the Palestinians
in particular, have suffered immeasurable
injustice
throughout the years. So far, the Council has not taken
adequate measures to alleviate their plight.
66. As has been very aptly said before during the
earlier part of this debate, Israel, like the Pretoria
regime, has no right to keep the entire world on the
brink of war for ever. It is, therefore, incumbent on
the Council in the interests of peace, humanity and
justice not to postpone the solution of this problem
any longer. It is high time that the injustices done the
Palestinian people were redressed.

72. Naturally, the Committee’s report, which is the
subject of the present debate, does not represent the
views of the Arab Governments concerning the rights
of the Palestinian people. It does, however, provide
for a minimum that the United Nations should undertake in order to rectify the incomparable and great
injustice which the United Nations has itself inflicted
upon the innocent people of Palestine. The recommendations of the Committee could constitute a preliminary step towards the implementation
of the
resolutions concerning the rights of the Palestinian
people, which would in turn enable them eventually
to exercise their rights in full measure.

67. There is very little chance for a lasting peace or
for security in that area so long as the Palestinian
question remains unresolved and the Arab territories
remain under foreign occupation. My delegation is
hopeful, therefore, that the Council will act in the
discharge of its reponsibility and make serious efforts
to take concrete measures to restore to the Palestinian
people their inalienable right to self-determination
and
national independence and their right to return to their
homeland.

73.

The Committee’s report nevertheless puts the
Council to the test: it must show whether
it is in fact able and willing to implement the decisions

68. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Iraq, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

Security

9

indeed cannot carry on the negotiations, but it certainly can adopt resolutions which would impress
upon the intransigent party the futility of its aggressive and unjust policies. Silence and the inactivity of
the Council can only encourage the aggressor to
further Xcts of aggression and intransigence. Furthermore, the right of return is a basic human right which
cannot and should riot be tied to political or other considerations.

of the United Nations. It has already been pointed out
that this is the first time that the Council has dealt
with the rights of the Palestinian people. This debate
and the development of the question of Palestine
within and outside the United Nations confirm the
position my delegation has always maintained
regarding resolution 242 (1967). One of the drawbacks
of that resolution-indeed
the great injustice of itwas the fact that it totally ignored the existence of the
Palestinians
as a people, dismissing them merely as
napeless
refugees. This debate confirms the fact
that the rights of the Palestinian people are the focus
and the main cause of the whole situation in the Middle
EaSt. The debate also provides the Council with an
opportunity
to approach the problem on a more just,
realistic and balanced basis than the one upon which
resolution 242 (1967) was founded.

76. In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm here once
more my country’s total commitment
to the cause of
the Palestinian people and to their struggle to survive
and assert their nationhood. Bitter experience with
the ruthless Zionist adversary has taught us that it will
never accept justice for the Palestinians and it’ will
never willingly surrender the territqries it has occupied. What has been taken by force can therefore
only be regained by force. We shall continue the
struggle together with our brothers, the Palestinian
people, and their sole legitimate representative, the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
as long as the
injustice continues and as long as the Security Council
is prevented by the power of the veto from even
acknowledging the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.

74. There appears to be almost unanimous acceptance of the fact that there will be no peace in the
region unless there is total and unconditional
Israeli
withdrawal from all the occupied territories, unconditional return of the refugees, and, finally, exercise
by the people of Palestine of their right to self-determination in their homeland. There is also unanimous
agreement on the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territories by force. It is very strange and disturbing
that constant reference is being made to the armistice
lines of 1967 as the basis for a peaceful solution in the
Middle East. Those who advocate return to the 1967
lines should be reminded that those lines too were
imposed by force and with a view to the, acquisition
of more territory than was allocated to the Zionists
by the resolution recommending
the partition of
Palestine. Where are the boundaries of the Zionist
entity? To this day, its leaders refuse to draw the map
of their expansionist dreams. They proclaim, on the
other hand, that the boundaries should be establ,ished
wherever the Zionists choose to settle, The speakers
who constantly refer to the right of all States in the
area to live within secure and recognized boundaries
should by now be fully aware that, in the view of the
Zionist
entity, such boundaries mean expanded
boundaries drawn by force and coercion. It is the
duty of the States which emphasize the necessity of
establishing
secure and recognized boundaries to
leave no doubt in the mind of the expansionist aggressor
*that the international community will not countenance
policies dictating expanded boundaries at the expense
of neighbouring States.

77. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
78. Mr. SMfD (Czechoslovakia):
Mr. President,
I should like to thank you and the members of the
Council for the opportunity afforded me to state my
Government’s
position on the question under consideration. It is a particular honour and pleasure for
me to be addressing the Council under your presidency. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the
Republic of Guyana enjoy friendly relations, and last
month I had the honour to sign together with Ambassador Jackson documents on the establishment
of
official diplomatic relations between our two countries. May I wish you ali success in the fulfilment of
your responsible task as President of the Cou’ncil.
79. We join others in expressing sincere condolences
to the United States delegation on the tragic death of
Ambassador Meloy and two members of his staff in
Lebanon, and we deplore that senseless act of violence.

75. Those who call for the resumption of negotiations as a framework for the over-all settlement of the
problems in the Middle East should also be reminded
that they can and should first impress upon the Zionist
entity that there can be no negotiations while its forces
continue not only to occupy Arab territories but also
to establish Zionist settlements in those territories.
There can be no hope for peace in the area while the
Zionists continue to deny even the principle of the
right of the Palestinian refugees to return to theil
homes. As has been pointed out, the Council itself

80. Over and over again old and new tensions in the
Middle East remind us of the fact that this region
remains a dangerous hotbed of war. The absence of a
solution of the unsatisfactory situation in the Middle
East represents a great danger for world peace and
international
security. The reason for this is that
Israel, enjoying the support of certain imperialist
circles, stubbornly refuses to withdraw from the
Arab territories it seized in 1967 or to recognize the
legitimate rights od the Arab people of Palestine.
Today it has become even more evident that the so10

called step-by-step measures, far from being able to
become a part of the comprehensive solution to be
reached in the Middle East, actually can play into the
hands of those who attempt the postponent of the
basic solution.Bypassing
the international machinery
of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East,
such partial steps only further the fulfilment of desires
to freeze the existing situation and sanction the continued occupation by Israel of Arab lands.

possible to seek any path towards the solution of the
conflict without the participation
of the political
representatives of the PaIestinian people-the
Palestine Liberation Organization-from
the very beginning and on an equal footing. We consider the
results of the Committee’s work to be an important
contribution to the efforts for the attainment
of a
peaceful and lasting settlement in the Middle East.
We should like to express our hope that the Council
will endorse all the recommendations
in the report.

81. Czechoslovakia,
as a member of the socialist
community, has always supported the just struggle of
the Arab people against Israeli aggression, being
aware that the Arab national liberation movement is
encountering there one of the rapacious ramifications
of world imperialism.
My country considers itself to
be an integral part of those forces which are seeking
a political solution by peaceful means for the entire
compIex situation in the Middle East. It is so because
of our foreign policy, which is governed by a desire
for peace, international
security and progress, and
also because of our traditional friendship with the
Arab States and peoples. We honour this friendship
and, in so far as we are able, we assist the Arab peoples in their just cause.

85. We continue to hold the opinion that the Geneva
Conference represents a suitable international
machinery for negotiations aimed at the solution of the
problem. It is also our opinion that the proposal to
hold the Conference in two stages-the
first organizational and the second aimed at finding a solution to
the essential problems of a settlement-corresponds
with the needs for the solution of the problem. All
interested parties should participate pn an equal basis
in the work of the Conference, including the representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
86. The attainment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East has to be the common aim of all peaceloving countries and of the United Nations. The continuing and concentrated efforts of all who are interested in a peaceful and lasting settlement are needed
for the .implementation of the well-known decisions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council
which contain the basic elements for a political settlement of the Middle East conflict. Present developments call for all those who are striving for a just
solution in the Middle East to assist in furthering the
unity of the Arab States and nation on an anti-imperialist basis. The implementation
of the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people would
serve the interests both of the Arab people of Palestine and of all peoples in the Middle East and in the
entire world.
87. In connexion with the anti-Soviet statement of
one of the speakers at yesterday’s ineeting, the delegation of Czechoslovakia cannot but note that such
distortions of the real situation in the Middle East
divert attention from the substance of the problem
under discussion and benefit only the Israeli aggressors and their protectors. This is evident to everyone.

82. Recently the Government of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic has several times expressed in the
United Nations and elsewhere its opinion concerning
the solution of the Middle East conflict. It also has
stressed the fact that the settlement of the Palestinian
question represents an inseparable part of a just
peaceful solution of the Middle East conflict. The
Palestinian question is the question of the implementation of the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to sovereign national existence,
to a homeland and to return. We have always maintained that a permanent solution of the conflict is not
possible without securing these national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine.
83. By its resolution 3376 (XXX), which was cosponsored by Czechoslovakia, the Genera1 Assembly
at established the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. The
report submitted by the Committee emphasizes the
importance of implementing
the rights of the Palestinian people as the corner stone and the key to a fundamental political settlement of the Middle East
problem. The Committee’s
report also reiterates the
fact that the sole legitimate representative of the Arab
people of Palestine has been and remains the Palestine Liberation Organization, whose participation on
an equal footing is indispensable in all efforts, talks
and conferences on the Middle East held under the
auspices of the United Nations.

88. Mr. REIS (United States of America): I should
like, on behalf of the United States delegation, to
express our appreciation to the representatives who
have spoken this morning, and in particular those of
Romania, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Somalia and
Czechoslovakia, for their expressions of regret at the
death of the United States Ambassador in Beirut and
his two colleagues. We appreciate this very much and
we shall note it in an appropriate way.

84. We welcome the conclusions of the Committee.
They confirm our conviction that, without the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, it will be impossible to guarantee a lasting
peace for all States and peoples in the Middle East.
They confirm our conviction that it would not be

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.
Notes

I For the report, see QfJficicd Records
Thirfy$xf

Se.ssh,

S77pplenre77f

* A/AC.183/L.8, pp. 7 and 8.

11

No.

35.

of the G~~r~rral

Assel?lbly,
