S/PV.8847

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8847th meeting

Monday, 30 August 2021, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shringla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Gasri
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Miguel
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23702 (E)
*2123702*

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In addition, some $45 million of the requested
$95 million has been raised for the United Nations
humanitarian flash appeal, and an additional nearly
$55 million has been mobilized in support of the
humanitarian response more broadly. I again thank
donors for their generous support, while reiterating that
further contributions are urgently needed.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: More than three months have
passed since the deadly escalation between Israel and
militants in Gaza, and the situation remains tense. In
response, the United Nations continues to engage all
sides to maintain calm and provide urgent assistance to
Gaza’s residents.
On 19 August, the State of Qatar announced a
contribution of $40 million over four months to the
United Nations to provide cash assistance to some
100,000 needy families in Gaza. I welcome Qatar’s
contribution to support vulnerable families, which
comes in addition to the $10 million per month that
Qatar already gives to provide the programme of the
United Nations Office for Project Services to support
fuel to the Gaza power plant. Those two efforts
combined are vital to improving the dire socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation of the Gaza Strip.
Such support came following the United Nations
humanitarian appeal in May and its call to the
international community at the technical meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) in
July to work with the Palestinian Authority (PA) and the
United Nations on implementing a robust programme
of humanitarian aid and recovery for the Gaza
Strip, developed in full contact with the Palestinian
Authority. As the United Nations is about to implement
the programme of cash assistance for needy families, I
wish to thank the Government of Qatar for its generous
support to those programmes, and the Palestinian
Authority for its support for them.
2/18

30/08/2021

Concerning the continued level of violence
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory during
the reporting period, in Gaza, militants launched
incendiary balloons on multiple occasions, and one
rocket towards Israel. The rocket was intercepted,
causing no damage, while the balloons caused several
fires in areas around the Gaza Strip. In retaliation, the
Israel Defense Forces fired some 37 missiles against
Hamas targets, resulting in damage but no injuries.
Tensions along the Gaza perimeter reached a peak
on 21 August, when hundreds of Palestinians attended
a rally organized by Palestinian factions. During
the demonstration, hundreds of people approached
the security fence and threw stones and, reportedly,
improvised explosive devices towards Israeli security
personnel. Israeli forces fired on Palestinian protesters,
injuring 51 Palestinians, including 25 children, the
vast majority due to live ammunition. One Palestinian
man and a 12-year-old Palestinian boy subsequently
died of their wounds. One Israeli soldier was shot by a
Palestinian and later died of his injuries. That evening,
Israel launched six retaliatory air strikes against what it
said were Hamas military sites in Gaza.
On 25 August, another demonstration near the
security fence east of Khan Younis led to another
clash between Palestinians and Israeli security forces.
Fourteen Palestinians were injured, including five by
live ammunition.
I reiterate that children must never be targeted
or put in harm’s way, and I call on all sides to show
restraint, avoid provocations at the fence and keep the
protests peaceful.
In the occupied West Bank, clashes, attacks, searchand-arrest operations, including in Area A, and other
incidents resulted in the death of nine Palestinians,
including two children, and injuries to more than 280
Palestinians, including with live ammunition or, in the
case of the vast majority, with rubber bullets. One Israeli
security personnel was injured during those events.
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Near-daily clashes near Beita village, in the
northern West Bank, took place in the context of
protests against the nearby outpost of Evyatar, which is
held by Israeli security forces after settlers evacuated
the location in July. In more than 100 days of protests,
seven Palestinians were killed and 972 injured by
Israeli security forces, with one killed and 226 injured
during the reporting period.
On 27 July, a Palestinian man was shot dead by
Israeli security forces near Beita. According to Israeli
forces, the man advanced towards Israeli soldiers
holding a suspicious object and ignored warning shots.
The man, reportedly a water technician, was seen on
video with a pipe wrench near a water pump shortly
before he was shot. Israeli authorities said they opened
an investigation. On 6 August, another Palestinian
was killed by Israeli security forces’ live fire in Beita
during clashes with those forces.
On 28 July, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was
killed in Beit Ummar after the ISF fired at the car in
which he was travelling with his father and siblings.
Israeli authorities have opened an investigation. The
next day, the ISF killed a 20-year-old Palestinian man
amid clashes during the boy’s funeral.
On 3 August, six Palestinians were injured during
an exchange of fire with Israeli security forces in
the Jenin refugee camp, in Area A of the West Bank,
including a 25-year-old man, who later succumbed
to his wounds. On 16 August, four Palestinians were
killed and another was injured by live ammunition in
an exchange of fire with Israeli security forces during
an Israeli search operation in the camp.

S/PV. 8847

On 17 August, a 15-year-old Palestinian boy was
attacked in the northern West Bank, during which a
group of Israeli settlers kidnapped the boy, tied him
to a tree and brutally assaulted, cut and burned him.
The boy, who lost consciousness, was eventually
handed over to a Palestinian ambulance. I am deeply
concerned about this heinous act, and I expect the
Israeli authorities to undertake a swift, thorough
and transparent investigation and ensure that the
perpetrators are held accountable.
I am concerned about the continued tragic loss of
life and serious injuries in the occupied Palestinian
territory. I note that settler violence against Palestinian
civilians is recurrent in my reporting to the Council.
Further measures must be taken to ensure that Israel
fulfils its obligation to protect Palestinian civilians
from violence, including by Israeli settlers, and to
investigate and hold accountable those responsible
for such attacks. I reiterate that security forces must
exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force only
when it is strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
In a concerning incident on 14 August, during the
protests in Beita, Palestinians set fire to a Star of David
containing the image of a swastika. Such displays of
anti-Semitism are unacceptable. I urge all parties to
refrain from incitement and provocative actions.

On 24 August, Israeli forces killed a 15-year-old
boy with live ammunition during an arrest operation in
the Balata refugee camp in Nablus. According to Israeli
officials, the boy had been threatening to throw a large
object at Israeli security forces personnel. However,
witnesses dispute the account and say that the boy was
shot in the head by Israeli security forces personnel at
some distance.

During the reporting period, Palestinian civil
society organizations and human rights defenders
continued to face restrictions on their freedoms of
expression, assembly and association. On 29 July,
Israeli security forces reportedly conducted searches
of the offices of the Bisan Center for Research
and Development and the Defence for Children
International-Palestine in Ramallah and confiscated
equipment. On 21 August, Palestinian security forces
arrested 23 people in Ramallah for their participation
in a planned demonstration, the majority of them
before the protest started. Several of those arrested
were well-known human rights defenders, lawyers,
journalists and political activists. All the detained were
subsequently released.

During the reporting period, six Palestinians,
including one woman and one child, were injured
in five violent incidents involving Israeli settlers.
Palestinians perpetrated attacks against Israeli settlers
and other civilians, resulting in five injuries and
damage to property.

I call on Israel to take all necessary measures to
protect the right to freedom of association and ensure
that human rights organizations in the occupied
Palestinian territory are protected from arbitrary
actions. I also urge the Palestinian Authority to
immediately stop arrests of human rights defenders,

21-237023/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

journalists and activists on charges that impinge upon
the exercise of freedom of expression.
Israeli demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian
homes and other structures continued throughout
the reporting period. Overall, Israeli authorities
demolished, seized or forced owners to demolish 81
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and 22 in East
Jerusalem — displacing 165 Palestinians, including 33
women and 98 children. The demolitions were carried
out due to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits,
which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
On 4 August, 17 structures were seized in the Bedouin
community of Ibziq in the Jordan Valley — displacing
27 people, including 19 children. The confiscation
was carried out due to the community’s location in an
Israeli-declared “firing zone”.
On 2 August, Israel’s Supreme Court held a hearing
to consider an appeal request by four Palestinian families
facing eviction in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of
East Jerusalem. The judges proposed a compromise,
which was not agreed to, and the hearing was
adjourned with no date to reconvene. On 15 August,
the Supreme Court postponed the eviction of several
other Palestinian families living in the same area of
Sheikh Jarrah, pending a decision on their request to
appeal the decision to evict them. On 11 August, the
Jerusalem Local Affairs Court froze the demolition
of several dozen structures in the Al-Bustan section
of the Silwan neighbourhood until 10 February 2022,
pending planning discussions that are under way. I urge
Israel to cease the demolition and seizure of Palestinian
property throughout the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, in line with its obligations under
international humanitarian law.
Returning to the situation in Gaza, I note a gradual
and partial easing of the access restrictions by Israeli
authorities. On 29 July, the fishing zone was again
expanded to 12 nautical miles after being restricted for
four days in response to the launching of incendiary
balloons into Israel from the Gaza Strip. On 13 and
26 August, Israeli authorities announced additional
easing of import and export restrictions. For the first
time in 18 months, permits will be given to 2,000
Palestinian traders and 350 businesspeople to cross
from Gaza into Israel.
While some 6,000 trucks — including of
construction materials, food and non-food items and
fuel — entered Gaza through Kerem Shalom, the
4/18

30/08/2021

volume of trade still remains below pre-escalation
levels. On 23 August, for the first time in over six
months, Egyptian authorities closed the Rafah crossing
to all movement, and reopened it fully on 29 August.
Although movement and access in and out of Gaza
should be further improved, no amount of humanitarian
or economic support on its own will address the
challenges facing Gaza. The current gradual approach is
a holding operation and not a strategic way forward or a
solution for the people of Gaza. Gaza requires political
solutions that will see a full lifting of Israeli closures,
in line with resolution 1860 (2009), as well as the return
of a legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza and the
establishment of an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State of which Gaza is an integral part. It must also
see Hamas and other armed groups stop the launching
of incendiary devices, rockets and mortars and end the
militant build-up.
Following the takeover by Hamas of a school
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the
Agency reiterated, in an 11 August statement, that its
installations are inviolable at all times. The Agency
protested the takeover and condemned the existence
and potential use of structures, including tunnels, under
its premises in the strongest possible terms. While
Hamas subsequently vacated the school, such actions
undermine the inviolability and neutrality of UNRWA
premises and compromise the safe return of children to
their schools on time. UNRWA and the United Nations
Mine Action Service are working to remove any
remaining unexploded ordnance as soon as possible.
The state of the Palestinian Authority’s finances
remains precarious. While the monthly transfer of
clearance revenues from Israel to the PA occurs regularly,
Israel continues to deduct an amount equivalent to
what is calculated as paid by the PA to the families of
prisoners and martyrs. Those deductions, along with
numerous other fiscal leakages, make it increasingly
difficult for the PA to cover its minimum expenditures,
including salaries to Government employees and
social protection payments to needy households. I urge
Israelis and Palestinians to resolve the impasse over the
prisoner payment scheme and other fiscal leakages; and
I call on donors to provide urgent financial support to
the PA.
On a positive note, on 29 July, the Israeli Ministers
of Health and Environmental Protection met with their
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian counterparts for the first time in many years,
amid an increase in engagement between Israeli and
Palestinian officials. On 29 August, yesterday, Israeli
Defence Minister Benny Gantz met with President
Abbas in Ramallah, where they discussed security
policy and economic issues, among other aspects
of the Israeli-Palestinian relationship. That was the
highest-level meeting between the two sides since the
formation of the current Israeli Government. I welcome
that dialogue, and I encourage more ministerial-level
engagement, particularly to advance financial and
economic cooperation. I hope that such contacts can
result in bringing the parties to a position to advance
unresolved issues, including political ones and those
related to the implementation of agreements made by
the parties.
On 27 August, Israeli Prime Minister Bennett
met with United States President Biden. The two sides
exchanged views on the efforts to advance peace,
security and prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians,
and reaffirmed the importance of Israel’s historic
partnerships with Egypt and Jordan, as well as expanding
relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
Turning to the region, in Lebanon, the Government
formation process has yet to yield tangible progress.
The lifting of fuel subsidies on 11 August exacerbated
fuel shortages, causing widespread disruption in service
delivery. The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remains tense following the launching of rockets from
Lebanon towards Israel on 4 and 6 August — the latter
instance claimed by Hizbullah. Israel responded on
both occasions with artillery fire, as well as air strikes
in southern Lebanon on 5 August. UNIFIL remains
engaged with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel
Defense Forces to defuse tensions.
On the Golan, the ceasefire between Israel and
Syria has been generally maintained, despite the
continued volatile situation and violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the parties. On
17 August, the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) observed projectiles fired from west
to north-east of their positions’ strike locations and
heavy explosions on the Bravo side. UNDOF continues
to observe the presence of unauthorized military
personnel and equipment in the area of separation.

S/PV. 8847

Finally, demonstrable change is needed on the
ground, especially for the people living in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza.
I remain extremely concerned by the dire financial
situation facing the Palestinian Authority and its ability
to withstand the ongoing fiscal and health crises. That
may affect all Palestinians. It is critical that the PA be
empowered to exercise its responsibilities throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, including on
reconstruction in the Gaza Strip.
The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee remains the
established mechanism whereby the parties and donors
can address relevant issues pertaining to the economic
situation of PA institution-building. The next meeting
of the AHLC can work out plans for how outstanding
issues can be addressed by the parties, with the support
of donors and the United Nations.
I also believe that no positive, hopeful step should be
wasted, and despite the formidable challenges, we should
help provide momentum to that renewed engagement.
Nevertheless, serious political efforts are required
to return to meaningful negotiations that will address
all final-status issues and achieve a negotiated end to
the occupation and the vision of two States, living side
by side in peace and security, based on the 1967 borders,
in line with United Nations resolutions, international
law and signed agreements. In the meantime, both
sides should abide by the signed agreements and avoid
unilateral actions that change the reality on the ground
and undermine the two-State solution.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Foreign Secretary of India.
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
briefing. I also note the presence of the representatives
of Israel and Palestine in the Chamber.
We are concerned by the recent escalation in the
Gaza Strip, which once again underscores the fragility
of the ceasefire and the urgent need for addressing the
underlying causes that triggered the escalation. We call
on all parties to the conflict to respect the ceasefire and
refrain from acts that could exacerbate tensions and
worsen the security situation. We recognize the efforts
made by the United Nations and countries of the region

21-237025/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

30/08/2021

to prevent the hostilities from escalating into another
military conflict.

press and are supporting several other quick-impact
community projects in Palestine.

I reaffirm India’s call for the regular and
predictable transfer of aid and other essential items to
Gaza to ease the humanitarian situation and facilitate
early reconstruction, as well as for the appropriate use
of such aid. It is also important that the international
donor community support the reconstruction of the
Gaza Strip through the Palestinian Authority. We take
note of the incremental relaxation of restrictions for the
entry of commodities into the Gaza Strip and urge the
parties to work together to ensure timely access to such
relief for the Palestinians. That would create conditions
that will help in preventing another round of escalation.

High-level interaction between Israel and Palestine
contributes to a better environment for the resumption
of direct peace negotiations. We hope to see an early
commencement of those negotiations between the two
sides, as they provide the best opportunity to resolve
all final-status issues and achieve a two-State solution.
The international community, and the Middle East
Quartet in particular, has an important role to play in
reviving those negotiations.

The recent agreement for the resumption of cash
assistance to needy Palestinian families in the Gaza Strip
is an important development, as it would provide much
needed relief for those families. We also appreciate the
work of agencies like the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the World Food Programme to ensure the delivery
of critical aid to Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
The West Bank continues to witness incidents of
violence and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces. Both sides must desist from provocative
actions, in the interest of peace and stability. We note
the progress in the legal challenge to the eviction of
Palestinian families in Sheikh Jarrah and underscore
the need for respecting the historic status quo in East
Jerusalem and its neighbourhoods. We also urge parties
to refrain from unilateral measures that undermine the
viability of a two-State solution.
Amid those concerns, the decision taken by Israel
to increase the number of work permits issued to
Palestinians will help strengthen both the Palestinian
and Israeli economies. Furthermore, the recognition
of coronavirus disease vaccination certificates issued
by the Palestinian Authority and the facilitation of the
passage of patients from the Gaza Strip to the West Bank
are also positive signs. India welcomes all measures
that create greater opportunities for the socioeconomic
development of the Palestinian people.
India’s development cooperation with Palestine is
also geared towards that objective. We have assisted
in building schools and setting up information and
communications technology and vocational training
centres, a technology park and a national printing
6/18

Given our long-standing and firm commitment
to the establishment of a sovereign, independent and
viable State of Palestine, within secure, recognized
and mutually agreed borders, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security, India will remain fully
supportive of all efforts to restart the peace process.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and
continued efforts in the region.
The United States is deeply concerned about the
risk of escalation in the region, particularly in the
light of the recent provocations, including the use of
incendiary devices along the Gaza border, which we
just heard about from the Special Coordinator. This
most recent violence has made it even more difficult
to deliver humanitarian relief following the violence in
May. The United States urges Palestinians and Israelis
to refrain from actions and rhetoric that inflame
tensions and further endanger the fragile peace of the
past three months. That includes incitement to violence,
compensating individuals who are imprisoned for acts
of terrorism, the annexation of territory, settlement
activity, evictions and demolitions.
The United States is committed to a negotiated
two-State solution. We firmly believe that Israelis
and Palestinians deserve equal measures of freedom,
dignity, security and prosperity. The diplomacy of the
United States will remain focused on practical steps to
advance that vision in the immediate term.
We welcome the 19 August agreement between
the United Nations and Qatar to resume aid to the
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people of Gaza in need, including the 100,000 families
who will receive $100 monthly stipends through the
World Food Programme starting next month. That will
give many in Gaza the means to get food and other
necessities to survive. We would like to thank Qatar
for its generosity. The new arrangement will ensure aid
reaches those most in need and is not misused by other
parties. While that aid will address the most basic daily
needs of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians, much
more must be done to facilitate relief and recovery as
well as economic development in Gaza.
The United States therefore calls on the United
Nations and Member States to redouble their efforts
to help Gaza recover, including by facilitating regular
predictable access in and out of Gaza, with appropriate
safeguards against the risk of diversion. In addition,
following the announcement by the United States
of another $136 million in humanitarian assistance
to the operations of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in the region last month, the United States
again urges other Member States to make financial
commitments as well.
As we saw with the recent return of 290,000 students
to UNRWA schools in Gaza, UNRWA services are a
lifeline to many Palestinian refugees. We must therefore
work collectively to advance the Agency’s ability
to sustain its core services over time. That includes
making aid delivery more targeted and efficient. At the
same time, the United States will continue to work with
UNRWA and other donor countries to promote oversight
and ensure that the Agency embodies the principles of
the United Nations, namely, tolerance and respect.
The United States also wants to recognize the visit
of the Israeli Foreign Minister to Morocco this month as
the two countries upgraded their diplomatic relations.
We certainly commend efforts to normalize relations
between Israel, its neighbours and countries throughout
the Middle East.
In conclusion, last week Ambassador ThomasGreenfield joined President Biden and Prime Minister
Bennett for their first meeting. That was an important
opportunity to reaffirm our mutual commitment to
Israel’s security and to forging lasting peace in the
region. Together, let all of us work towards that shared
commitment and do everything we can to bring peace
and prosperity to the Middle East.

S/PV. 8847

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I welcome
the fact that you, Mr. President, are presiding over
today’s important meeting on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I value
India’s firm position in favour of a just, durable and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
pursuant to international resolutions.
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
and all United Nations staff in the occupied territories
for their efforts to enhance prospects for peace in the
Middle East.
We meet again today to deliberate the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories and reiterate our
positions in favour of the need to end the occupation
and the protracted conflict. We meet here to state yet
again that we categorically reject the expansionist
settlement policies of the occupation authorities and
their plans to annex land, demolish houses, displace
Palestinian civilians and tighten the blockade on the
Gaza Strip, in blatant violation of international law and
binding resolutions adopted by the United Nations.
International positions support reaching a just,
comprehensive and durable solution to the conflict based
on international resolutions and the agreed upon terms of
reference for a settlement. Nevertheless, the occupying
Power continues to pursue oppressive policies, while
evading accountability and disregarding international
law. In the light of continued flagrant human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories and
attempts to impose a fait accompli, Tunisia again calls
upon the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to fully shoulder its responsibility and
compel the occupying Power to respect its obligations
under international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. It should put
an end to the violations, expansionist plans, settlement
projects and any unilateral action that would deepen the
conflict, lead to further escalation and undermine the
opportunity to achieve peace and restore stability and
security in the region.
We again call for accountability for flagrant
violations of international law that have been
committed by occupation authorities in the occupied
Palestinian territories for decades. We reaffirm the
need to protect Palestinian civilians from violence by
settlers — occupation forces that use excessive force and
carry out repeated attacks against Palestinian civilians.

21-237027/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation in the Gaza Strip remains a cause for
grave concern due to the blockade that was imposed
more than 14 years ago and persists today, along with the
deterioration of the situation on the ground at multiple
levels, in particular following the most recent Israeli
aggression, which resulted in a considerable number of
casualties and widespread destruction of infrastructure
and property.
In the light of the deteriorating social, economic and
humanitarian situation, we call upon the international
community to compel the occupation authorities to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and refrain
from hindering reconstruction efforts. We also call
upon international donors to increase the level of
assistance and humanitarian response in the occupied
Palestinian territories and to support relevant United
Nations efforts.
In that connection, we stress the urgent need to
fund the interventions of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We also underscore the need to continue Palestinian
reconciliation efforts, and we welcome mediation
efforts supporting that endeavour.
Peace and stability in the Middle East can be
achieved only through a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
international law and international resolutions. Any
attempt to impose a fait accompli will not change that
reality or alter the legal and historical facts; and neither
will it break the Palestinian people’s determination to
regain their legitimate rights, which are not subject to
any statute of limitations.
Tunisia will maintain its firm and principled
position in support of the Palestinian people and
their aspirations for self-determination, an end to the
occupation and the establishment of an independent,
sovereign State on Palestinian territory, based on
the 4 June 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
We are confident that concerted efforts by the
international community, including the Security
Council, the Middle East Quartet, the SecretaryGeneral and neighbouring countries, can contribute to
overcoming the current stalemate in the peace process
and creating real chances for a settlement that can, in
turn, can lay the foundations for stability and peace and
security in the region.
8/18

30/08/2021

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
My thanks go to Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
Let me start by once again reinforcing the need to
prevent a further escalation in violence in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories and to restore calm. We
share concerns about the recent tensions in Gaza and
call on all parties to take steps to avoid exacerbating
tensions and to maintain the cessation of hostilities.
The United Kingdom condemns unequivocally
Hamas’ indiscriminate attacks against Israel, including
the use of incendiary balloons. We call upon Hamas
and other terrorist groups to permanently end their
rocket fire against Israel.
Our attention must remain on the dire humanitarian
situation in Gaza and the impact on Palestinians
living there. It remains vital that Israel ensure
regularized access into and out of Gaza, in accordance
with international humanitarian law, especially for
humanitarian actors and goods, for reconstruction
materials and for medical purposes.
In the West Bank, we should all be troubled by the
high number of Palestinians who have been killed by
Israeli forces in recent weeks. Since our most recent
debate on 28 July (see S/PV.8826), nine Palestinians
have been killed in the West Bank, including two
children. We urge the Israeli authorities to conduct
transparent and comprehensive investigations and to
hold those responsible to account.
With regard to the handling of recent protests,
we call on the Palestinian Authority to adhere to
international standards of freedom of expression,
association and assembly, and we urge respect for
human rights. The use of violence against peaceful
human rights defenders, activists and protesters and the
mistreatment of those detained are unacceptable.
In Jerusalem, we remain concerned by the high
number of evictions and demolitions, including in
Shaykh Jarrah, Silwan and Al-Walaja. Unfortunately,
in 2021 we have seen the pace of those unilateral Israeli
actions increase across the West Bank. We urge Israel
to refrain from actions that displace Palestinians from
their homes, that act as a driver for conflict and are,
in all but the most exceptional circumstances, illegal
under international law. It is also vital to maintain calm
on Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount and to uphold
the historic status quo.
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Against that fragile backdrop, we continue to see
signs of hope. We are pleased to see Palestinian and
Israeli firefighters working together to extinguish fires
in Jerusalem. We want to see greater coordination
and cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians,
particularly on economic initiatives, to help pave a
pathway towards peace.
The first anniversary of the signing of the Abraham
Accords this month is a reminder that the advancement
of peace is possible. We welcome and urge continued
engagement between the new Israeli Government and
the Palestinian leadership and call on both parties
to work together to tackle immediate and long-term
threats to peace and stability.
Our collective goal remains a two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines, which the United Kingdom
stands ready to support.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
The situation in Gaza continues to be volatile.
There is a clear need for long-term solutions, first and
foremost in the form of a solid and lasting ceasefire. We
commend Egypt’s ongoing efforts in Gaza.
Let me highlight a positive development, namely,
the memorandum of understanding between Qatar
and the United Nations to provide cash assistance to
approximately 100,000 families in need in Gaza. We
welcome the contributions from Qatar and the efforts
of the Special Coordinator and his team. In addition to
alleviating the suffering of the civilian population, such
assistance is critical for securing stability in Gaza.
With regard to regional stability, the continued
ability of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to deliver
essential services to Palestinian refugees remains
crucial. We call for sufficient funding for the Agency.
Norway welcomes the fact that Israel has lifted
some restrictions imposed on Gaza. We call for further
steps to be taken, including an increase in the number
of work permits for Gazans in Israel. The population
of Gaza needs increased opportunities for economic
activity, trade and travel, as well as genuine access to
their fisheries.
Furthermore, we urge all actors to contribute to
de-escalation and refrain from actions and rhetoric that
could inflame tensions. We expect groups in Gaza to

S/PV. 8847

uphold the ceasefire and attend to the needs of their
own populations. The people of Gaza will not live in
peace unless their leaders embrace it.
Only a broad political solution can solve the
underlying problems of the conflict. We reiterate our call
for a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 lines,
the relevant Security Council resolutions, international
law and internationally agreed upon parameters.
I would like to reiterate our concern about
Israel’s illegal settlement activities, demolitions and
evictions. The proposal to build 9,000 new settlement
units in Atarot would further isolate Ramallah from
East Jerusalem. With other plans in the area around
Jerusalem, those settlements undermine the prospects
of a contiguous Palestinian State and a viable twoState solution.
We are concerned about the rising levels of violence
against Palestinians, particularly children, in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Recently there have
been violent clashes around the village of Beita in
connection with demonstrations against attempts to
establish a new outpost nearby.
We urge Israel to refrain from the excessive use of
force and to ensure the protection of Palestinians against
settler attacks. We reiterate that a strong Palestinian
Authority is crucial to the delivery of services to the
Palestinian people and development, both in the West
Bank and in Gaza. A strong Palestinian Authority is one
that is well-financed, well-functioning and accountable
and that enjoys democratic legitimacy among the
Palestinian people.
Norway is also concerned about the treatment of
political activists and demonstrators by the Palestinian
security forces, including recent arrests. We call
on the Palestinian Authority to uphold its human
rights obligations, including respect for the freedom
of expression and the freedom of assembly. We
commend the new Israeli Government for resuming
a broad dialogue with its Palestinian counterpart.
We urge the parties to use that new momentum
constructively to secure progress across a wide variety
of outstanding issues.
The financial situation of the Palestinian Authority
remains precarious. It is necessary to significantly
increase its tax revenues. There is also tremendous
potential for cooperating on matters such as trade,
infrastructure, water, energy and telecommunications.

21-237029/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Furthermore, Norway calls on international donors to
step up their assistance and contributions. These and
other measures aimed at providing tangible benefits
to the people on the ground will be discussed at the
upcoming ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, which Norway will convene
on 23 September in New York.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing.
Let me begin by expressing our concern at the
recent increase in violence across the occupied Palestine
territory. The number of casualties is on the rise, with
an alarmingly excessive use of force against civilians.
In August alone, as mentioned by Mr. Wennesland,
several men and boys were killed. In addition, nearly
1,000 were injured in the West Bank. Meanwhile, the
situation in Gaza remains very volatile and is in danger
of escalating into an intensified conflict owing to
continued violations of the cessation of hostilities.
We are also particularly concerned about the risk
of conflict over the holy sites in East Jerusalem. If the
status quo is not respected, clashes will be inevitable
and may escalate into religious conflicts. We believe
that neither side would benefit from such a scenario.
We therefore call upon all relevant parties to
exercise utmost restraint and continue to urge Israel to
stop the excessive use of force. Dialogue and negotiation
must be the main path to a sustainable settlement. We
welcome the recent dialogue and encourage the parties
concerned to maintain the momentum. We also urge all
the parties to apply all necessary measures to protect
civilians, especially women and children.
The deadly violence and the risk of escalation only
underscore the need for a permanent ceasefire. We
welcome the mediation efforts by international actors
towards that end and call upon all parties concerned to
resume negotiations with goodwill. In the absence of a
permanent ceasefire and measures to uphold it, a new
round of hostilities is just a matter of time.
While the cessation of violence is essential, the root
causes of the conflict need to be addressed. Viet Nam is
concerned by the recent report about a new proposal to
expand settlements in the West Bank. Such settlement
activities run counter to international law and United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
10/18

30/08/2021

We once again call for an end to such activities and
to all other unilateral actions that escalate tensions,
including the demolition of Palestinian homes and
property in the West Bank. Palestinians have the
right to build their own homes and to live safely in
their communities.
We reaffirm our strong support for the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights. There is no alternative to a two-State solution
that includes the establishment of an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine, living side by side with
the State of Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967 lines
and a negotiated settlement. We welcome all initiatives
aimed at bringing the relevant parties together towards
that end.
Before concluding, we would like to stress the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. As the new school
year has begun, we strongly support the efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to bring children
back to school. At the same time, we are troubled by
the reported violations of UNRWA-operated schools.
Children and educational facilities must be protected
from all sides in a conflict, as mentioned in resolution
2573 (2021).
We commend the international efforts coordinated
by the United Nations in implementing the humanitarian
response and stabilizing the situation. We call for
further financial assistance from international donors
to the Palestinian Authority to overcome the current
dire financial situation. In that connection, we welcome
the contribution made by Qatar and the memorandum
of understanding signed between the United Nations
and Qatar on 19 August for the delivery of assistance
to Gaza.
Furthermore, despite the recent easing of
commercial restrictions on the Strip, it remains essential
to ensure the unhindered entry of all humanitarian
assistance into Gaza. We continue to urge all relevant
parties to allow the regular and predictable movement
of goods into and out of the Strip in order to improve
the provision of basic services, people’s livelihoods and
the wider economy.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for his briefing and to welcome his
continued efforts in recent months.
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

France is also very concerned by the severe tensions
in Gaza. We call on all parties to exercise restraint
to ensure that there is no new spiral of violence. We
condemn the launching of incendiary balloons and
rockets against Israel, which imperil civilian lives and
violate international law. They must stop.
We call upon Israel to continue to ease conditions
for entry and exit of goods and persons from Gaza.
Assistance is essential for the people of Gaza following
the most recent escalation. In that connection, we
welcome the agreement between Qatar and the United
Nations to provide humanitarian assistance in Gaza.
But more can and must be done. It is also imperative
that such assistance be delivered to its intended
beneficiaries; the Palestinian Authority has a key role
to play here.
We are encouraged by the dialogue and the
initial cooperation measures undertaken between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
We call for the strengthening of that cooperation,
which can contribute to creating an atmosphere of trust
between the parties and meet common challenges, be
they humanitarian, health-related, climate-related
or economic.
France, together with its German, Egyptian and
Jordanian partners, in the framework of the Amman
Group, is determined to continue all specific reciprocal
measures aimed at restoring trust between the parties,
with a view to a resumption of the negotiations.
We are nonetheless concerned by the continued
settlement policy. The announcement that construction
permits had been granted Palestinians in Area C is an
initial and encouraging sign, but it cannot obscure the
fact that the continuing settlement policy contravenes
international law and imperils the two-State solution. In
that respect, we call on the Israeli authorities to refrain
from any new settlement activity, stop demolitions and
definitively suspend expulsion procedures aimed at
Palestinian families from Silwan and Sheikh Jarrah, in
East Jerusalem.
All the parties must refrain from taking unilateral
measures and commit themselves to respecting the
status quo at holy sites in order to ensure that there is no
new flare-up. France also calls for tangible progress in
order to improve and strengthen Palestinian governance.
Strong democratic institutions based on respect for the
rule of law remain vital to a viable Palestinian State. In
this regard, we deplore the recent arrests of members of

S/PV. 8847

Palestinian civil society. We also call on the Palestinian
Authority to shed full and transparent light on the
circumstances of the death of Nizar Banat, following
his arrest by Palestinian security forces in late June.
France reiterates its commitment to freedom
of expression and respect for human rights in the
Palestinian territories. We call on the Palestinian
Authority to comply with its international commitments
on this issue.
Finally, France remains convinced that the twoState solution is likely to meet the aspirations of the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples and to ensure the
security of everyone as well as the stability of the
region. We call on all members of the Security Council
to take action to preserve the prospects for peace before
it is too late.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the last debate under the Indian
presidency of the Security Council, I would like to
most sincerely congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the successful way India conducted the Council’s
work during the month of August. I also thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
As we have heard from the Special Coordinator this
morning, we are once again faced with an uninspiring
scenario in which the ceasefire between Gaza and Israel
is looking increasingly fragile. The economic situation
in the West Bank and the humanitarian crisis in Gaza
continue to deepen, as evidenced by recurrent popular
mobilization and the clashes with the forces of law and
order that result.
Mexico has already pointed out on several occasions
that it is essential to break the cycle of violence and
not lose sight of the fact that the prosperity of the
Palestinians contributes to the prosperity and security
of the Israelis. In this regard, I would like to focus my
remarks on the following points.
First, we express great concern about the fragile
security situation. Mexico condemns the shelling of
targets in the Gaza Strip, while we also condemn the
firing of rockets and incendiary devices by militias
in Gaza into Israel. We call on the parties to exercise
maximum restraint and avoid provocations.
Secondly, unfortunately, restrictions on the entry
and exit of people and goods from the Gaza Strip
continue. While we acknowledge that Israel has
authorized the clearance of some goods, it has clearly

21-2370211/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

been insufficient. We are particularly concerned
about the delays in humanitarian assistance, and we
regret the obstacles facing the import of materials for
reconstruction in Gaza. We call upon Israel to lift the
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip as soon as possible,
and we urge Egypt to keep the Rafah border crossing
open on a regular basis.
Restricting freedom of movement is a form of
collective punishment that severely affects the civilian
population. Respect for human rights in no way
undermines security. Moreover, my country, Mexico,
welcomes the agreement between Qatar and the United
Nations that will facilitate the transfer of financial
resources to Gaza. We also welcome the recent donation
of 500,000 doses of vaccines for Palestine by the United
States, of which 200,000 were destined for Gaza.
Thirdly, turning to the situation in the West Bank,
Mexico notes with concern the frequency of clashes
between Israeli law enforcement and Palestinian
civilians. Recent incidents in the vicinity of Hebron,
Nablus, Jenin and East Jerusalem, in which several
Palestinians, including 12 minors, lost their lives as a
result of ammunition fired by Israeli law enforcement
agencies, are simply unacceptable. We urge Israel to
observe its obligations under international humanitarian
law and to redouble its efforts to protect the lives of
civilians, particularly children.
Likewise, the recurrent acts of repression
against popular demonstrations, arbitrary arrests
and harassment of social activists and journalists by
Palestinian security forces are of concern. Mexico calls
on the Palestinian Authority to preserve the rights to
freedom of expression and association. Respect for
human rights and accountability are cornerstones in the
construction of any democratic State.
Fourthly, we commend the Israeli diplomatic
activism shown in recent high-level meetings with
Moroccan and Egyptian officials. We also applaud
the growing economic and public-health cooperation
with the Palestinian Authority. Mexico hopes that such
rapprochement will be deepened and that the dispute
over the transfer of fiscal resources that Israel collects
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority will be resolved.
The precarious budgetary situation of the Palestinian
Authority is causing delays in the payment of civil
servants’ salaries, which is the main source of income
for thousands of Palestinian families.
12/18

30/08/2021

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate Mexico’s
condemnation of the construction and expansion of
settlements in the occupied territories. We call on Israel
to cease the expansion of settlements and adopt measures
that would reverse the negative trends on the ground,
in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). We also
call for a definitive suspension of eviction decisions in
such East Jerusalem neighbourhoods as Sheikh Jarrah,
Silwan and Al-Walaja. Decades of conflict have laid
bare the disillusionment of the Palestinian population
and the imperative need to address the root causes of
the conflict.
Finally, I would like to reiterate once again that my
country, Mexico, supports the efforts of the international
community, including the Middle East Peace Quartet,
in favour of the two-State solution, namely, a solution
that addresses Israel’s legitimate security concerns and
the aspirations of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State, in accordance with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome Foreign Secretary Harsh
Vardhan Shringla’s personal participation in today’s
meeting. We also thank Tor Wennesland for his
informative briefing.
We are watching with concern the continued
tension in the Palestinian territories, in particular in the
Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem. The risk remains that
clashes in the border areas of Gaza could escalate into
full-scale hostilities. There is also the ongoing threat
of forced evictions of several Arab families from the
Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of East Jerusalem. On
2 August, the Israeli Supreme Court postponed the
hearings in the case indefinitely, which could lead to
another round of escalation.
The Russian Federation’s position remains
unchanged: Israel’s illegal settlement activity and
expropriation of land and property in the occupied
territories is a violation of international law. Such
actions significantly impede international efforts aimed
at resuming direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations
as quickly as possible so as to make sure that the
parties arrive at a comprehensive settlement of final
status issues.
At the same time, it is impossible to achieve lasting
stability without restoring the political horizon and
reviving the peace process on the universally agreed
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international legal basis, with the two-State solution as
the key element.
We also welcome the Egyptian mediation
efforts aimed at breaking the deadlock in a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement.
The prolonged stagnation in the peace process, the
provocative unilateral steps and the attempts to score
domestic political points through acts of force further
complicate the already explosive situation in the conflict
area. In that regard, we believe that it is important to
preserve and strengthen the international consensus
on a Palestinian-Israeli settlement, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and the two-State solution.
The most recent serious escalation of tension in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict in May this year once again
reminded us of the risks and threats to regional and
international security posed by the lack of a settlement.
In that context, we call upon the parties concerned to
start building a stable and conflict-free Middle East in
the spirit of our recently updated concept of collective
security in the Gulf region, with an emphasis on its
regional dimension. Such a system is meant to be a
prelude to building a common post-crisis architecture
for the Middle East region.
We support the relaunching of direct PalestinianIsraeli negotiations, resulting in meeting the legitimate
Palestinian aspirations for an independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and providing for the
understandable Israeli national security concerns. We
accord a special role to the Middle East Quartet in
helping to achieve that goal as the only internationally
recognized mechanism for facilitating an IsraeliPalestinian settlement.
In that regard, we intend to continue our efforts
to revitalize the activities of the Quartet. We call on
our Quartet colleagues to respond positively to our
initiative to hold a ministerial meeting in New York
in September on the margins of the high-level week
of the General Assembly, as well as consultations in
an expanded format with the participation of States of
the region. At the same time, we are counting on the
international community’s support for such efforts.

S/PV. 8847

conflict. As stated many times before, the only viable
path towards that is through direct negotiations aimed
at a two-State solution based on international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Until the conditions for such negotiations are
established, we urge the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to take practical steps to rebuild
confidence. For instance, further coordinated efforts
to enhance economic cooperation are vital and would
benefit the citizens of both sides. Meanwhile, it is
essential that all refrain from any unilateral steps that
undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
We are concerned about the continued tensions
around Gaza, and we reiterate our call to the parties
to continue to respect the ceasefire and do their utmost
to prevent further violence. The continued launching
of incendiary balloons, as well the recent launch of a
rocket towards Israel, is unacceptable. Israel has a right
to defend itself, while ensuring the safety and protection
of the civilian population.
Estonia fully supports the international and
regional efforts for reconstruction in Gaza and to
improve the dire and unsustainable humanitarian
and socioeconomic situation on the Gaza Strip. The
agreement reached by the United Nations and Qatar
on distributing aid to Gaza was a positive step in that
regard. We call upon all parties to facilitate unimpeded
humanitarian access.
Turning to the West Bank, we are worried about
the continued incidents of violence, including the
recent clashes between the Palestinians and the Israeli
security forces. We call on all parties to refrain from
violence and incitement to provocation.
We are concerned about the recent arrests of
Palestinian activists calling for transparency in the
investigation related to the killing of the political activist
Nizar Banat. We call on the Palestinian Authority to
ensure freedom of expression and freedom of assembly
and to conclude a transparent investigation of the death
of Nizar Banat.

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.

We are also concerned about Israel’s settlement
activity, as well as the evictions and demolition of
Palestinian property in the West Bank. We call upon the
Government of Israel to refrain from advancing such
activities, as they are contrary to international law.

Estonia remains committed to supporting efforts
to find a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian

In conclusion, considering the tensions on the
ground, threatening the stability of Israelis and

21-2370213/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians as well, I would like to reiterate the
importance of international and regional efforts
supporting the parties to take practical steps to restore
confidence, help reconstruction and stabilization in
Gaza and create a horizon for meaningful negotiations.
It is also essential to resume the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process.
Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Let
me start by thanking Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing and endeavours in pursuit of a solution to
the ongoing crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, remains one of the most important
unresolved issues of peace and security in the world
today. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines holds the firm
view that multilateral efforts, including those of the
Security Council and the Quartet, could contribute to the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East, in accordance with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
During August, Israel, the occupying Power,
continued its illegal and inhuman practice throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, injuring and killing
Palestinian civilians, including children, in violation of
international law. We reiterate our call for immediate
international protection for the Palestinian people,
in accordance with international human rights law
and international humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention. It is also imperative that
the relevant parties respect the terms of the 21 May
ceasefire agreement in order to prevent a further
escalation of violence on the ground.
We remain profoundly concerned about the
continuing Israeli demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian structures in East Jerusalem and areas of the
occupied West Bank, displacing Palestinian families.
In line with our long-standing position on that issue, we
call upon the Israeli authorities to halt the demolition
and seizure of Palestinian houses and property, in
accordance with its obligations as an occupying Power
under international humanitarian law, and to cease the
policy of settlement construction and expansion.
The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
a source of serious concern. Humanitarian operations
continue to be seriously affected by the 14-year Israeli
blockade of Gaza, restricting access to humanitarian
needs, relief and reconstruction to meet the needs of
the people in Gaza. We reiterate our call on Israel to
14/18

30/08/2021

lift the blockade, which continues to critically affect
all aspects of life in Gaza. Moreover, we call on the
Security Council to demand that humanitarian aid be
allowed to enter Gaza without restrictions.
On the more positive side, we welcome the recent
agreement between the United Nations and Qatar
to return some Qatari subsidies to Gaza, and we
encourage the international community to help alleviate
the imminent humanitarian crisis. Furthermore, we
reiterate our ongoing urgent call for the international
community to continue its support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East in order to fulfil its mandate of providing
services to Palestine refugees.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains
committed to the establishment of an independent and
viable Palestinian State, living side by side in peace
with Israel, and a comprehensive peace in the region,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and the internationally
agreed parameters. The Council, with its responsibility
for international peace and security mandated by the
Charter of the United Nations, cannot afford to ignore
the suffering of the Palestinian people anymore. We
need to urgently find a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the dire conflict.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
My delegation remains concerned about recent
developments in the region, which do not give cause
for optimism with regard to our hopes following the
Israeli-Palestinian ceasefire in May. The incidents
observed this month, like those of the previous two
months, continue to distance us from those optimistic
prospects, leaving behind the looming spectre of
violence and instability.
In that regard, we stress that the source of all
the violence and suffering endured by these two
peoples lies essentially in the continuation of the
policy of unbridled colonization carried out by Israel
over several decades in the Palestinian territories, in
defiance of international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Moreover, it is the continuation of
colonization, injustice and discrimination against the
Palestinian people that breeds discontent, revolt and
violence. The tragic events of May and the upsurge in
protests in the occupied territories bear witness to that
reality and should prompt the Security Council, in line
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with its obligations, to do all it can to put an end to
that policy.
The international community, the Quartet, the
members of the Council and regional actors with
influence on the parties must continue to exert the
necessary pressure for the maintenance of a lasting
ceasefire and the resumption of the peace process for a
successful conclusion to this conflict.
On the humanitarian front, my delegation welcomes
the reopening of the Rafah crossing by the Egyptian
authorities, the easing of the blockade on the import of
goods into Gaza by Israel and Qatar’s announcement
of the forthcoming resumption of its financial aid to
thousands of needy families in the enclave.
We therefore call on the international community
to be more generous towards the suffering people of
Gaza. It is essential that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
be provided with the means to continue to deliver its
vital services to the thousands of Palestinian families in
need, especially after the Israeli bombardment during
this time of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
As the occupying Power, Israel must fully
comply with its responsibilities under international
humanitarian law to ensure the well-being and survival
of the population under its control.
In conclusion, the Niger reaffirms that only the
return to international parameters and the resumption
of the peace process leading to the realization of the
solution of two viable, sovereign and independent
States, living side by side in peace and security, can
lead to a lasting solution to the crisis.

S/PV. 8847

We further condemn all terrorist attacks and acts
conducive to terrorism by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other militant groups. We urge all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint and refrain from hostilities
in the interest of the safety and security of Israelis and
Palestinians alike.
In the interest of peace and stability in the region,
it is critical that the parties commit to upholding the
ceasefire and engage positively with the regional
stakeholders, the Office of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and the Special
Envoys of the Middle East Quartet mediation efforts.
Kenya continues to encourage the positive regional
mediation efforts, including those aimed at fostering
intra-Palestinian unity — particularly following the
postponement of the Palestinian presidential elections.
The surge of the coronavirus disease, including
reports of the highly infectious Delta variant in the
Gaza Strip, is an urgent concern given the already
fragile health infrastructure, which has been stretched
beyond its capacity. Kenya commends all efforts to
contain the spread of the pandemic. It is encouraging
that vaccines are now more widely available. We urge
a robust effort to promote vaccination that addresses
misinformation and disinformation.
Kenya remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We continue
to call for unhindered access to humanitarian aid, in
line with international humanitarian law. In addition,
the existing instruments to guard against the diversion
of humanitarian resources by militant groups should be
fully operationalized.

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): We are happy to the see
the Foreign Secretary of India presiding over our
meeting today, and we thank Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland for his briefing.

We welcome the ongoing efforts for an integrated
humanitarian package in Gaza. The recent $40 million
agreement between the Special Coordinator’s Office
and Qatar for providing funds to families in Gaza is a
welcome initiative.

Kenya hopes that the 20 May ceasefire agreement
will continue to hold. However, the recent increase
in violent incidents and clashes in the West Bank, as
well as the continued tensions this past week in Gaza,
including along the parameter fence, are of concern. If
unchecked, such incidents could easily escalate to the
levels we saw in May, or even worse.

As we look forward to the recommendations of
the upcoming Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in
September, Kenya continues to call for the strengthened
role and reinforced funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in order to address the broader set of socioeconomic
challenges in the occupied Palestinian territory.

Kenya strongly condemns the continued rocket
launches from Gaza by Hamas and any militant
group against civilians and civilian targets in Israel.

As we have stated before, the practicality and full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will need to
address the various elements that have implications

21-2370215/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for peace, security and stability, including the issue of
settlements, territorial contiguity and the immediate
socioeconomic effects of acts that violate aspects of
the resolution.
Kenya therefore remains opposed to the expansion
of existing and new settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
as they are in violation of international law and
constitute a major obstacle to the actualization of the
two-State solution.
I conclude by encouraging both Israelis and
Palestinians, in every sector and at every level, to spare
no effort in promoting direct final-status negotiations
as the only meaningful way to achieve sustained peace.
We welcome the recent engagements at ministerial
levels reported by the Special Coordinator as a positive
development in that regard.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Tensions in the occupied Palestinian territory have
escalated recently, casting a shadow over the ceasefire
agreement reached three months ago. Israeli military
forces have clashed with Palestinian demonstrators
along the Gaza border on multiple occasions, resulting
in many casualties, including dozens of children.
Moreover, an arrest operation carried out by the Israeli
security forces in the West Bank resulted in the death
of several young Palestinians. Special Coordinator
Wennesland has called for an investigation in that regard.
China is deeply concerned about those developments
and urges all parties, especially Israel, to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid all violence against civilians
and refrain from any actions that might heighten
tensions. We call on Israel to fully abide by all relevant
United Nations resolutions, halt settlement activities in
the West Bank and cease the demolition of Palestinian
homes and the expulsion of Palestinians.
The dual shock of conflict and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) has exacerbated the humanitarian
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
international community should take urgent action to
provide Palestine with humanitarian and COVID-19
response assistance through multiple channels and
continue to support the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).
16/18

30/08/2021

China welcomes Qatar’s cooperation with the United
Nations to provide relief to the people of Gaza. We urge
Israel to open relevant entry points, lift the blockade
and siege on Gaza as soon as possible and provide
access for humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
materials rather than setting up obstacles.
China has been following closely the humanitarian
situation in Palestine and has provided concrete support
to the Palestinian people’s fight against the pandemic.
In March, the Chinese Government donated 100,000
doses of COVID-19 vaccine to Palestine and will
donate another 1 million doses in the near future. In
addition, China will partner with Egypt to provide the
Palestinians in Gaza with 500,000 doses of COVID-19
vaccine supplied from an Egypt-based vaccine field
facility, jointly built by the two countries. We will
also provide 200,000 doses of COVID-19 vaccine
to UNRWA.
The frequent conflicts between Palestine and Israel
are largely due to the fact that the Middle East peace
process has deviated from the right track, that relevant
United Nations resolutions have not been effectively
implemented and Palestine’s right to statehood has
been repeatedly violated. That proves once again that
a lasting settlement of the Palestine-Israel question lies
in the two-State solution.
During a visit to the Middle East last month, the
State Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the People’s Republic of China, Wang Yi, put forward
three ideas on implementing the two-State solution
with a view to breaking the current impasse and
translating the consensus on the two-State solution
into concrete action. China calls for enhancing the
authority of the Palestinian National Authority,
supports intra-Palestinian unity and reconciliation and
encourages Palestine and Israel to resume peace talks
based on the two-State solution. Palestinian and Israeli
negotiators are welcome to conduct direct talks in China.
China also calls for the holding of a United Nationsled international peace conference that brings together
the permanent members of the Security Council and all
stakeholders in the Middle East peace process.
As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people,
China supports Palestine’s just calls for fighting for
its national rights and the establishment of a fully
sovereign and independent Palestinian State based on
his 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
will continue to work with the international community
21-23702

30/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to preserve peace and justice, uphold fairness and
conscience, practice true multilateralism and promote
a comprehensive, reasonable and just settlement of the
Palestinian question, as well as the early realization of
lasting peace in Palestine, Israel and the wider region.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I welcome you,
Foreign Secretary, to the Security Council table.
I thank Mr. Wennesland for his briefing. The fact is
that we should all be concerned by the rising tensions
between Israel and the Gaza Strip over recent weeks
and, the comprehensive briefing of Tor Wennesland
just reinforces that view. The fragility of the ceasefire
underlines — as if those of us at this meeting needed
reminding — the urgent need to address the root causes
of that conflict.
The high number of casualties, including children,
from recent violence at protests along the Gaza border
are unacceptable, and we also strongly condemn the
release of incendiary balloons from Gaza. We have
already this year seen the devastating loss of many
lives, including the deaths of children in Gaza and
Israel. In addition, 13 children have been killed in the
West Bank so far this year as a result of that conflict,
many by live fire from Israeli security forces. We
expect the Israeli Government to hold perpetrators of
those killings to account and to conduct transparent
investigations to that end. There is a clear risk of
an even more severe escalation, and today we urge
all sides to exercise restraint and to uphold rules of
international humanitarian law applicable to children
in armed conflict.
We welcome the recent positive developments,
including the agreement to distribute Qatari aid
payments to vulnerable families in Gaza through the
United Nations. The situation in Gaza remains dire,
marked by alarming unemployment and poverty rates,
increased food insecurity and an inadequate health
service to tackle the challenges posed by the pandemic.
Without the hope of a better future for Gazans,
especially for young people in Gaza, we cannot hope to
resolve those issues in a sustainable way.
It is imperative that Gazans be given such hope and
that reconstruction and recovery move forward without
delay. I reiterate our appeal to international donors to
step up support, including through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. I would like also to underline the necessity
of full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access into

S/PV. 8847

Gaza. The positive steps that we have seen in recent
days must be expedited and expanded. I repeat Ireland’s
call on Israel to end its illegal blockade, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009).
Time and again, Council members have expressed
support for the development of a sustainable and
sovereign Palestinian State. To make that possible, we
must keep alive the viability of a two-State solution.
Ireland repeats its call on Israel to end all settlement
expansion, in line with international law. We remain
very concerned about the impact of settlements and
increasing reports of settler violence on Palestinian
communities. We call for attacks against civilians in
the occupied Palestinian territory to cease immediately
and for those responsible to be clearly held to account.
Demolitions, including in Humsa Al-Baqai’a and
Ras Al-Tin last month, as well as threatened evictions
of Palestinian families from their homes, including in
Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan, Al-Walaja and elsewhere in the
West Bank, are part of a deeply concerning trend of
displacement of Palestinians, which simply must cease.
We reject any attempts to undermine the status quo of
the holy sites of Jerusalem, which will only further fuel
tensions on the ground.
Ireland encourages the Quartet to renew its
efforts to revive the Middle East peace process. We
also recognize the importance of holding Palestinian
elections across the occupied territory, giving a
democratic voice to Palestinians, redoubling efforts to
achieve intra-Palestinian reconciliation and renewing
the legitimacy of national institutions.
We will continue to say it: It is essential that
Palestinian women be supported in respect of their
right to full, equal and meaningful participation in
all aspects of public and political life. That should be
guaranteed. We all have a responsibility in seeing that
be realized.
The arrest and intimidation of human rights
defenders and activists for exercising their rights to
freedom of expression and association is unacceptable.
Denying them the right to peaceful assembly is also
completely unacceptable. We call on Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to protect and uphold those
fundamental rights.
Finally, after decades of strife and loss of life,
we all know that the underlying causes of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict can be resolved only by ending

21-2370217/18

S/PV.8847

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the illegal occupation, which began in 1967. It can
be realized only through a two-State solution, the
parameters of which are well known and are agreed.
That would see an independent, democratic, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State side by side in peace and
security with Israel. It is in the interests of both peoples.
Notwithstanding the obstacles, that will and
must remain our vision and our shared goal, as we

18/18

30/08/2021

have already set out in numerous United Nations
resolutions, in the work of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion of the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-23702
