Geaeral Auembl:,-Thirtieth Seuion

88

l. Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control, in collaboration with
Governments and intemational organizations, has undertaken a number of activities which have contributed
to the strengthening of national drug control programmes and thereby significantly advanced intemational efforts to reduce drug abuse and illidt traffic in
drugs;

2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1937 (LVIII) of 6 May 1975 appealing to Govemments for generous and sustained contributions to ·
the Fund;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate this renewed appeal to Govemments;,
4. Further requests the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the Fund to use their good offices
to the maximum extent possible to promote early and
generous responses to the present appeal.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3447 (XXX). Deelaration on the Rigb'.ts of
Disabled Persons
The General Assembly,
Mindful of the pledge made by Member States, under the Charter of the United Nations, to take joint and
separate action in co-operation with the Organization
to promote higher standards of living, full employment
and conditions of economic and social progress and
development,
Reaffirming its faith in human rights and fundamental freedoms and in the principies of peace, of the dignity and worth of the human person and of social justice proclaimed in the Charter,
·
Recalling the principies of the Universal Declaration
,of Human Rights, 18 the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights, 14 the Declaration of the Rights of the
Child 111 and the Declaration on the Rights of Mentally
Retarded Persons, 16 as well as the standards aiready
set for social progress in the constitutions, conventions,
recommendations and resolutions of the Intemational
Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund and
other organizations concemed,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1921 (LVIII) of 6 May 1975 on the prevention
of disability and the rehabilitation of disabled persons,
Emphasizing that the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development17 has proclaimed the necessity of
protecting the rights and assuring the welfare and rehabilitation of the physically and mentally disadvantaged,
Bearing in mind the necessity of preventing physical
and mental disabilities and of assisting disabled persons to develop their abilities in the most varied fields
of activities and of promoting their integration as far as
possible in normal life,
13Resolution 217,A (Ill). ·
1, Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
111 Resolution 1386 (XIV).
te Resolution 2856 (XXVI).
11 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

A ware that certain countries, at their present stage
of development, can devote only limited eflorts to this
end,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Rights of Disabled Persons and calls for national and intemational
action to ensure that it will be used as a common basis
and frame of reference for the protection of these rights:
1. The term "disabled person" means any person
unable to ensure by himself or herself, wholly or
partly, the necessities of a normal individual and/or
social life, as a result of a deñciency, either ccritgenital
or not, in bis or her physical or mental capabilities.
2. Disabled persons shall enjoy ali the rights set
forth in this Declaration. These rights shall be granted
to all disabled persons without any exception whatsoever and without distinction or discrimination on
the basis of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinions, national or social origin,
state of wealth, birth or any other situation applying
either to the disabled person himself or herself or to
bis or her family.
3. Disabled persons have the inherent right to
respect for their human dignity. Disabled persons,
wl!atever the origin, nature and seriousness of their
handicaps and disabilities, have the same fundamental rights as their fellow-citizens of ·the same
age, which implies first and foremost the right to
enjoy a decent life, as normal and full as possible.
4. Disabled persons have the same civil and political rights as other human beings; paragraph 7
of the Declaration on the Rights of Mentally Retarded Persons applies to any possible limitation or
suppression of those rights for mentally disabled
persons.
5. Disabled persons are entitled to the measures
designed to enable them to become as self-reliant as
possible.
6. Disabled persons have the right to medical,
psychological and functional treatment, including
prosthetic and orthetic appliances, to medica} and
social rehabilitation, education, vocational training
and rehabiHtation, aid, counselling, pla~ment services and other services which will enable them to
develop their capabilities and skills to the maximum
and will basten the process of "their social integration or reintegration.
7. Disabled persons have the right to economic
and social security and to a decent level of living.
They have the right, according to their capabilities,
to secure and retain employment or to engage in a
useful, productive and remunerative occupation and
to join trade unions.

8. Disabled persons are entitled to have their
special needs taken into consideration at all stages
of economic and social planning.
9. Disabled persons have the right to live with
their families or with foster parents and to participate in ali social, creative or recreational activities.
No disabled person shall be subjected, as far as bis
or her residence is concemed, to differential treatment other than that required by bis or her condition or by the improvement which he or she may
derive therefrom. lf the stay of a disabled person in
a specialized establishment is indispensable, the environment and living conditions therein shall be as

Resolutions adoptecl on the reporte of the Thinl Committee

close as possible to those of the normal life of a
person of his or her age.
1O. Disabled persons shall be protected against
ali exploitation, all regulations and ali treatment of
a discriminatory, abusive or degrading nature.
11. Disabled persons shall be able to avail themselves of qualified legal aid when such aid proves indispensable for the protection of their persons and
property. If judicial proceedings are instituted against
them, the legal procedure applied shall take their
physical and mental condition fully into account.
12. Organizations of disabled persons may be usefully consulted in ali matters regarding the rights of
disabled persons.
·
13. Disabled persons, their families and communities shall be fully informed, by all appropriate means,
of the rights contained in this Declaration.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3448 (XXX).

Protection of human rights
in Chile18
The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental fteedoms for
all,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights, 19 everyone has the right
to life, liberty and the security of person and the right
not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile, or to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recalling that, in its resolution 3219 (XXIX) of
6 November 1974, the General Assembly expressed its
deepest concem about reported constant and lagrant
violations of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile and urged the authorities in that country
to tak:e ali necessary steps to restore and safeguard
those rights and freedoms,
Noting that the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its eighteenth session, the General Conference
of the Intemational Labour Organisation at its sixtieth
session, the World Conference of the Intemational
Women's Year and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discri.min:ation and Protection of Minorities at its
iwenty-eighth session called for the cessation of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
Chile,
Noting that, in its resolution 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975,20 the Commission on Human Rights, after
expressing its serious concem about the continuing reports of violations of human rights in Chile, decided to
establish an ad hoc working group to inquire into the
present situation of human rights in that country on the
basis of ali available evidence, including a visit to
Chile, and appealed to the authorities of Chile to extend their full co-operation to the group,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 3219

(XXIX) 21 and, in particular, the progress report submitted by the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile,22
Convinced that the progress report contains evidence
from which to conclude that constant fl.agrant violations
of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms have
taken place and continue to take place in Chile,
Expressing its appreciation to the Chairman and the
members of the Ad Hoc Working Group for their report, which has been prepared in a commendable manner notwithstanding the refusal of the Chilean authorities to permit the Group to visit the country,
Reaffirming its condemnation of all forms of torture
and of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,

1. Expresses its profound distress at the constant
flagrant violations of human rights, including the institutionalized practice of torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, arbitrary arrest,
detention and exile-to which the progress report of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Situation of Human
Rights in Chile, established under resolution 8 (XXXI)
of the Commission on Human Rights, brings additional
evidence-which have taken place and, according to
existing evidence, continue to take place in Chile;
2. Calls upon the Chilean authorities to take, without delay, all necessary measures to restore and saf~
guard basic human rights and fundamental fi:eedoms
and fully to respect the provisions of the intemational
instruments to which Chile is a party and, to this end,
to ensure that:
(a) The state of siege or emergency is not used for
the purpose of violating human rights and fundamental
freedoms, contrary to article 4 of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;28

(b) Adequate measures are talren to end the institutionalized practice of torture and other forms of
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
in full respect of article 7 of the Intemational Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights;

(e) The rights of all persons to liberty and security
of person, in particular the rights of those who have
been detainecl without charge or are in prison solely
for political reasons, as provided for in article 9 of the
Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
are fully guaranteed and steps are taken to clarify the
status of those individuals who are not accounted for;
(d) No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any aot or omission which did not
constitute a criminal offence, under Játional or international law, at the time when it was committed, contrary to article 15 of the Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
(e) No one, in accorda.p.ce with article 15, paragraph 2, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
shall be arbitrarily deprived of Chilean nationality;

(f) The right to freedom of association, including the
right to form and join trade uníons, shall be respected,
in accordance with article 22 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;

1s See also p. 99, itero 12.
111 Resolution 217 A (ill).
20 See Olficial Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Fifty-elghth Sesslon, Supplement No. 4 (B/S63S), cbap. XXDI.

89

21 A/10295.

22 A/1028S, annex.
23 Resolution 2:200 A (XXI), annex.
