38

General AMembly-Twentieth Sel!11ion

3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights to continue
its consideration of the question of the further promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms ;
4. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council should, in studying the question of transferring the
resources released as a result of disarmament, bear in
mind the economic needs of all countries, particularly
of the less developed countries, in order to help them
to achieve the safeguarding of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. "
1381st plenary meeting,
18 November 1965.
2034 (XX). Assistance in cases of natural disaster

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1049 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964 requesting the
Secretary-General to make a study of the types of
assistance the United Nations might appropriately
provide, the order of magnitude of the resources the
Secretary-General might require for the purpose and
the alternative methods of providing such resources,
including the establishment of a United Nations fund
for assistance in cases of natural disaster, financed
through voluntary contributions, and to report to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session,
Recalling that in resolution 1049 (XXXVII) the
Economic and Social Council also requested the
Secretary-General to consider possible improvements
in the arrangements for co-ordinating international
assistance and to report to the Council at its thirtyninth session,
lf aving,. considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its nineteenth
session,3 the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon• and
the report of the Secretary-General to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-ninth session, 5
Noting the Secretary-General's readiness to be at
the disposal of international non-governmental organizations concerned with emergency relief to assist them
in pursuing the question of co-ordination,
Further noting that, in co-operation with the League
of Red Cross Societies, the United Nations can offer
both guidance and technical assistance in formulating
pre-disaster plans to countries requesting it, and also
assistance, immediately after a disaster, in drawing up
comprehensive plans for rehabilitation and reconstruction,
Welcoming the Secretary-General's statement that
the procedures set out in the twenty-eighth report
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination6
for the co-ordination of assistance from mei'nbers of
the United Nations family are working satisfactorily,
l. Invites States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies and the Ina Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document A/5845.
4 Ibid., document A/5883.
5 Official Records of the Economic aind Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 5, document
E/4036.
6 Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda items 4 and
document E/3765.

ternational Atomic Energy Agency which have not
already done so:
(a) To consider the advisability ?f setting_ up appropriate national planning and operatmg t?achmery most
suited to their own conditions, and designed to determine the degree and character of the relief _required ~nd
to give unified direction to relief operations, Umted
Nations resident representatives being suitably associated with such work;
( b) To consider setting up national Red Cross or
Red Crescent societies;
2. Requests Member States, whe? offering. emergency assistance in cases of natural disa~ter, to m_form
and make use of the appropriate standmg. machmery
set up in the stricken countries and to mfor!ll the
Secretary-General of the type of emergency assistance
they are in a position to offer;
3. Notes with satisfaction the existing arrangemer.its
which the United Nations and the specialized agencies
have for providing emergency assistance, ir.iclu_ding
their relationships with non-governmental orgamz~tt~ns,
particularly with the League of Red Cross Societies;
4. Invites the executive heads of the organizations
and programmes within the United Nations system,
under the leadership of the Secretary-General, to continue and intensify their efforts to ensure the full coordination of the assistance made available by and
through those organizations and programmes to countries stricken by natural disasters;
5. Approves the proposal of the Secreta_ry-Gen~ral
that he be authorized to draw on the Workmg Capital
Fund in the amount of $100,000 for emergency aid in
any one year, with a normal ceiling of $20,000 per
country in the case of any one disaster ;
6. Decides to review at its twenty-third session the
experimental arrangements referred to in paragraph 5
above.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2035 (XX). World social situation

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the measures taken to implement General
Assembly resolution 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December
1963,7
Taking note with satisfaction of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1086 E (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965,
by which the Council, inter alia, invited the Social Commission to re-examine, at its seventeenth session, the
role which it should play within the framework of
United Nations programmes in order to meet the needs
of Member States, and to submit its proposals regarding the action to this effect to the Council at its fortyfirst session,
Recalling its resolution 1916 (XVIII) which, inter
alia, requested the Economic and Social Council to
review its resolution 496 (XVI) of 31 July 1953 entitled "Programme of concerted practical action in the
social field of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies" in the light of the Report on the World
Social Situation, 1963, 8 and of the objectives of the
United Nations Development Decade,
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Srssion, Annexes, agenda item 54, document A/6016.
8 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 63.IV.4.
