S/PV.7184

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7184th meeting

Wednesday, 28 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon/Ms. Paik Ji-ah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

14-41153 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1441153*

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belgium, Israel, Jamaica, Japan,
Pakistan and the Syrian Arab Republic to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė
will make a joint statement on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Following
the joint statement, the Council will hear briefings by
the Chairs of those three Committees.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Raimonda
Murmokaité, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning Counter-Terrorism.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): On behalf of the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), on the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction; and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, 1 have the honour to
brief the Council on the continuing cooperation among
the three Committees and their respective expert
groups.
I would like to address three key areas of such
cooperation: information sharing and joint meetings,
outreach activities and country visits, and participation
in a broader counter-terrorism framework.
The three Committees and their respective expert
groups continued the practice of sharing relevant

2/31

28/05/2014

information and of meeting, where appropriate, in
order to discuss common issues, coordinate actions
and exchange information on particular issues. For
instance, the 1540 Committee’s Group of Experts and
the 1267 Committee’s Monitoring Team held regular
informal exchanges concerning new challenges, such
as the implications of scientific and technological
developments in chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear weapons in relation to non-State actors,
including terrorists. The 1540 Committee’s Group
of Experts and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) shared experiences
on compiling effective implementation practices in
accordance with their respective mandates. In addition,
the members of the expert groups participated in
training sessions, such as on the relationship between
the Internet and communication technologies and
terrorism, organized by CTED in December 2013.
The Committees also continued to extend invitations
to each other and their expert groups when arranging
thematic briefings and presentations, including those
by visiting officials from international and regional
organizations. One such briefing, which included the
participation of the Secretary-General of the World
Customs Organization, was organized by the 1540
Committee in February. Earlier this month, the 1267
Monitoring Team and CTED made a joint presentation
to the 1373 Committee members on kidnapping for
ransom.
All three expert groups continued to coordinate
their outreach activities and country visits on a regular
basis. Where appropriate, the three groups consulted
one another when planning country visits and other
missions in order to facilitate the participation of
their respective experts and to ensure a consistent and
coherent approach. A noteworthy example of such
cooperation is this week’s comprehensive assessment
visit to Mongolia, conducted by CTED on behalf of the
1373 Committee, and joined by the 1540 Committee
Group of Experts and the 1267 Monitoring Team.
As regards broader regional perspectives, members
of the 1267 Monitoring Team also participated in
CTED-facilitated workshops in South-East Asia and
South Asia in December and in West Africa in April,
and both expert groups jointly facilitated a workshop
for States members of the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money-Laundering Group in April.
Another step forward in regional engagement was
marked by the establishment, pursuant to resolution
14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

2129 (2013), of a shared focal point for the Caribbean
region to work on issues relevant to the three
Committees and their respective groups of experts. It is
hosted by the Caribbean Community and funded by the
Government of Australia and deals with requests from
Member States of the region to facilitate the delivery
of integrated technical assistance that addresses both
counter-terrorism measures and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The initiative may also
be considered a pilot project that may lead, where
appropriate, to the shared use of focal points in other
regions.
The expert groups continued to work closely with
one another within the framework of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), notably
its various thematic working groups, and contributed
to the preparation of the fourth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In addition,
members of the 1267 Monitoring Team and CTED were
actively involved in the launch of the CTITF global
experts meeting on capacity-building for terrorist
designations and asset-freezing, held this month.
The expert groups also continued to coordinate
among themselves during participation in the work
of other entities and forums dealing with counterterrorism, such as the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, regarding design, facilitation and
pursuit of technical assistance programmes and projects
on a thematic and regional basis; the Financial Action
Task Force, regarding the implementation of counterterrorist financing measures, including Security
Council sanctions; and the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, on areas within their respective mandates.
The work of the three Committees and their
expert groups has been intensified, but continues to
present opportunities for further synergies and for
strengthening the delivery of results. The Committees
and their expert groups will continue to explore ways to
further strengthen their coordination and cooperation
while maintaining respect for the mandates of their
respective Committees and the independence of the
respective expert groups.
That concludes my joint statement to the Security
Council.
Allow me now to turn to a statement that I would like
to make on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and to give an overview of developments in the work of
the Committee and its Executive Directorate.

S/PV.7184

As members of the Council are all aware,
resolution 2129 (2013) renewed CTED’s mandate until
31 December 2017 and provided policy direction for the
work of the Committee and CTED to assist Member
States to achieve full implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In that context, I would
like to address some of the key aspects pertaining to the
realization of that overarching goal.
National and regional assessments and followup, including efforts to ensure that Member States
are provided with timely and appropriate capacitybuilding assistance, continue to be the central focus
of the work of the Committee and CTED. That work
has been strengthened over recent months by the
introduction of new assessment tools and an increased
focus on regional engagement and targeted follow-up
country visits. The new tools — namely, the overview
of implementation assessment and the detailed
implementation survey — were designed to provide
a more detailed assessment of national, regional and
global challenges, shortfalls and good practices, as well
as to help ensure more targeted and effective counterterrorism capacity-building. Thus far, the Committee
has assessed the implementation efforts of 27 Member
States using the new assessment tools.
In order to help the Committee provide ongoing
policy guidance on capacity-building, CTED has
continued to provide regular updates on progress on
Member States’ implementation efforts in specific
regions, as well as on specific terrorism-related issues,
trends and developments. It has also continued to
submit special reports on specific themes, events or
situations that may have implications for capacitybuilding initiatives around the world.
In addition, the Chair of the Committee, with
the assistance of CTED, held an open briefing in
April — with the participation of the SecretaryGeneral of INTERPOL, the Secretary-General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) — on preventing the misuse
by terrorists of travel documents and on terrorism
prevention activities. The CTED’s country assessment
visits conducted on the Committee’s behalf continued to
serve as a platform for direct interaction with Member
States and as the foundation for facilitating the delivery
of capacity-building assistance. The Committee
approved a list of comprehensive, focused and followup visits to 40 Member States — in addition to 15

14-411533/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

28/05/2014

previously approved visits — for the period running
from 2014 to 2017.

Headquarters and on the ground, including the Office
of the Special Envoy for the Sahel.

The assessment process also includes in-depth
and tailored regional dialogue with counter-terrorism
practitioners conducted in focus group environments
and aimed at achieving a more complete understanding
of their working level needs, while also encouraging
practical approaches to capacity-building and
promoting regional cooperation. In that regard, for
example, CTED launched in May the first annual
meeting of professional networks of border police,
customs and intelligence agencies to strengthen border
control cooperation in the fight against terrorism in the
Sahel and the Maghreb.

The joint statement indicated heretofore how close
collaboration of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
with the 1267 and 1540 Committees, as well of CTED
with the respective expert groups, continued to serve
as a platform for raising awareness, encouraging
implementation of related mandates and joint technical
assistance projects, where appropriate. That process
has been reinforced in the Committee’s dialogue with
Member States, many of which have emphasized
the need for the delivery of capacity-building that
addresses both counter-terrorism measures and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Effective delivery of technical assistance and
training often requires a sustained regional dialogue
conducted over a number of years. That model has been
successfully tested in South Asia, where it has resulted
in the development of a platform that generates specific
independent spin-off capacity-building deliverables
developed through dialogue and delivered by donors
and providers. In April, for example, CTED convened
the eighth regional workshop for judges, prosecutors
and police officers in South Asia, which examined the
work of training academies in the region.

The Committee and CTED continue to promote
the effective implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
which focuses on the threats posed by terrorist incitement
and the need to take effective countermeasures, which
may include legal sanctions, as well as increased
emphasis on dialogue and understanding.

Continuing the practice of convening regular
regional and thematic meetings and workshops helps
to create an environment that best serves the interests
of potential recipient States, as well as the community
of donors and technical assistance providers and
to strengthen the coordination of activities and the
identification of national and regional priorities.
Member States and regional and subregional
organizations may also request CTED to advise them
on formulating national and regional counter-terrorism
strategies.
In that regard, CTED, acting in cooperation
with the CTITF and relevant regional organizations,
continued to assist Member States in Central Africa
in their development of a regional integrated strategy
on counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. In January and
April, two regional workshops were held to draft the
strategy’s border control and law enforcement-related
elements. Another example of regional engagement is
CTED’s continued participation in the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and its implementation,
working closely with other United Nations offices at

4/31

Measures taken by Member States to counter
incitement and violent extremism have been intensively
discussed during the country visits and in other
settings. In that regard, this month CTED facilitated
the organization in Kenya of a national workshop
on the effective implementation of resolution 1624
(2005). CTED also continued to gather examples of
good practices related both to legislation and other
aspects of counter-incitement measures, such as
educational programmes promoting peace, dialogue
and understanding among civilizations.
In December 2013, senior prosecutors from around
the world gathered in Tunis to discuss the growing
phenomenon of individual radicalization, which results
in terrorists acting alone or in small cells. That event,
facilitated by CTED, was also attended by leading
academics and representatives of international and
regional organizations. The participants tested strategic
assumptions and compared legal and operational tools
to address that phenomenon, which remains little
documented and ill defined.
Even though the terrorist threat has become more
diffuse, a strong and fair criminal justice system
remains central to a comprehensive counter-terrorism
approach. CTED continues to engage with Member
States on ways to develop tailored and more effective
judicial responses to emerging trends. As part of the
Committee’s efforts to support States’ efforts to bring

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

terrorists to justice, CTED and UNODC have launched
a joint global initiative to strengthen the capacities
of national investigative, prosecutorial and judicial
authorities. This multi-year initiative will address the
challenges involved in effectively investigating and
prosecuting terrorism cases while respecting human
rights and the rule of law.
The Committee and CTED continued to pay close
attention to relevant human rights and rule-of-law issues,
consistent with the Committee’s policy guidance in that
area. Human rights issues arise in virtually all areas
of counter-terrorism, and the Committee and CTED
remain committed to promoting the principle that all
counter-terrorism measures must comply with Member
States’ obligations under international law, including
international human rights law, as a matter of both legal
obligation and effectiveness of the implementation of
such measures.
Over the coming months, the Committee will
continue to fulfil the mandates conferred by the
Security Council, including through the preparation
of a special meeting on the issue of kidnapping for
ransom, in accordance with resolution 2133 (2014);
continued Committee visits to Member States and
stocktaking of their implementation efforts; and further
interaction with civil society, the private sector and
academic institutions. The Committee and CTED will
also continue to arrange open briefings on regional and
thematic counter-terrorism issues for the wider United
Nations membership, with a view to further enhancing
transparency and strengthening cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.
The President: I thank Ambassador Murmokaitė
for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
I am pleased to report to the Council on the
progress made in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) since my last briefing in November 2013 (see
S/PV.7071).
At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation for the support given by the members of
the Security Council and the Secretariat to the work of
the 1540 Committee, in particular the Security Council
open debate held on 7 May (see S/PV.7169), on the topic
“Commemorating the tenth anniversary of resolution
1540 (2004) and looking ahead”, which was held

S/PV.7184

successfully. More than 60 Member States expressed
their strong commitment to the implementation of the
resolution. As encapsulated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, adopted at that meeting and echoed
by many, the 1540 Committee was recommended
to consider developing a strategy towards the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In the same
vein, the Committee will continue to enhance the
ongoing cooperation among relevant Committees as
necessary, as well as to coordinate its non-proliferation
work with other international, regional and subregional
organizations.
On the promotion of a universal reporting, the
Committee received one additional initial report over the
past six months, bringing the number of non-reporting
States down to 21. With the support of the Group of
Experts and the United Nations Office of Disarmament
Affairs (UNODA), three special meetings are being
held to engage and assist the remaining Member States.
By the end of June, we will have engaged 19 out of the
21 non-reporting States.
Since the last joint briefing, the 1540 Committee
and its experts made two country visits, to Niger and
Bangladesh at their invitations, and also participated
in 46 outreach events worldwide. They provided
excellent opportunities to further the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and facilitate assistance
to support capacity-building in many States. The
Committee has also embarked on the compilation of
effective practices. I take this opportunity to thank
all those Member States and international, regional
and subregional organizations for submitting useful
information in that regard. Facilitating matchmaking
between assistance requests and offers also remains a
priority for the Committee. We will review practical
recommendations for strengthening our assistance
mechanism in the coming weeks. I look forward to
reporting that outcome to the Council at the next
briefing in November.
Since the last joint briefing on 27 November 2013,
we also received new formal notifications of 15 points
of contact. To date, the Committee has been advised
of points of contact for 79 States and 12 international
and regional organizations. A special meeting was
held in early April in Vienna, organized by UNODA
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. Points of contact from States, as well as from
international organizations, were brought together to
share experiences. That is an encouraging step in our

14-411535/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

efforts to move towards the development of a living
network of points of contact.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the
Chair’s commitment towards achieving universal
and full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
As we celebrate the tenth anniversary of that seminal
resolution, there is a substantial agenda before us.
Under the guidance of the thirteenth programme of
work, which was submitted to the Council last week,
the 1540 Committee will continue to actively cooperate
with all stakeholders to address all aspects of the
resolution in preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors. The collaboration
between the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) and their experts is crucial in that
regard, and I look forward to sustained cooperation in
the future.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Gary Quinlan,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): In my last briefing to
the Council, I spoke of Al-Qaida’s structural changes,
noting that the movement no longer follows a centralized
command structure. I also emphasized that the threat
to international peace and security posed by Al-Qaida
emanates from a range of increasingly heterogeneous
groups and affiliates. In today’s briefing, I will focus
on those developments in the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and its affiliates and outline the steps taken by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities to ensure that
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains an effective
response to that threat.
The Committee seeks to act quickly and
strategically to ensure that the sanctions imposed
support national and regional responses to the evolving
Al-Qaida inspired threat. That approach encourages
Member States from all regions to take ownership of
the listing process. It was evident last week when the
Committee approved the addition of Boko Haram to its
list of individuals and entities subject to the targeted
financial sanctions and the arms embargo set out in
paragraph 1 of resolution 2083 (2012). As a result of

6/31

28/05/2014

the new listing, any individual or entity that provides
financial or material support to Boko Haram, including
the provision of arms or recruits, is eligible to be
added to the Al-Qaida sanctions list and subject to the
sanctions measures.
The fifteenth report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2014/41) details the ways
in which Al-Qaida and its affiliates take advantage of
local conflicts or situations of limited State control.
When a political situation shifts and opportunities to
bolster Al-Qaida’s agenda arise, the organization and
its affiliates have become adept at quickly seizing such
opportunities to regroup and strengthen. Similarly, the
restoration of political stability and security in one
region does not necessarily serve to weaken the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. It may simply
mean that terrorists find safe havens and opportunities
elsewhere. The shift in the geographical focus of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) in particular
demonstrates such adaptability. AQIM militants have
moved away from Mali and Algeria to regroup in
southern Libya. That combined trend of localization
and globalization demonstrates the need for the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee to maintain a global
approach, while at the same time constantly assessing
and reassessing the threat.
Al-Qaida has gained dexterity not only
geographically but also structurally. In particular, the
trend towards an ever-increasing recruitment of foreign
fighters has given Al-Qaida and its affiliates a more
global reach in a number of theatres of operation. That
strategy has been employed with particular rigour with
respect to Syria. The Monitoring Team’s fifteenth
report raises the specific issue of large numbers of
Al-Qaida-affiliated foreign fighters associating with
the Jabhat-al-Nusra organization. As thousands of
foreign fighters engage in conflict alongside local
militants, ties that the Monitoring Team predicts could
lead to new pan-Arab and pan-European networks of
extremists are established. Furthermore, the return of
those battle-hardened foreign fighters to their countries
of origin or to third countries with new ideas and skills
is a cause for concern. Member States in North Africa,
the Middle East and Europe are already grappling with
the reality of returning fighters with experience of
working with Al-Qaida affiliates. For those reasons,
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee will continue to
maintain a global approach to the threat.

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

In generational terms, Al-Qaida is getting younger,
with its leaders increasingly shaped by the experience of
the current social dynamics rather than the experiences
of the 1990s. Leadership positions within Al-Qaida are
being taken up by men in their late 30s and 40s. With that
generational shift come new philosophical perspectives
and outreach techniques. For instance, among the new
generation of Boko Haram militants in northern Nigeria,
a younger perspective has resulted in an increased
propensity for violence and less tolerance for the local
religious leadership. With Al-Qaida affiliates in Africa
and Asia, mid-level commanders bring technological
knowledge and a focus on innovative attack planning.
Younger leaders are also more adept at connecting with
the next generation of recruits, in particular through a
sophisticated use of social media.
While organizationally Al-Qaida is more
splintered, the shift towards diverse and localized
recruitment also means that it has become more
durable. That trend is further amplified by the scope
for domestic radicalization in a number of Member
States, where violent Al-Qaida-inspired cells may
generate themselves largely autonomously, influenced
by Internet propaganda but disconnected from the
Al-Qaida affiliate command structures.
The Committee remains dedicated to ensuring that
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime itself is as effective as
possible. The threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates
is characterized by the fluidity of its organizational
structure and geographical reach. Maintaining a
sanctions list that most effectively responds to the
threat means identifying potential targets and promptly
adding those names to the list. Conversely, it also
means removing from the sanctions list the names of
individuals and entities that are no longer affiliated
with Al-Qaida. To do that in a global context, the
Committee relies on the engagement of all Member
States. Any Member State may at any time propose
a name for listing or delisting under the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, and I encourage all Member States to
consider doing so.
On 22 May, the coordinator of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team briefed
the Committee on the current threat landscape. The
Committee recognizes that sanctions will have the
greatest impact if the individuals and entities targeted
by the regime are those that currently have an influential
role in or support, in particular financially, Al-Qaida
and its affiliates. It is important for the Committee, as

S/PV.7184

well as all Member States, to respond to the changing
threat in the names that are proposed for listing and
de-listing.
An important focus of the Committee is to improve
implementation of the sanctions measures. In its
fifteenth report, the Monitoring Team highlighted the
implementation value for the travel ban of publishing
biometric data on listed individuals. The Committee
now seeks to collect that data from Member States both
for existing entries on the list and when new names
are proposed for listing. Similarly, the Committee has
initiated a Council-wide engagement with the World
Customs Organization to seek an amendment to the
joint guidelines on advanced passenger information
that it issues with the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the International Air Transport
Association. The proposed amendment would raise
awareness among national civil aviation authorities of
the requirements and targets of Security Council travel
bans.
In view of the growing use by Al Qaida-inspired
terrorists of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), the
Monitoring Team concluded that IEDs are Al-Qaida’s
weapon of choice and the principal cause of civilian
casualties in attacks by Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
More alarming still, Al-Qaida affiliates disseminate
step-by-step guides to the manufacture of IEDs in a
deliberate attempt to arm “lone-wolf” terrorists. The
Monitoring Team has already engaged Member States,
counter-IED specialists and those involved with private
sector supply chains of components that may be used to
construct IEDs. The Committee is now considering the
best way forward.
The Committee is currently in the process of
reviewing more than 150 entries on the Al-Qaida
sanctions list. That is over half the total number. The
names under review include those lacking the identifiers
necessary to ensure the effective implementation
of the sanctions measures, entries corresponding to
reportedly deceased individuals and to entities that
are reported or confirmed to have ceased to exist. The
Committee also undertakes a review of those entries
that have not been reviewed in three or more years. The
responsiveness of Member States remains crucial to the
successful conduct of those reviews. I should like to
take this opportunity to thank those Member States that
have actively participated in such review processes by
providing detailed and updated information.

14-411537/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The Committee also continues to engage with the
Ombudsperson on delisting requests. Such a process
contributes to making the Al-Qaida sanctions list
focused and effective.
The rapid evolution of the threat that Al-Qaida and
its affiliates pose to international peace and security
requires dynamic and timely action by the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee and by the broader United Nations
membership. Ensuring the effectiveness of such a tool
remains a shared undertaking. Member States have a
dual opportunity in that regard. I encourage Member
States to at once assess the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and its affiliates and to actively contribute to making
the sanctions list relevant. I also urge Member States
to concentrate their efforts to fully implement the
measures against listed individuals and entities within
their jurisdiction. As always, the Committee and the
Monitoring Team stand ready to support Member States
in that crucial endeavour.
The President: I thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee Chairs for their important briefings to the
Council today.
Terrorism is regrettably an agile and evolving threat
that requires us to be a step ahead and to anticipate
developments. Since our last meeting on this subject
(see S/PV.7071), the Council has taken further steps
to address the threat of terrorism. In December, the
Council adopted resolution 2129 (2013), directing the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to implement its core mandate of assessing States’
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to identify
emerging issues, trends and developments.
One serious emerging trend is terrorists’ kidnapping
for ransom payments to finance their operations. That
is a significant challenge for us as we seek to constrict
terrorist financing, and it is a terrible threat to nationals
of all countries. In January, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2133 (2014) to tackle this growing
problem. The resolution sent a strong political signal
and made clear the Security Council’s commitment to
addressing the upward trend of terrorist kidnappings and
breaking the vicious cycle whereby ransom payments
strengthen terrorist groups and then incentivize future
incidents of kidnapping. The upcoming special meeting
on kidnapping for ransom will help States to better
8/31

28/05/2014

understand that pressing issue and will provide an
opportunity to discuss practical information, including
prevention measures, to break the vicious cycle.
The nature and composition of Al-Qaida may have
changed, but the threat it poses to nations across the
world has not. Nearly 15 years after it was established,
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains an essential tool
for combatting terrorism. Boko Haram’s abduction of
the schoolgirls in Nigeria on 14 April and its campaign
of violence and intimidation demonstrate the horrors
that terrorist groups can inflict on innocent people. The
United Kingdom was the first country to proscribe Boko
Haram and strongly supported its addition to the 1267
Monitoring Team’s list of groups subject to financial and
armed sanctions. We co-sponsored Nigeria’s proposal
that the United Nations take action. The international
community as a whole supports Nigeria’s efforts to
tackle terrorism. At the Paris summit on security in
Nigeria, Nigeria’s neighbours, the United Kingdom,
the United States and the European Union all agreed
to pursue sanctions against Boko Haram at the United
Nations. We look forward to supporting further efforts
at the United Nations in New York.
As we approach the mandate review next month,
we must work to strengthen the implementation of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime and advance measures to
ensure that processes are fair and clear so that sanctions
are credible and robust. We must also encourage States
to make use of the regime to take advantage of the
global reach that United Nations sanctions offer. To
effectively combat the threat of terrorism, we need that
global reach and must also work together to anticipate
and stifle terrorist activity.
Mr. President, I congratulate your delegation on the
successful open debate on non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction earlier this month (see S/PV.7169),
which commemorated the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), and on the accompanying
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, adopted by the
Council. That mandate remains as important today
as when it was adopted in 2004, and we urge States,
especially Council members, to ensure universal
reporting on its implementation.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
welcomes the initiative of convening a joint meeting
on the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
In regard to the Committee on Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, we thank
Committee Chair Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
very informative briefing, as well as for the leadership
and dynamic way in which he has led the Committee,
which has contributed to combating the scourge of
terrorism wherever it is found. We commend the work of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
for its assistance to the Committee, which provides us
with a strategic vision of the key trends represented by
Al-Qaida and its extensive network of affiliates.
Equally important is the role of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. We thank Ms. Kimberly Prost for the
independence and professionalism with which she has
been carrying out her work. There is no doubt that
it is thanks to the collective effort that the regime is
becoming increasingly effective and that sanctions are
being implemented in an increasingly more diligent
way.
By the same token, we reaffirm the importance
of the work of the Committee in maintaining and
constantly reviewing the list of sanctions. That work
is extremely important and represents the most rapid
and effective way to implement the sanctions regime,
taking into account the energy and versatility of that
terrorist organization and the ease with which it recruits
and incorporates new members in different parts of the
world.
In that regard, we commend the speed and
effectiveness with which, on 22 May, the terrorist
group Boko Haram was added to the list of individuals
and entities subject to financial sanctions and an arms
embargo. We call on Member States to continue to work
to improve those procedures, which underscore the
authority and legitimacy of the measures imposed by
the Council. In that context, we would like to highlight
the importance of the revision of resolution 2083 (2012)
this year.
My country supports the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee aimed at ensuring the full
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). We congratulate the Ambassador of Lithuania,
Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė, for the way in which she
has conducted the work of the Committee since her
appointment. We also thank Ambassador Mohammed

S/PV.7184

Loulichki of Morocco for his work as Chair of that
Committee until December 2013.
We also highlight the effective support work to
the Committee carried out by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate under the leadership
of Mr. Jean-Paul LaBorde. We believe that the most
important work of the Committee and its Executive
Directorate is the promotion of the capacity of States to
apply and implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) through effective international cooperation,
technology transfer and the training of civil servants,
inter alia, and through the unequivocal condemnation
of the international community whenever a terrorist act
is committed.
We commend the efforts of the Committee and the
Executive Directorate to create and use new national
and regional assessment tools to identify the gaps of the
countries and regions and the best practices that help
to ensure the implementation of the most appropriate
measures in the fight against terrorism. We support
interaction among the Committee, the Executive
Directorate, States and regional and subregional
organizations, which is essential to the successful
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). In that regard, my country is organizing a visit
of the Committee next year. We recognize that the
activities just described, as well as the periodic country
visits made by the Executive Directorate, contribute
to strengthening the capacity of the various national
actors in this area.
Chile has high expectations for the special meeting
mandated by resolution 2133 (2014), to be organized by
the Committee and which will include the participation
of Member States and relevant international and
regional organizations. The meeting will consider
measures to prevent terrorist groups from committing
kidnappings and taking hostages in order to raise funds
or obtain political concessions.
In regard to the work of the 1540 Committee, on
7 May we held an open debate to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
which was a milestone to which Chile contributed
when it held a seat as a non-permanent member of the
Council. We value the resolution, which was the first to
link the threat of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons with non-State actors, thereby
filling a void in the system of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

14-411539/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Over those 10 years, the 1540 Committee has
raised the awareness of the international community
by providing assistance, facilitating cooperation and
disseminating good practices. However, much work
remains because today, as in 2004, the threat of non-State
actors and terrorist groups persists. We value activities
fostering exchange of information. For example,
the recent visits to the Niger and Bangladesh were
excellent opportunities to promote the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Promoting joint information
presentations is highly relevant, as they will strengthen
awareness-raising among State authorities and civil
society and ensure the training of civil servants and
specialized units through workshops and seminars.
It is our opinion that the Committee’s work is
headed in the right direction in taking up challenges
such as the financing of weapons proliferation and
support provided by non-State actors in the form
of associated or dual-use materials. From the start,
my country has endeavoured to ensure the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), a
commitment that is in line with State policy. In that
context, we reiterate our commitment to the aims
and purposes of the resolution and again thank the
Government of the Republic of Korea for its leadership.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Six
weeks after nearly 300 Nigerian girls were kidnapped
by Boko Haram and less than one month after a series
of deadly attacks wracked Sana’a, we are reminded
that terrorism remains one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security. Since we last met
on the topic in November (see S/PV.7071), thousands of
foreign terrorist fighters continue to support Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, and groups such as Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram continue to
commit atrocities and instil fear in the Sahel. As the
terrorist threat evolves, so too must our response.
The need for a whole-of-United Nations approach to
countering terrorism has never been greater. Only with
a targeted, nimble and united approach can we respond
appropriately to the ever-changing terrorist landscape.
The Security Council’s three counter-terrorism
Committees should focus on combating the growth
of Al-Qaida and its ideology, building the counterterrorism capacities of States and ensuring that
terrorists do not have access to weapons of mass
destruction. We are grateful to the Chairs of the
Committees — Australia, Lithuania and the Republic

10/31

28/05/2014

of Korea — for their excellent work in promoting the
implementation of the resolutions.
Fifteen years after the creation of the sanctions
regime under resolution 1267 (1999), those sanctions
remain one of the most effective tools to curb the
financing and flow of arms to terrorists. When the
Security Council reviews the Al-Qaida sanctions
next month, we should assess their effectiveness and
calibrate them to the evolving Al-Qaida threat. We see
three particular areas that need the Council’s undivided
attention: kidnapping for ransom, the cross-border flow
of terrorist fighters, and the threat posed by improvised
explosive devices (IEDs).
To combat those trends, the Council must focus on
more effective implementation of those measures. That
can help to isolate and defund groups like Boko Haram
and deter future attacks of kidnapping for ransom — an
appalling practice that the Council rightly condemned
earlier this year in resolution 2133 (2014). Effective
implementation can also curb the flow of foreign
fighters, not only to Syria but also to the AfghanistanPakistan region, Yemen, the Sahel, East Africa and
elsewhere. To stop those flows, States should review
United Nations sanctions lists prior to issuing visas
and share information with international partners.
Finally, effective implementation can encourage States
to exercise greater vigilance to prevent terrorists
from using IEDs — weapons that have killed more
civilians than combatants. We encourage States to
share information, establish partnerships and develop
strategies to combat IEDs.
In addition to the 1267 sanctions, we must work
together to bring greater strategic coherence to the
broader counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations.
As an important first step, we welcome the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and Assistant Secretary-General Laborde and
his team to return CTED to its origins of providing
assessments of counter-terrorism capacity-building
gaps. CTED can and should serve as a matchmaker,
connecting assistance providers with those States most
in need of help. We see a particular need for the United
Nations to strengthen the criminal justice sector in a
rule-of-law framework, as well as to enhance border
security in countering violent extremism.
We welcome the important role of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCCT) in
building the counter-terrorism capacity of Member

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

States and the central role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in coordinating
those efforts. We hope that CTITF and the UNCCT will
continue to increase the strategic nature and impact of
their policies, including by focusing on regions and
countries with the biggest capacity gaps and through
the use of monitoring and evaluation efforts. We
encourage Member States to contribute to the UNCCT.
We encourage all United Nations entities to continue to
interact with the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum and
to use its framework documents and good practices in
areas such as countering violent extremism, criminal
justice, kidnapping for ransom, supporting victims of
terrorism and community-oriented policing.
We look forward to the creation, on 18 June, of
the international institute on justice and the rule of
law in Malta, which will help to strengthen criminal
justice systems. We welcome the creation later
this year of the global community engagement and
resilience fund — the first global effort to harness the
resources of the public and private sectors to support
local, community-based projects on educational and
vocational training, civic engagement, media and
women’s advocacy. We encourage States to support and
contribute to this important fund.
We would like to thank the Republic of Korea
for convening earlier this month an open debate on
resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/PV.7169) — another
pillar of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
The Council’s presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7,
adopted at that meeting, can serve as useful guidance
for the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) as it plans its future work, such as its
interaction with civil society and industry.
The United States has most directly supported the
work of the 1540 Committee through a $4.5 million
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities. The
contribution has helped to fund the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and 1540 Committee
projects, such as the recent meetings in Gabon and
South Africa for non-reporting States. We urge
Member States to consider how they assist others in
implementation resolution 1540 (2004), including by
contributing to the Trust Fund.
To ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), we know what we need to do. Each State
must identify its own vulnerabilities and gaps in
implementation and develop a plan so that the next steps

S/PV.7184

are prioritized. States that lack capacity should request
help and those in a position to assist should do so.
Finally, everyone should be open to sharing useful
information on a timely basis. States should place
special emphasis on improving the design of national
and global approaches to the problem of biosecurity. As
reflected in the joint statement issued at the Nuclear
Security Summit in March, States should also seek the
full implementation of the nuclear security elements
of resolution 1540 (2004) by 2016. By identifying such
priorities, the Committee can use its resources more
effectively and efficiently.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the Chairs of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for their briefings and commend them
for their astute leadership.
Nigeria commends the Chairs for the continued
cooperation among their Committees in the areas of
information-sharing, joint meetings, outreach activities,
country visits and participation in the broader counterterrorism framework. That cooperation has allowed the
Committees to share ideas on new challenges and share
experiences on compiling effective implementation
practices. The regular coordination by the three groups
of experts of outreach activities, country visits and
participation in the work of other entities dealing with
counter-terrorism has allowed them to work together
in a coherent and consistent manner. That is clearly
a win-win situation for the three Committees, as it
allows them to benefit from their relative strengths
and competencies, thus improving their overall ability
to achieve their different mandates. What really
counts is the delivery of results, and we see merit in
the Committees strengthening their coordination and
cooperation with a view to improving their performance.
Turning to the issue of terrorism, I would like to
state that Nigeria remains resolute in its determination
to meet that challenge, which is a clear and present
threat to our national security. It was in that context
that, in March 2014, the federal Government launched a
four-point plan aimed at deradicalization, reaffirmation
of the national ethos, reorientation of the security
services and economic revitalization of a part of the
country where poverty is endemic in order to address
terrorism at home. That plan, which is part of the
national counter-terrorism strategy, is expected to
boost the efforts by Nigeria and its partners to root out
terrorism in the country.

14-4115311/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Nigeria appreciates the cooperation and assistance
of United Nations counter-terrorism entities, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which has been engaged in Nigeria since
2006. That cooperation has led to the establishment of
the office of a national counter-terrorism coordinator in
Nigeria and the evolution of a proactive deradicalization
effort. The contributions of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in the criminal justice track in
Nigeria are also significant. We acknowledge the role
being played in the fight against terrorism by the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCCT) and the
synergy evolving between the Centre and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force.
Capacity-building in the fight against terrorism
has become even more imperative. Terrorists are using
the Internet to advance their cause and are exploiting
modern technology to plan and launch attacks. They have
developed expertise in many areas, including command
and control, logistics and mobility, as evidenced by the
operations in Nigeria and other parts of the world. In
that regard, we thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
its generous contribution to the UNCCT. We urge other
Member States to also contribute to funding the Centre
in order to enhance its responsiveness to the capacitybuilding needs of Member States.
Nigeria appreciates the universality of the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, which is in place to serve Member
States in the global fight against terrorism. It is our
hope that the recent listing of Boko Haram will aid
our counter-terrorism efforts. We remain committed
to implementing the sanctions, resolute in assisting the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) deliver on its mandate and keen to render
on-reserve support to the Office of the Ombudsperson,
who strives hard to ensure fairness and transparency in
the listing and delisting process.
We take this opportunity to acknowledge the support
of friendly States in our fight against terrorism. We are
determined to work with our neighbours to strengthen
coordination of our counter-terrorism efforts.
I will now make a few remarks on nuclear
non-proliferation. Nigeria recognizes the need for all
States to continue to take effective measures to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery. In the interest
of international peace and security, it is particularly
crucial for us to ensure that non-State actors in
12/31

28/05/2014

particular are prevented from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. That underscores the importance of
the work of the 1540 Committee. The decision of the
1540 Committee to strengthen its cooperation with
other committees and with international, regional and
subregional organizations, including in the compilation
of effective practices, will enhance the attainment of
its mandate.
That multidimensional approach also serves as a
viable means of achieving the objective of resolution
1540 (2004). We welcome the steps being taken by the
Committee to promote universal reporting under the
resolution and encourage the planned collaboration
between its Group of Experts and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs to engage with and
assist Member States in the submission of their initial
reports. The fight for non-proliferation can be greatly
aided when requests for assistance are matched by
offers. We therefore urge the Committee to continue
to facilitate that form of matchmaking as it works to
strengthen its assistance mechanism.
Finally, terrorism and the risk of non-State actors
acquiring weapons of mass destruction remain real
threats to international peace and security. As Member
States, we must unite in the face of those threats and
continue to give our full support to the 1373 Committee,
the 1540 Committee and the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Murmokaitė, Ambassador
Oh Joon and Ambassador Quinlan for their briefings.
China appreciates the work of the three Committees
under the leadership of those three representatives.
I would like to focus my statement on the question
of anti-terrorism. Terrorism is the common enemy
of humankind. Recent violent terrorist attacks in
Nigeria, China and other countries have once again
demonstrated that any terrorist act, regardless of when,
where, by whom or for what motive it is committed, is
a grave and inexcusable crime.
The international community must adopt a zerotolerance attitude in the face of terrorism, separatism
and extremism and firmly oppose and counter them.
The United Nations should play a greater role in counterterrorism. The Organization should apply clear-cut
criteria on the question of counter-terrorism, oppose
double standards and encourage the international
community to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law.
China opposes efforts to link terrorism with
any specific country, ethnic group or religion and
supports enhanced dialogue among civilizations and
the elimination of the breeding grounds for terrorism
by various comprehensive means. China believes that
terrorists and terrorist groups are currently using new
information and technology, including incitement,
recruitment, financing and planning through the
Internet. The international community should be highly
vigilant on this issue and seek appropriate solutions to
it.
The Eastern Turkestan terrorist forces, led by the
Eastern Turkestan Islamic Movement, are the most
serious terrorist threat to China’s national security.
The Chinese Government will continue to take
resolute action against those terrorists. We have the
determination, the confidence and capability to fight
them. These terrorists will never succeed, regardless of
the purpose of their attacks.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee bears a very
important responsibility in the fight against terrorism,
and we support its implementation of its mandate and its
continuing efforts to improve the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions through measures
such as the preliminary implementation assessment
and by organizing relevant meetings and country
visits. We hope it will continue to maintain a dialogue
and communication with Member States, enhance its
coordination and cooperation with other United Nations
entities, and continue to help Member States build their
capacity. China will continue to participate actively in
international cooperation within the framework of the
Council in order to fight the phenomenon of terrorism.
The Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities represents an important tool
for the United Nations and the Council in combating
terrorism and imposing sanctions. We support its
efforts to enhance communication with the countries
concerned in listing and de-listing names and to
review the sanctions lists as scheduled, in order to
promote implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 2083 (2012) and fulfil its mandate effectively.
China supports the work of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team under the Committee’s
leadership, and we have taken note of the efforts of the
Office of the Ombudsman to enhance the impartiality

S/PV.7184

and transparency of the sanctions regime. We hope the
membership will continue to support the work of the
Committee and work together to maintain the authority,
effectiveness and impartiality of the United Nations
sanctions regime.
Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first Council
resolution to be assigned the important role of
preventing non-State actors from acquiring nuclear,
chemical, biological and other weapons of mass
destruction. This year marks its tenth anniversary, and
earlier this month the Council held an open debate (see
S/PV.7169) at which it adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) that reflected the determination
and commitment of the international community
with regard to non-proliferation. The next step for
all countries should be promoting the universal,
comprehensive and balanced implementation of the
resolution, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) should do its part in that regard.
China supports the work of the Committee in collecting
reports from Member States, summarizing useful
experiences in the implementation of the resolution and
promoting international assistance and cooperation in
accordance with its mandates. China is ready to work
with all parties to enhance global governance in the
area of non-proliferation and advance the international
non-proliferation process in the interests of promoting
universal security.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ambassadors Raimonda Murmokaité of Lithuania, Oh
Joon of the Republic of Korea and Gary Quinlan of
Australia for their statements.
Ambassador Bénédicte Frankinet will mention
this in her statement, but I would also like to take this
opportunity to strongly condemn the terrorist attack on
the Jewish Museum in Brussels on Saturday. We offer
our deep condolences to the families of the victims
and to the people and Government of the Kingdom of
Belgium. Terrorism is a cowardly act that targets the
most vulnerable. It can hit anywhere at any time. We
must therefore remain vigilant.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Committees for their commitment to enforcing
measures for maintaining and restoring international
peace and security, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. We understand the need for the
objective use of sanctions as an important instrument
for enforcing Council decisions without resorting
to force. On that basis we welcome the opportunity

14-4115313/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

28/05/2014

presented by these biannual briefings on the work of
the three United Nations subsidiary bodies designed
to fight terrorism and non-proliferation, including by
overseeing the implementation of sanctions imposed
on individuals and entities and by monitoring their
violations.

North Africa and the Sahel region. On that note we
reiterate our appeal to the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to support Member States in building their
national counter-terrorism capacities and to foster
international cooperation among the United Nations
system, States and other governmental bodies.

Rwanda believes that Al-Qaida and its affiliates
still pose a serious threat to international peace and
security. Though it is believed that Al-Qaida has had
no central command since the death of its former
leader, his absence, or the absence of that central
command, has not discouraged religious radicalization,
kidnappings and terrorist attacks in various parts of
the world. However, we should remember that these
extremist groups do not manufacture weapons or other
military logistical supplies, and they do not operate
in isolation. They receive arms supplies clandestinely
through individuals, entities and even Member States.

As time has gone on, terrorism has benefited from
technical advances and the power of the Internet,
and from religious radicalization, poverty and lack
of education. Although the masterminds of terrorism
are political extremists and religious radicals, its
proliferation, especially among young people, is
amplified by poverty and a lack of education. While
it is therefore critical to continue the fight against
terrorist networks, we should at the same time invest
heavily in education and povery eradication if we want
to curb this scourge in the long term.

We are very concerned about the branching out of
Al-Qaida into almost every corner of Africa, creating
affiliated groups such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb in the North, Al-Shabaab in the East and Boko
Haram in Western and Central Africa. The persistent
conflicts and instability, lack of solid institutions and
the supply of uncontrolled weapons could make for
fertile ground for incubating terrorism across Africa
if concerted efforts are not made to address the root
causes of conflicts, to provide a sustainable solution to
crises and to neutralize terrorist organizations on the
continent.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
inclusion of Boko Haram on the list of entities subject
to targeted financial sanctions and arms embargoes,
as laid out in resolution 2083 (2012). On Monday, this
group — which, as we all know, is responsible for
the abduction of more than 200 young girls from a
school in northern Nigeria — also attacked a Nigerian
military base and police barracks in the town of Buni
Yadi, killing 31 security personnel. It is important to
support the Governments of Nigeria and its neighbours
at this time in their efforts to eradicate this terrorist
organization.
In accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), Member
States are obliged to prevent and criminalize incitement
and to strengthen international cooperation and border
control. However, porous borders, inadequate financial
means and lack of technical capacity of some Member
States facilitate terrorist movements across borders
without hindrance, especially in the Middle East,
14/31

Rwanda supports the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
appreciates the efforts of Ambassador Oh Joon,
particularly in improving outreach programmes
and visibility for the Committee. In fulfilling the
Committee’s mandate, the outreach events around the
world have raised global awareness and facilitated
information-sharing on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and discussion of identification
of possible needs for assistance and any future steps
that Member States should undertake in support of the
resolution’s implementation.
We thank the Republic of Korea for its organization
on 7 May of an open debate on non-proliferation (see
S/PV.7169), which was presided over by His Excellency
Mr. Yun Byung-se, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Korea. During that debate the
Security Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) marking the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of this landmark resolution, in which it
expressed grave concern about the threat of terrorism
and the risk of non-State actors acquiring, developing,
trafficking in or using nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, given the rapid advances in science and
technology. It is on that note that the 1540 Committee
has strongly urged that we map out key areas requiring
focus, so the resolution can be fully achieved by 2021.
We believe that overcoming new proliferation
challenges requires new approaches to evolving
situations and a consensus on the international security
order that effectively addresses genuine proliferation
concerns. Success in the fight against terrorism goes
14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

hand in hand with progress in strengthening counterterrorism cooperation and the exchange of information
at the international, regional and subregional levels.
In our joint efforts, the fundamental issue should be
that of enhancing consistency and cooperation among
the various counter-terrorism committees, as well as
addressing the root causes of terrorism. In that regard,
we are confident that increased partnership among the
sanctions committees will contribute to a significant
decrease in terrorism.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, allow me to express my sincerest gratitude to
the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), respectively, for their comprehensive briefings
today.
Al-Qaida and its associated individuals and entities
remain a very clear and serious threat to international
peace and security despite a certain weakening of its
core and its central organization. We are observing
with great concern the emergence of new entities
associated with Al-Qaida and its terrorist ideas, which
are carrying out various dangerous activities around
the world. In addition, they are using new methods,
such as information technology of all types, to carry
out terrorist activities through innovative tactics, using
very low-cost and easily available materials. Al-Qaida
therefore continues to threaten peace and security in
the Middle East. There is no doubt that the conflicts
that are ravaging certain States of the region provide
environments conducive to the activity of terrorist
organizations and entities. The clearest proof of that
is the emergence of such terrorist organizations as the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and Jabhat-al-Nusrah.
The Al-Qaida Committee added the latter organization
to its sanctions list about a week ago.
In that context, we think that it is extremely
important for the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning Counter-Terrorism to continue to work
tirelessly in the Middle East and in other regions of the
world where terrorism is emerging.
Today Al-Qaida and its associated individuals and
entities pose threats to international peace and security,
and the international community has to confront those

S/PV.7184

threats through a practical methodology consisting
of a number of elements. They include, in particular,
fostering international and regional cooperation among
States; improving the exchange of relevant information,
expertise and good practices; and assisting States in
implementing sanctions regimes and in participating
in the process of inscription on and deletion from lists
on a case-by-case basis at the national and regional
level. The role of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Committee should be
strengthened. We would like to confirm the importance
of the Team’s recommendation regarding the need to
provide biometric data on individuals on the Al-Qaida
sanctions list. Cooperation with the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which plays a very important and
transparent role, should also be strengthened
Jordan appreciates the important role played by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate in terms of capacity-building, raising
awareness about the offices in charge of countering
terrorism in various States, and coordinating visits to
States. We would like to reiterate in that regard how
important it is for the Committee and its Executive
Directorate to coordinate technical assistance with
Member States in accordance with their needs and on
the basis of the constantly evolving security situation
that we are witnessing. We call on the Executive
Directorate to develop a strategy for a periodic review
of the assistance provided to Member States so that the
members of the Committee are duly informed of it.
Not much time has passed since the Council’s
open debate under the leadership of His Excellency
Mr. Yun Byung-se, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Korea, to mark the tenth anniversary of
the Council’s adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) (see
S/PV.7169). During that debate, a number of proposals
and ideas were presented to strengthen the work of the
1540 Committee. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank you, Mr. President, and the entire delegation of
the Republic of Korea, for your efforts in the work of the
Committee. We appreciate the role of the Committee
and of the Group of Experts in ensuring that all States
are represented in the global reports, in establishing a
network of contact points, in raising awareness and in
facilitating the provision of assistance by contributing
States to recipient States.
Lastly, my delegation would like to say how
important it is for the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
cooperate with Member States and how important it is

14-4115315/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to strengthen national, regional and international efforts
to confront the scourge that threatens the peace and
security of people around the world. Jordan would like
to reiterate that it will continue to play its leading role
in fighting terrorism by adopting necessary measures,
developing effective national legislation, sharing its
expertise in combatting terrorism with other countries
of its region and around the world, strengthening
cooperation with the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and other relevant bodies of the United Nations,
and continuing to support international initiatives aimed
at fostering the values of understanding, cooperation
and rejection of terrorism and intellectual extremism,
such as through “A Common Word Between Us and
You” and World Understanding Week.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to thank the Ambassadors of Australia and
Lithuania and you, Mr. President, for your briefings and
leadership as the Chairs of the respective committees.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be made by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union.
Terrorism is a threat more present than ever,
as illustrated by recent tragic events. France joins
others in condemning with the greatest firmness the
terrible killings that took place at the Jewish Museum
in Brussels. We express our full solidarity with the
Belgian people in that ordeal and offer our condolences
to the families of the victims.
For the struggle against the terrorist scourge
to be effective, the Council, through its Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, must have at its disposal a flexible tool
enabling it to implement swift sanctions when an
emergency requires it. In that regard, several days
following the Paris summit on security in Nigeria held
on 17 May, the Committee took a decision, on 22 May,
to place Boko Haram under sanctions, a decision that
my country co-sponsored.
It is important to continue our efforts to update the
sanctions list so that it correctly reflects the emerging
threats in the fight against Al-Qaida. Today, France is
particularly concerned about a new phenomenon, that of
foreign combatants. These fighters are self-radicalized
young people who travel to fight alongside terrorists.
They represent a threat not only to the countries to
which they travel, but also to their countries of origin,

16/31

28/05/2014

where they will probably return to settle. It is urgent
that the sanctions Committee take action against that
phenomenon, and in particular against the networks
that aid and abet them.
Finally, the listing and delisting procedures of the
sanctions list must respect the fundamental freedoms of
the persons on the list. By creating and strengthening
the Ombudsperson’s mandate, the latest resolutions
have allowed us to improve the procedural guarantees.
While the Council is about to review the mandate of the
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) Committee, it is important
that it continue to improve those guarantees.
Besides the Al-Qaida sanctions Committee, the
issue of foreign combatants, which poses a new threat,
must be taken seriously by all United Nations counterterrorism bodies. We therefore encourage the CounterTerrorism Committee to continue to address that issue,
especially as its new mandate, defined by resolution
2129 (2013), includes the need to focus on recent
trends in the field of terrorism. We also commend the
Committee’s particular focus on new threats through
the holding of discussions on resolution 2133 (2014), on
abductions for ransom.
Lastly, we would like to thank the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for its programme of
work, including several follow-up visits, to ensure the
due implementation by Member States of the Council’s
requirements in the fight against terrorism, namely,
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). It is essential
to pursue that dialogue with Member States by carrying
out regular follow-up visits.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to recall that
the proliferation of nuclear, radiological, biological and
chemical weapons and their means of delivery and the
risk of their falling into the hands of terrorists pose a
genuine threat. Resolution 1540 (2004) and its rigorous
implementation by Member States plays an important
role in averting that risk. In that regard, I would like
to thank and congratulate you, Mr. President, for the
successful organization of the high-level Security
Council debate to commemorate the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004) (S/PV.7169) in early May.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, which the
Council adopted on that occasion, also serves as a road
map for the work of the 1540 (2004) Committee.
Since its adoption in 2004, the progress noted in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has been

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

important. Today, a majority of States in the world have
adopted measures to replicate the provisions of the
resolution in their national legislation, and the main
international, regional and subregional organizations
have adopted strategies to promote and implement that
important resolution. In that regard, we must continue to
encourage countries that have not yet done so to provide
the Committee with a report on the implementation of
the resolution in their national legislation.
Over the past 10 years, the Committee has also
continued its cooperation with several international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as with
other subsidiary bodies of the Council whose activities
are aligned with the goals of resolution 1540 (2004).
The Committee has much to gain from expanded
cooperation with the international bodies responsible
for combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular in developing partnerships
related to technical assistance. We hope that this
cooperation will continue unhindered.
In the light of those developments, the Committee
should undertake a strategic review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the longer
term and to incorporate the results of that analysis in
the Committee’s comprehensive review in 2016. The
presidential statement adopted at the start of the month
paves the way for conducting that important exercise.

S/PV.7184

continue to strengthen the coordination and coherence
of the United Nations activities in the fight against
terrorism. That is particularly important this year when
the General Assembly will hold the fourth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in June.
First, I would like to refer to the work of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and to underscore, as noted by the Chair
of the Committee in his briefing, the importance of
ensuring that the sanctions regime remains an effective
response to the threat represented by Al-Qaida and
its associated entities. In that regard, we agree with
Ambassador Quinlan that is essential to ensure that
the list of individuals and entities subject to sanctions
remains relevant and evolves in line with the evolution
of Al-Qaida and its associated entities. On that point,
we join the support for the inclusion of the Boko Haram
group in the list, as was done just a few days ago.

Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me, through you, Mr. President,
to thank the Permanent Representatives of Lithuania,
Australia and yourself, in your capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for your informative briefings and your work in
leading the subsidiary bodies.

Furthermore, we believe that in order to maintain
the effectiveness of the sanctions regime, it is important
to guarantee respect for due process. As on previous
occasions, I would like to acknowledge the work of the
Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost, who is an example of
efficiency, professionalism and independence. In that
connection, we have carefully considered her report to
the Security Council (S/2014/73), dated 31 January 2014,
and we regret that, in accordance with paragraph 70, she
has been obligated to submit reports on her travels, which
is a clear interference in the independence of the work
of the Office of the Ombudsperson and compromises its
efficiency. We consider it essential that the impartiality
of the Ombudsperson and the confidential nature of
her work be respected. Therefore, we believe that the
Security Council should closely monitor that issue to
ensure that the Ombudsperson can carry out her duties
independently and without restrictions. We also believe
that the Ombudsperson should have the appropriate
tools to carry out the mandate entrusted to her by the
Council. Therefore, we note the challenges and pending
issues identified in the report, for example, the need for
a database and the importance of improving methods in
certain issues related to transparency.

I would like to begin by reaffirming that the
General Assembly, together with the Security Council
and its competent bodies, are the most appropriate
forums for effective action to prevent and eradicate
terrorism. In that sense, we consider it important to

Finally, let me reaffirm the importance of the
availability of the list in the six official languages of
​​
the Organization. This issue is directly relevant to the
implementation of the list by the competent authorities
and the relevance of the sanctions regime. On that

In conclusion, to meet the growing challenge
of terrorism, we must continue to promote close
cooperation between all structures combatting that
phenomenon. It would be useful for the fourth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which will take place in June, to address strengthened
coordination, as well as emerging problems, such as
that of foreign combatants, so that the international
community is better equipped to confront those threats.

14-4115317/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

issue, I would like once again to thank the Chair of
the Committee for his efforts to find a solution to
that problem, which we hope will be resolved as soon
as possible. I would also like to underscore the work
carried out by the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters, which examined the
practice of the different sanctions Committees in the
area of the translation of their respective lists, in order
to contribute, from a general point of view, to the way
in which the 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) Committee
deals with that issue.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee plays an
important role in ensuring that the international
community’s efforts in the fight against terrorism
are more effective. In that context, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2129 (2013) and the extension of
the mandate until 31 December 2017 of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
which assists the Committee in its work. In that regard,
we hope that respect for human rights and the validity
of the rule of law in the context of the fight against
terrorism continue to be cross-cutting aspects of the
Executive Directorate’s work.
The open debate of 7 May on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) and the prospects for its implementation, which
was presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of your country, Mr. President, clearly demonstrated
that Member States agree on underscoring the 1540
Committee’s work and the resolution’s provisions as
essential tools to prevent weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery from falling into the hands
of terrorists (see S/PV.7169).
At the same time, the debate allowed the
international community to reaffirm that, in combating
terrorism, effective international efforts depend on
the adoption and implementation of the necessary
national measures and regional coordination. It also
underscored the need to mobve forward in the area of
nuclear disarmament, since, while weapons of mass
destruction continue to exist, there will be the risk
of them falling into the hands of terrorists. As many
delegations, including mine, pointed out during that
open debate, the only way to eliminate that risk is the
complete elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for initiatives that help to improve transparency in the
work of the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, as well

18/31

28/05/2014

as actions to strengthen their coordination and cooperation
so as to enhance the Security Council’s contribution to
the fight against terrorism and allow for consideration
of the issue in a more comprehensive manner.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I join other
speakers before me in thanking Ambassadors Raimonda
Murmokaitė of Lithuania, Oh Joon of the Republic of
Korea and Gary Quinlan of Australia, the respective
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) on the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, for their briefings.
I congratulate them on their leadership at the head of
those Committees.
Allow me also to add my voice to those of previous
speakers in condemning the attack against the Jewish
Museum in Brussels and to offer our condolences to the
families of the victims and the Government of Belgium.
Chad welcomes the growing cooperation among the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Chad
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2129 (2013), which
renewed the mandate of the Executive Directorate by
providing it with guidance in order to better assist
Member States in fully implementing resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). Furthermore, Chad welcomes
the Committee’s activities set out in the briefing by
its Chair and underscores the threat posed by ransom
payments. Such a practice is a source of revenue that
perpetuates criminal and terrorist acts. In that regard,
we look forward with interest to the special meeting to
be held on the issue of kidnapping for ransom.
With regard to the 1540 Committee, Chad
commends the adoption of its programme of work from
1 June 2014 to 31 January 2015, the visits to Niger and
Bangladesh and the 46 global awareness-raising actions.
Moreover, Chad awaits with interest the development
of a strategy for the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), recommended by the Security Council in the
presidential statement of 7 May (S/PRST/2014/7) and the
review of recommendations on strengthening assistance
mechanisms. Chad reiterates its commitment to
working for the implementation of resolution 1540

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

(2004) and calls for increased dialogue between the
1540 Committee and the 21 Member States that have
still to submit their reports.
With regard to the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, Chad welcomes the
fact that Boko Haram is now on the Al-Qaida sanctions
list. Chad is concerned about the growing threat posed
by Boko Haram, which is increasingly organized and
professional, as demonstrated by its modus operandi.
Boko Haram has human, materiel and logistical
resources.
Chad is also concerned about the regrouping of
the militants of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM) in southern Libya following their defeat in
Mali, as the fifteenth report of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2104/14) notes. We
are also concerned about the diverse and sophisticated
means used by the terrorist group and their movement
around the world.
The use of the Internet, its social media and
improvised explosive devices and the regrouping of
more than 9,000 foreign fighters in Syria are likewise
of concern. Chad calls for the identification of the main
leaders in order to include them on the sanctions list and
encourages the ongoing review of that list, in which all
Member States should participate by providing detailed
and up-to-date information.
With regard to the sanctions regime, like many
other States, Chad believes that the listing and delisting
procedures of individuals on the sanctions list should
be examined in depth to ensure a more transparent
mechanism that is consistent with the relevant legal
standards and practices.
Finally, with regard to the considerable threat posed
by a number of terrorist groups in Africa, such as Boko
Haram, AQIM and Al-Shabaab, Chad calls for increased
cooperation among the Committees, Member States
and regional and subregional organizations in order to
strengthen legal, technical and professional capacities,
including in the military and security fields, with a
view to the effective implementation of sanctions. In
line with its means, Chad is ready to participate in joint
and coordinated actions to restore peace and stability in
Africa and elsewhere.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives of
Lithuania, Australia and your country, Mr. President,

S/PV.7184

for their briefings on the work of the respective
Committees. Such activities are an important
contribution to strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in the
area of international cooperation to counter terrorism.
The events of recent months demonstrate that
terrorism remains a key threat to international peace
and security. At the heart of anti-terror activities is the
conflict in Syria, which is fanning the flames in northern
and western Africa, including the Sahel region, and
continues to destabilize Afghanistan and the Middle East.
Extremists of various affiliations are trying to harness the
turbulence in unstable regions by skilfully feeding off social
problems, the lack of an alternative to criminality and longstanding sectarian and religious differences. Terrorists are
actively taking advantage of recent information technology
developments, including to recruit extremists remotely.
They move unhindered through porous borders and
exploit loopholes in legislation on criminal activities.
A subject of worry, terrorism continues to weave
itself into the fabric of modern regional and other armed
conflicts. In that context, the most pressing problem
is the participation of citizens of various countries in
such conflicts on the side of terrorist organizations,
above all, Al-Qaida and its affiliates. It is necessary to
address such risks at the early stage, to continue efforts
to improve knowledge-sharing among competent
Government departments, to make terrorist activities
less attractive, and to combat the spread of the ideology
of terrorism and violent extremism, including in the
media and on the Internet.
The
Security
Council’s
Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) continues to set the tone in
counter-terrorist cooperation within the Organization.
Increasing attention is being given to a comprehensive
approach in combating terrorism, taking into account
preventive measures for combating that scourge. There
is a growing understanding of a need to involve civil
society, academia and the media in the efforts of
Government structures and international organizations
in that sphere. That was confirmed by the adoption in
December of resolution 2129 (2013), which adapted
the mandate of the CTC and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to the new
realities.
We commend the role of CTED in providing
assistance to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We
think CTED should focus, in the framework of its
updated mandate, on one of its key elements, which is

14-4115319/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

supporting the CTC in monitoring the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) and coordinating
the provision of technical assistance to Member States.
CTED activities that prepare comprehensive counterterrorist strategies are of particular significance. We
are in favour of strengthening its role as a key expert
organ in that field, commanding necessary experience
and methodology. It is necessary to maintain the current
rate of successful CTC country visits. We find useful
the initiatives of the new CTED leadership to stimulate
direct contact between prosecutors and judges in
various States directly involved in prosecutions and
trials of cases of a terrorist nature.
It is relevant to update the global review of the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) and the plan of action for the implementation
of resolution 1624 (2005). We believe it is important to
further strengthen CTC contacts with other structures
and organizations with a view to expanding the
network of counter-terrorist cooperation under the
aegis of the United Nations. In that respect, we note
the interactions of the CTC, the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) at the meeting of heads of special services,
security agencies and law enforcement organizations
on the issue of terrorism, which was organized by the
Russian Federation’s Federal Security Services. We
intend to continue the practice of holding briefings by
representatives from that meeting to the CTC.
The Committee on Al-Qaida remains one of the
most effective Security Council mechanisms in the
field of counter-terrorism. Its sanctions list must
adequately reflect the Al-Qaida threat, which, as recent
events in the Arab world and in Africa have shown, has
not faded. We support proposals on inclusion in the list
of new entities by Member States. We think that the
Committee needs to swiftly respond to the changing
nature of the threat and to consider applications without
excessive red tape.
The powers of the Ombudsperson, set out in
resolution 2083 (2012), provide an optimal level of
transparency for the Committee’s work. However, the
practical activities of that entity sometimes fall short.
Sadly, at times it suffers from a narrow, short-sighted
approach, ignoring the opinion of interested States.
A top priority should be improving the effectiveness
of the sanctions mechanism, which fully depends on

20/31

28/05/2014

implementation by States of relevant commitments.
In that context, we are troubled by references to the
opinion of national judicial forums being used as a
pretext for ignoring Security Council decisions. Such
a policy calls into question the prerogatives of the
Council in combating terrorism.
The adoption in 2004 of resolution 1540 (2004),
which Russia initiated, was the result of a general
understanding of the need to prevent weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems falling into the
hands of non-State actors, above all, terrorists. The
goals set out in the resolution are more relevant than
ever for all members of the international community.
In recent months, the 1540 Committee’s Group of
Experts has continued successful work. We trust that
new members of the Group, given their experience and
qualifications, will be able to join that work smoothly.
The 7 May Security Council high-level open debate
on the theme of non-proliferation (see S/PV.7169) was
a milestone. The main outcome was agreeing on a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7) that will serve
as a benchmark for the work of the 1540 Committee for
the period up to the comprehensive review in 2016.
All of us, all responsible members of the
international community, have collective, long-term
interests in the sphere of non-proliferation. One of our
priorities should be continued, full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by all countries. In that
resolution, all three kinds of weapons of mass
destruction — nuclear, chemical and biological — are
treated as a whole, which confirms the equal danger
of any of them falling into the hands of terrorists. In
the last 10 years, much has been done to implement
that binding document. While 172 Member States have
presented their first reports on implementation, there
is still a long way to go. A remaining priority in the
Committee’s work is providing technical assistance to
States. It is vital that the 1540 Committee effectively
carries out the functions of the central coordinator of
activities on implementation of the resolution, to define
its goals and priorities and to focus the main efforts on
the work of countries that have yet to present their first
national reports.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaité, Ambassador
Gary Quinlan and you, Mr. President, Ambassador Oh
Joon, for the briefings and the commitment with which
all have presided over the Committees established
14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), and 1540 (2004), respectively. I would like to
thank our Lithuanian colleague for her joint briefing,
which highlighted the continued cooperation between
the three Committees and their groups of experts.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the European Union.
Current events, whether in the Sahel, the Horn of
Africa or the Middle East, remind us every day to what
extent terrorism continues to threaten international
peace and security. In the face of that scourge, we
welcome the fact that the three competent Security
Council Committees and their groups of experts
continue to interact with a view to coordinating their
activities and to exchange information on the issues
before them.
We encourage the three groups of experts to
continue coordinating their outreach activities and
their field visits in order to facilitate the participation
of their respective experts and to ensure a consistent
approach. The assessment visit to Mongolia — which
takes place this week, headed by Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, on behalf of the the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, with the participation
of the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the 1267/1989 Committee — is a good example in that
respect.
We welcome the commitment of the three groups
of experts in the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, which has contributed to
the preparation for the United Nations fourth global
counter-terrorism strategic review.
The sanctions regime established under resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) on Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities is one of the most important
multilateral tools that the international community has
for combating terrorism. It targets the various factions
of Al-Qaida and its affiliates to deprive them of
weapons and funding, limit their movements and thus
weaken their ability to perpetrate acts of terrorism.
For the regime to be effective, the listing process
for persons and entities and the delisting procedures
must be guided by the principles of equity, respect for
the rule of law, credibility and transparency. Similarly,
sanctions must be applied diligently. The consolidated
list must also evolve in step with the threat.

S/PV.7184

We support the rapid and strategic work by the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, which seeks to
ensure that the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council support national and regional responses to the
evolving terrorist threat from Al-Qaida. That approach
encourages Member States to take ownership of the
listing process. It proved its worth last week when,
at the request of Nigeria, the Committee approved
the listing of Boko Haram on the sanctions list. That
designation is welcome and fully justified.
We commend the role of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team in highlighting the changing
nature of the Al-Qaida threat and for recommending
ways to adapt sanctions to the noted changes in the
protocol and scope of that threat. Мr. Evans and his
Team can rely on our full support in discharging
their mandate. We support the recommendations of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team and believe it is necessary for the Committee
to maintain a comprehensive approach linked to an
ongoing assessment of the threat.
The Office of the Ombudsman plays an important
impartial role in applying the sanctions regime. The
Committee continues to work with the Ombudsman on
delisting requests. That process helps in ensuring that
the Al-Qaida sanctions list is targeted and effective. We
congratulate Ms. Kimberly Prost on the independence,
professionalism and courage with which she fulfils
her mission. The review of resolution 2083 (2012)
next month will be a useful opportunity to further
strengthen the procedures and effectiveness of the
Committee and the Office of the Ombudsman. The
Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions
has made ​​
constructive proposals in that regard, in
particular to improve information-sharing between the
Office of the Ombudsman and the Member States and
to strengthen the transparency of decisions to delist or
maintain elements on the sanctions list.
Regarding the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, we support the efforts of the Committee to
strengthen the capacity of Member States to help them
to fully implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). Those efforts are a response to the guidance
given by resolution 2129 (2013), which renewed the
mandate of Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. We welcome the fact that the Committee
has decided to pay enhanced attention to the fight

14-4115321/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

against hostage-taking for ransom and the prevention
of terrorists’ misuse of travel documents.
We commend the work of Mr. Laborde at the
head of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. The close interaction between the
Executive Directorate and Member States is essential
for the full implementation of their commitments in the
fight against terrorism. We encourage the Executive
Directorate to continue its capacity-building activities
and to propose mechanisms for technical assistance to
countries that request it. Luxembourg is prepared to
assist in that regard. We have thus sponsored a regional
workshop on the freezing of terrorist assets, which is
organized jointly by the Executive Directorate and the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force. The workshop is being held today, tomorrow and
the day after tomorrow in Tunis.
Finally, regarding the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), it cannot be stressed
enough that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The threat from terrorists or other non-State actors who
might acquire, develop, traffic or use such weapons is
elevated. It is the duty of all Member States to fight
against that threat.
During the open debate (see S/PV.7169) held on
7 May by the Korean presidency on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), the Council renewed the commitment it had
undertaken 10 years earlier. It acknowledged the role of
the 1540 Committee as a clearinghouse that connects
applicants and providers of assistance and recognized
the essential contribution that civil society, industry
and the private sector have to make. To counter the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, we must
indeed mobilize all possible efforts. The Council
also stressed the importance of close and effective
cooperation and coordination between the 1540
Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The cooperation of those three Committees and
their Groups of Experts has created synergies. We must
continue on that path. Everyone will thus win, and
terrorists will lose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

22/31

28/05/2014

Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting. We would also like to express our gratitude to
the Permanent Representatives of Lithuania, Australia
and the Republic of Korea for chairing the Committees
and for their comprehensive briefings. Israel believes
that the United Nations counter-terrorism Committees
are essential to global efforts to isolate terrorists. We
appreciate their dedicated work, along with that of
other relevant agencies.
For the past month, the world’s attention has been
focused on the kidnapping of hundreds of girls from a
school in north-eastern Nigeria by Boko Haram. When
our children are not safe in their schools and our families
are not safe in their homes, then we, as an international
community, have failed. Israel welcomes the inclusion
of Boko Haram on the sanctions list of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, but there is still much more work to be done.
In its 66-year history, Israel has not known a single
day free from terrorism. With every siren that wails,
every report of a terrorist attack and even every car
backfiring, our hearts miss a beat. There is not a family
in Israel that does not know the bitter taste of tragedy.
This past weekend, a gunman stormed the Jewish
Museum of Belgium in Brussels, killing Dominique
Chabrier, a French citizen; Alexandre Strens, a Belgian
citizen; and Emanuel and Miriam Riva, two Israeli
citizens. That horrific act proves yet again that both
anti-Semitism and terrorism are not confined by
national borders.
Since the beginning of this year, over 100 rockets
have been fired from the Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip
into southern Israel. Hamas now seeks the veneer of
international legitimacy by partnering with Fatah. In
case the Council thinks Hamas has changed its tune,
48 hours after forging a unity agreement, Hamas leader
Khaled Mashaal stated, “Our path is resistance and
jihad is our choice”, and if anyone had any further
doubt, he also stated, “This is the original Palestinian
strategy”. It is clear from that statement that lending
support to the Hamas-Abbas partnership is the same as
lending legitimacy to terror attacks against Israel.
The reach of terrorist organizations has grown
dramatically and dangerously. Israelis have become
the targets of an Iranian terror campaign executed
by the Iranian Revolutionary Guard and Hizbullah.

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Those groups are responsible for attacks throughout
the world, from Burgas and Buenos Aires to Bangkok.
Just last month, authorities in Thailand foiled a plan
by Hizbullah agents to attack Israeli tourists. Hizbullah
has built its arsenal to unprecedented levels, amassing
over 80,000 deadly missiles and rockets, which it stores
throughout Lebanon in schools, homes and hospitals.
In doing so, it is committing a double war crime: first
by using Lebanese civilians as human shields; and
secondly by targeting Israeli civilians.
Both Hamas and Hizbullah receive funding and
support from the world’s primary sponsor of terrorism,
Iran. In March, the Israeli Defense Forces intercepted
a cargo ship, the KLOS C, sent by Iran and carrying
advanced weaponry destined for the Hamas-controlled
Gaza Strip. The KLOS C was a close call. That time, it
was a ship carrying rockets bound for Tel Aviv. Next
time, it could be carrying a bomb meant for a capital
city in Europe or Asia or the Americas.
Iran is not easily discouraged, and it continues to fan
the flames of conflict across the Middle East. In Syria,
where the worst humanitarian crisis of this generation
is taking place, Iran has sent terrorist groups from
Lebanon and Iraq to fight alongside the brutal Al-Assad
regime. Directing this network is Qasem Soleimani, the
chief of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard’s Quds Force.
Thousands of foreign fighters from all over Europe and
the Middle East have joined Al-Qaida in Syria and are
aggravating sectarian tensions in the region. Syria has
become the foremost academy for both Sunni and Shiite
terrorists, teaching the philosophy of fundamentalism,
the engineering of explosives and the calculus of chaos.

S/PV.7184

system. We support the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which is currently being negotiated.
Israel believes that all four pillars of the Strategy must
be treated as a whole. Israel also recently submitted
its periodic report in accordance with resolution 1540
(2004) .
In Israel, the threat of terrorism is not theoretical.
It is prevalent and it is persistent. Out of necessity, we
have become experts in the field of counter-terrorism
and are sharing our knowledge with Governments
throughout the world. Israeli experts have contributed
their expertise on a range of issues, from terrorist
financing to forensic investigation and from aviation
security to border protection. Those activities reflect our
fundamental belief that terrorism can only be effectively
confronted through international cooperation.
There is a specific kind of ecosystem that creates
terrorism. It is seeded in hate, watered with instability
and cultivated by rogue regimes. As an international
community, we must attack the roots of terrorist
infrastructure and stem the flow of arms and money
from its sponsors. Working together, we can abolish the
weapons of war before they abolish us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for holding this
important meeting. We would like to thank the Chairs
of the subsidiary bodies for their briefings.

The international community must stand firm in
combating terrorism. Terrorism cannot be justified
on any grounds or for any reason, and it must be
condemned in all its forms and manifestations. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the 1540 Committee all remain essential
parts of the global effort to isolate terrorists and deny
them the means to inflict harm.

Six months have passed since the most recent
briefing by the three Chairs of the subsidiary bodies
(see S/PV.7071). In the course of that time, my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic, and dozens of other Member
States such as Iraq, Lebanon, Egypt, Libya, Yemen, the
Russian Federation, China, Kenya, Nigeria, Pakistan
and others have experienced brutal terrorist attacks.
The attacks have been of various types and committed
by various groups, yet they are united in their abhorrent
and criminal terrorist approach and blind radicalism.

Israel attaches great importance to the work of
the United Nations counter-terrorism agencies and
commends the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) for its ongoing contribution to
coordinating action against terrorism. CTED has done
an excellent job monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which Israel fully implements
and which constitutes the centrepiece of the United
Nations efforts to create a robust counter-terrorism

Just a few days ago, Jabhat al-Nusra, a terrorist
organization that has been designated as such by
the Security Council counter-terrorism committees,
detonated two car bombs in the Old City of Homs to deter
the efforts of the Government at national reconciliation.
Dozens of innocent civilians died. Regrettably, the
reports of senior officials of the Secretariat, some
reports of the Secretary-General and statements made
by certain colleagues in the Council describe Jabhat

14-4115323/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

al-Nusra as an armed opposition group in Syria. Some
still use that expression in this very Council.
Those terrorist acts have demonstrated their
perpetrators’ ability to launch further terrorist attacks
despite the efforts deployed at the national, regional
and international levels to combat terrorism. Terrorist
organizations utilize the circumstances in some Member
States to find new bases for themselves, benefiting from
the failure of the Governments of some Member States
to meet their obligations and from the support provided
to them by those Governments and our Organization,
which are of the view that the ends justifies the means
and that terrorism may be an effective means to serve
their foreign policies and interventionist interests that
they seek to achieve at the expense of innocent lives.
We express our condolences and sympathy to the
victims of terrorism, and we are of the view that the
lives taken and the bloodshed resulting from such
terrorist acts must compel us to act seriously and
abide by international calls to combat terrorism. The
United Nations represents the main international forum
for coordinating and fostering international efforts
designed to eradicate the threat terrorism poses to
international peace and security, the safety and stability
of States and the prosperity of peoples. Success in that
endeavour necessitates, first and foremost, eschewing
anything that would undermine the role and credibility
of the United Nations, such as politicizing the efforts
to combat terrorism, seeking to excuse the perpetrators
of terrorist acts, or classifying terrorism as “halal
terrorism”, or lawful terrorism, and “haram terrorism”,
or unlawful terrorism. Terrorism is terrorism, regardless
of where it happens and who perpetrates it.
The abduction by Boko Haram of innocent Nigerian
girls is a contemptible and condemnable action. The
abductions carried out by terrorist groups acting in
Syria have harmed hundreds of women and children
and are condemnable and shameful acts.
Only two days ago, in Idlib City, near the Turkish/
Syrian border, four suicide bombers from Jabhat
al-Nusra detonated themselves in vehicles carrying
several tons of explosives. That piece of news may
not sound surprising, but we should note that the first
suicide bomber was from the United States, the second
from the Maldives, the third from Turkestan and the
fourth from Syria.
The sister of Mohamed Merah, the terrorist killed in
Toulouse, left France for Syria without the knowledge of

24/31

28/05/2014

the French authorities, who had had under supervision,
or so they claim. That terrorist is now in Syria and is
fighting alongside the terrorists — and some call them
“foreign fighters”. Even some of my colleagues might
be ashamed of using terrorists, but they call them
foreign fighters. As long as the subject is terrorism in
Syria, these are not terrorists; they are called foreign
fighters. If, however, they are somewhere else, they are
called terrorists.
The terrorist acts committed by terrorists, radicals
and foreign mercenaries crossing our borders to wage
war on our country’s territory are targeting Syria’s
ancient civilization, State institutions, infrastructure
and services. They are targeting Syrians and their
schools, universities, hospitals, mosques, churches and
places of work. They have also attacked diplomatic
missions, foreign journalists and peacekeeping
personnel in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force and humanitarian assistance convoys.
Yesterday, we witnessed an attack by terrorist groups
on a fact-finding team from the Organization for the
Prevention of Chemical Weapons on its way to verify
allegations of the use of chlorine gas in the village of
Kfar Zeita, north of Hama. This was done with the aim
of undermining faith in Syria’s cooperation in the area
of eliminating chemical weapons and preventing the
team from doing its job. A doctor was also prevented
from going to the village to verify the use of toxic gas.
The terrorist groups’ ongoing activities, including
the cutting off of drinking water and sewage services
for 3 million citizens in Aleppo, targeting schools
and universities with rockets and bombing an election
meeting are a direct result of the support they receive
from Governments of United Nations Member States
that turn a blind eye to their crimes, give them all sorts
of support and describe them as a moderate opposition.
We listened attentively to the briefings by the
Chairmen of the Security Council subsidiary bodies,
and we would like to emphasize the priority of the
following issues.
First, all Member States should be obliged to cease
giving any form or support or financing to terrorism,
in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001). They must
prevent their citizens, institutions and any businesses
operating in their territory from supporting such
terrorism. In that connection, I would like to refer to a
report issued by the Brookings Doha Center, headed by
the former Prime Minister of Qatar, which states that in
the autumn of 2011 some philanthropic societies were
14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

subject to United States sanctions, and that influential
business leaders in the Gulf States have actively
worked to form and finance terrorist operations in
Syria. Residents in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar
sent millions of dollars to finance terrorist acts that
resulted in the deaths of hundreds of Syrian civilians.
Secondly, radicalism and bigotry should be
combated regardless of their justifications. The
incitment to violence and terrorism in my country
encouraged by some States must end, in accordance
with resolution 1624 (2005). They must refrain from
disseminating hate speech, attempting to sow the
seeds of sedition and ethnic, factional and religious
proclivities.
Thirdly, radical and terrorist groups should be
prevented from acquiring the capacity to exploit the
media and modern technology, particularly the Internet,
in order to coordinate and implement terrorist acts,
glorify terrorism, spread terrorist propaganda, deceive
young people and seduce them into joining their ranks.
Fourthly, the efforts of terrorist groups to acquire
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
manufacture and delivery should be thwarted, in
accordance with resolution 1540 (2004). We should
be informed of the steps taken by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
address the information it has received from the Syrian
Government on the acquisition by armed terrorist
groups of chemical weapons and the involvement of
some other States in the region in this matter.
Fifthly, terrorist organizations that are affiliated
with Al-Qaida should be placed on the lists of the
Committee pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and should have sanctions imposed on
them similar to those already imposed on Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. Borders should be
controlled and the flow of terrorists into Syria to fight
alongside terrorist organizations curbed. It is no secret
that foreign terrorists have been imported by certain
specific, well-known Governments of more than 80
States to run amok there. The total number of foreign
terrorists brought into Syria is larger than those who
have entered Iraq and Afghanistan. This phenomenon
is significant in that it has led to some States admitting
belatedly how enormous and grave the situation is
and the importance of finding the means to fight it
successfully.

S/PV.7184

Our delegation calls for more transparency in
the work of the counter-terrorism committees. Some
records circulated in closed meetings, in which Member
States have revealed major issues, indicate the degree
to which Syria’s neighbouring States abide by the
provisions of resolution 2118 (2013), as well as violations
of resolution 1550 (2004), with these networks crossing
borders. The actions taken by the committees to deal
with such matters are not clear. We have received
no reply to the dozens of letters sent to the various
committees dedicated to countering the terrorism that
is battering my country on the involvement of specific
Governments in that terrorism.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the States supporting the terrorism of which Syria
is the primary victim include Israel, which does not
need an academy of terrorism. It brought radicalism
and terrorism to the region along with Zionism and the
crimes perpetrated by its Zionist bands against all of
us. Those States also include Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
They are accomplices in the taking of Syrian lives.
My delegation appeals to the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, to condemn those and other States, to
hold them and others that support terrorism accountable,
to force them to refrain from their subversive practices
and respect their obligations under international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. Foreign occupation
is the most dangerous form of aggression and terrorism,
and that is what Israel represents in the international
Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, Montenegro
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I thank the President very much for organizing this
annual briefing. This is a very important discussion,
and it is clearly also important that we find the right
sort of language. I am sorry that the preceding speaker
was unable to do so in his concluding remarks.
Let me start by expressing our appreciation to
the Committee Chairs for their extensive updates and

14-4115325/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

summaries of the actions and initiatives that they have
taken. This year has already seen several events to mark
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004). Those included a Security Council briefing on
10 April and an open debate on 7 May (see S/PV.7169).
We strongly support such initiatives. Outreach is an
essential part of our work to raise awareness of the
challenge and our response and to garner broad political
support.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is often viewed through
the lens of counter-terrorism, but it is more than that.
The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery, constitutes
a threat to international peace and security. The threat
of terrorism and the risk that non-State actors may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery remain
high. Therefore, it is the duty of all States of the world
to fight the threat. The full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is not simply a legal requirement. It is
incumbent upon us all and in all of our interests.
We therefore applaud the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), efforts
at matchmaking between donors and those that seek
support. We will redouble our efforts to play our
part in helping partners to implement resolution 1540
(2004). For example, we have adopted an EU Council
decision in support of the practical implementation
of that resolution and signed an agreement with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs as the
implementing agency. A large component of the EU
Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Centres
of Excellence initiative is devoted to supporting national
action plans on resolution 1540 (2004). Universal
reporting under the resolution is within reach, and I
hope that we will achieve that goal this year.

28/05/2014

security. Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) are
therefore still as pertinent and important as ever. They
play a crucial role in our security. That is underscored
in the recent report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations system in implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/68/841).
We remain committed to the idea that the scourge
of terrorism can be overcome only by measures that
adhere to the highest human rights standards and are in
full compliance with the rule of law. Terrorism needs to
be fought as a crime by law and within the law with full
respect for fundamental rights.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council has
taken significant steps to further reinforce fair and clear
procedures for United Nations sanctions. We commend
the Ombudsperson’s work and reiterate our support for
her unwavering efforts. We reiterate our call upon all
Member States to extend their full cooperation to the
Office of the Ombudsperson in each and every case.
The discussions in the Council in June on the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee will provide an excellent
opportunity to further advance those procedures and to
strengthen the effectiveness of the Committee and the
work of the Ombudsperson.

Finally, we support the recommendations that
were agreed in the 2013 annual review, including the
sharing of effective practices, the development of a
living network of points of contact and interaction with
civil society and the private sectors, as well as with
parliamentarians. We hope that those recommendations
can be implemented quickly.

We welcome the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), in particular the vast
array of counter-terrorism efforts and activities. In the
period of concern, we participated with great interest in
a number of events focused on countering the financing
of terrorism and preventing terrorist travel, such as
the high-level open briefing on 25 April on preventing
the misuse of travel documents by terrorists, traveller
identification management and document security.
That is a crucial issue, in particular as many countries
are faced with the growing threat of an increasing flow
of international recruits to terrorist organizations,
including foreign fighters. Such foreign fighters can
pose an acute terrorist threat on their return to their
home countries. Sharing information and best practices
on detecting those who travel abroad to fight and on
preventing them from doing so is vital. We strongly
support further work in that area.

The terrorist threat that we face continues to
evolve, with more active terrorist groups than before.
In 2013, there were nearly 10,000 terrorist attacks,
resulting in more than 18,000 deaths and over 32,000
injuries. Terrorism remains a threat to global peace and

We warmly welcome resolution 2129 (2013),
which renews the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
resolution calls on the Committee and CTED to be more
active in countering violent extremism and to focus on

26/31

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

prevention in response to the global terrorist threat.
Communities, civil society and other partners should
be involved in finding solutions. The resolution also
highlights the positive role that victims of terrorism
and women can play in that process.
Finally, it is worth drawing attention to resolution
2133 (2014), which is the first resolution dedicated to
the issue of kidnapping for ransom. Building on the
commitments made in resolution 1373 (2001), it calls
upon all Member States to take action to prevent
terrorists from benefiting directly or indirectly from
ransom payments or from political concessions and to
work together to secure the safe release of hostages.
I would like to conclude my intervention by
underscoring that our resolve to defeat terrorism and
the proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear weapons must never weaken or falter. We remain
committed to working with the three Committees. Their
work must remain a priority for the United Nations and
its Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Chairs of the Council’s three counterterrorism committees for their comprehensive briefings.
As several other colleagues have mentioned, the
threat of terrorism is still a reality. We are all deeply
enraged by the abduction of more than 200 schoolgirls
by Boko Haram, which has renewed our determination
to fight against terrorism. Any violence committed by
terrorists against innocent people cannot be justified on
any grounds or for any purpose. Japan firmly condemns
any act of terrorism.
The international community should continue to
work together to eliminate all kinds of violence. In that
context, since the fourth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is now under way,
there is no doubt that such an opportunity can serve
to enhance awareness of the importance and necessity
of counter-terrorism measures and to further promote
the efforts of Member States in that regard. Japan has
participated in the process in a constructive manner in
order to achieve such objectives.
I would like to take this opportunity to suggest a
renewed focus on the importance of each relevant body
working not only individually in an effective manner
but also in close coordination with other relevant

S/PV.7184

bodies in order to generate synergy. For example, Japan
highly appreciates the initiative of the Chair of the
1540 Committee in organizing the briefing to Member
States on 28 February, with the presence of Mr. Kunio
Mikuriya, Secretary General of the World Customs
Organization. Japan would like to support such ongoing
cooperation among the three committees and other
relevant organizations.
In commemorating the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), Japan highly
appreciates the initiative of the Chair of the 1540
Committee to hold an open debate on 7 May (see
S/PV.7169) and strongly supports presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, adopted on that occasion. As many
States stated at the open debate, and as mentioned in
the presidential statement, resolution 1540 (2004) has
played a significant role in promoting the importance
of non-proliferation efforts. At the same time, we have
to make further and continued efforts with a view to
achieving its full implementation. In this context, we
commend and fully support efforts of the Chair of the
1540 Committee to strengthen its activities, such as
raising awareness of the importance of non-proliferation
efforts, in particular among high level policymakers.
For its part, Japan intends to advance its activities
in support of resolution 1540 (2004), inter alia by
collaborating with the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts, and in organizing relevant seminars in Tokyo
and in New York. I would like to reconfirm Japan’s
strongest support for and continued commitment to be
deeply involved in the long-term process towards the
full and universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
Finally, let me introduce briefly our recent efforts
to fight terrorism. Japan has continued support for
the international community, especially in the field
of capacity-building. After the latest briefings, Japan
newly pledged approximately $3 million to support
capacity building through the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the Middle East and Africa, and to
strengthen the legal regime against terrorism, as well
as criminal justice and law enforcement capacities.
Japan has also conducted dialogues and consultations
with several countries to enhance capacities to cope
with terrorism and share the practices and lessons
learned. Last December, the leaders of Japan and the
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) decided to strengthen cooperation in this
area at the Japan-ASEAN Commemorative Summit in

14-4115327/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

28/05/2014

Tokyo. Tomorrow, we are going to hold the ninth JapanASEAN dialogue on counter-terrorism in Singapore.

of individuals and entities, clearly indicating that the
Committee’s listing process needs to be streamlined.

Japan expects that the three committees will
continue to carry out their roles actively, and we will
continue to support the efforts of the three committees.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee efforts to build
the capacities of States are very helpful. We particularly
appreciate the focus of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on assets freezes,
the prosecution of terrorism cases, and seminars and
workshops on specific themes it has held in various
regions. In Islamabad in October 2013, Pakistan hosted
the seventh regional workshop for judges, prosecutors
and police officers in South Asia on effectively
countering terrorism.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism for their
comprehensive briefings today. We appreciate the
coordination between the three Committees and the
efforts being made by them to promote dialogue and
transparency with Member States.
Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture of society.
Pakistan has adopted a comprehensive approach
that emphasizes the importance of development,
dialogue and deterrence. If we are to attain sustainable
solutions, we need to intensify our efforts to resolve
festering conflicts and crises that spawn extremism.
A comprehensive approach at the international level
is also required to address the immediate issue of
violence, as well as its root causes. The response of
the international community has to be comprehensive,
long-term and multi-pronged; it must involve dialogue
among civilizations, economic development, cultural
harmony, dispute resolution and political settlements.
Al-Qaida has changed in many ways. Selfradicalized individuals have made the prevention of
terrorism more difficult. Terrorists now use electronic
safe havens to host websites for inspiration and
training. The Al-Qaida sanctions regime needs a more
effective, targeted and evidence-based approach. It
should use clear, fair and transparent procedures. The
Ombudsperson’s good work should be emulated in
all other sanctions regimes and her role expanded to
delisting issues. A large number of recommendations
made by the Ombudsperson have led to the delisting

28/31

Pakistan fully supports the shared goal of
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. The 1540 Committee
has been a strong catalyst in preventing proliferation. It
supports many treaty regimes and, even without being
a treaty regime, ensures compliance through voluntary
measures. We support the measures taken by the 1540
Committee and its experts in such areas as awarenessraising, outreach, implementation assistance and
capacity-building. The Committee plays an important
part in mobilizing assistance. It should enhance
its matchmaking role by mapping assistance needs
and working as a clearinghouse between assistance
providers and recipients. As the Committee promotes
universal reporting and implementation, assistance
and capacity-building will serve as anchors for such
activities.
Pakistan supports efforts to promote cooperation
and coordination among the subsidiary bodies of the
Council and their respective expert groups. This
objective is best advanced when joint activities are
conducted in close consultation with all Council
members and are consistent with the mandate and
nature of the work of each subsidiary body and expert
group.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like in my national capacity to thank the
delegations that have condemned the terrorist attack on
the Jewish Museum in Brussels for their expressions of
sympathy.
(spoke in English)
I am pleased to take the floor on behalf of the Group
of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions. This

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

group is comprised of Austria, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Belgium.
First of all, we thank the Committee Chairs for
their informative briefings. We commend the Security
Council for organizing this biannual meeting, and for
creating the opportunity to discuss United Nations
sanctions regimes.
The need to further develop fair and clear
procedures in United Nations sanctions regimes is
widely recognized, as we have heard again today. As in
previous years, the Group of Like-Minded States aims
to support the efforts of the Security Council to enhance
the fairness and transparency of its various sanctions
regimes, thereby contributing to their credibility and
effectiveness. Much has been done with regard to
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. In particular, the creation and
strengthening of the Ombudsperson process were vital
steps towards an independent and effective sanctions
review mechanism.
However, considerable due process concerns persist
and legal challenges have been filed in jurisdictions
around the world. The ruling of the Court of Justice
of the European Union in the Kadi case in July last
year, concerning the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, is
one of several judicial decisions confirming that in
the implementation of United Nations measures, the
actions of Member States are subject to full judicial
review as to their conformity with fundamental
norms, such as the right to be heard, the right to have
access to one’s file — subject to legitimate interests in
maintaining confidentiality — the right to ascertain the
reasons behind a decision, and the right to an effective
remedy. The right to have cases decided upon within
a reasonable time frame should also be respected.
Therefore, as long as national and regional Courts
consider United Nations sanctions to fall short of the
minimum standards of due process, national authorities
may find themselves unable to fully implement them at
the national level.
In order to further strengthen the effectiveness of
the United Nations sanctions regimes and in line with
the continuous need to ensure due process, the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions invites the
Security Council and Member States to consider the

S/PV.7184

following proposals and ideas, which were submitted in
writing on 17 April in document S/2014/286.
First, the Office of the Ombudsperson should
be made permanent. That will give more weight and
credibility to the Ombudsperson’s work.
Secondly, information-sharing between Member
States and the Ombudsperson, as well as between the
Sanctions Committee and Member States, national
or regional courts and other authorities should be
improved.
Thirdly, transparency should be enhanced. All
decisions regardless of whether they maintain a listing
or delist an individual or entity should contain adequate
and substantial reasons. Moreover, those reasons,
as well as a redacted version of the comprehensive
report of the Ombudsperson, should be published,
while allowing for legitimate privacy, security and
confidentiality interests to be adequately protected.
Fourthly, the Committees must continue to conduct
the triennial review in a timely and thorough manner and
to regularly inform Member States about the results of
all reviews provided for under resolution 2083 (2012). In
the course of the review, the Committee should actively
confirm each listing in order to maintain it on the list.
In so doing, the Committee should give reasons why
a listing remains appropriate. In case a listing is not
reviewed and confirmed within the required three-year
period, it should automatically be deleted.
Besides these four proposals for the immediate
future, the Group of Like-Minded States would also
like to submit a few ideas for the longer term, aimed at
ensuring the effectiveness of all the Council’s sanctions
regimes, while improving their fairness and thereby
bringing them in line with human rights jurisprudence:
First, we recommend providing the Ombudsperson
with the authority to decide, when a delisting request
is made, whether to maintain a listing or to delist an
individual or entity. At the same time, Member States
and relevant international organizations and bodies
should encourage individuals or entities that may
consider challenging their listing through national
and regional courts to first seek their removal from
the Al-Qaida sanctions list by submitting delisting
petitions to the Office of the Ombudsperson.
Secondly, we propose beginning a reflection on
improving due process in other sanctions regimes as
well, given that one of them is already subject to a

14-4115329/31

S/PV.7184

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

review by the European Court of Human Rights. We
should consider gradually extending the important
procedural safeguards of the Ombudsperson process to
other appropriate sanctions regimes. In so doing, the
need for possible adaptations to the Ombudspersons
mandate should be explored. Besides that, other due
process safeguards should be introduced in other
sanctions regimes, such as informing in a timely
manner the listed individual or entity of the designation
and communicating a narrative summary of reasons for
listing. Lastly, the holds procedure time limits adopted
by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) could be extended to other sanctions
regimes.
The Group of Like-Minded States would be happy
to further discuss these proposals with the members of
the Security Council and all members of the General
Assembly.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Jamaica.
Miss Richards (Jamaica): It is my distinct honour to
register Jamaica`s support for the innovative, integrated
and coordinated approach outlined by the Chairmen of
the Security Council’s counter-terrorism committees,
which will undoubtedly serve to advance our common
efforts to prevent nonproliferation and to deepen our
fight against terrorism.
Without question, Jamaica and other Member
States from the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
remain committed and resolute in meeting our
obligations, particularly in relation to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which together
constitute the cornerstone of our continuing global
efforts to prevent non-State and State actors alike from
acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction or
engaging in asymmetric warfare, including terrorism.
We take these obligations seriously and always mindful
of the fact that the maintenance of peace and security
is indeed a shared responsibility and one that must be
fully assumed by all within the international system.
Since 2009, CARICOM has demonstrated its
full embrace of this reality with the institution of a
region-wide initiative aimed at fully implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). This mechanism, devised and
constituted within the Caribbean Community, has
allowed CARICOM members to effectively meet their
responsibilities under the resolution and to advance

30/31

28/05/2014

national and regional non-proliferation activities in
unprecedented ways.
It is important, however, to recognize that the
genesis of this regional implementation initiative was
the result of CARICOM members’ recognition of the
inherent challenges in devising national programmes
and activities that would allow States to meet the
necessary legal and enforcement obligations ensuing
from the resolution, and to appropriate the necessary
human and financial resources that this effort would
require. Member States recognized that a regional
programme to implement resolution 1540 (2004), which
would leverage the considerable security cooperation
that has existed within the region, would constitute
the most logical and efficient way to address these
priorities.
The submission by the Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) fully demonstrates an
appreciation of this innovative thinking, which will
undoubtedly allow States like ours in the Caribbean
Community, with limited resources, to better coordinate
important non-proliferation mandates, such as that of
resolution 1540 (2004), with other Security Council
obligations. The submission also fully takes on board
views recently expressed in the Council by the delegation
of Australia, which has been clear and constant in its
assertion that advancing non-proliferation goals cannot
be piecemeal, but should be practical, coordinated,
coherent and, indeed, appropriately linked to achieving
Security Council aims in relation to terrorism and the
implementation of relevant sanctions.
In this vein, Jamaica would also like to recognize
the Government of Australia for its assistance to
CARICOM in its efforts to leverage its existing 1540
implementation programme to now include initiatives
that will be also counter-terrorism-focused, even
as it continues to meet core obligations relating to
non-proliferation.
We would further like to register our full
support for the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate as it fashions
practical approaches and mechanisms to ensure
that States meet their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001) and fully undertake relevant legislative,
regulatory and administrative action to implement
the sanctions regimes, even while meeting important
non-proliferation goals as required by resolution 1540
(2004). It is through that concerted and innovative

14-41153

28/05/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

joint effort that we will continue to make meaningful
and measurable gains in preventing proliferation and
in providing Member States with the necessary tools
to effectively confront terrorism in a comprehensive,
coordinated and indeed successful way.

S/PV.7184

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

14-4115331/31
