UNITEDNATIONS

SE$iURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL.

RECORDS-

UN LIBRARY

a,1979

MAY.2
TB'ENTY-NINTH

\jp:i ,'A

YEAR

COLLECTDN

177-5
th

MEETING: 7 JUNE 1974

-- -

NEW

Y.ORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1775) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ‘““f
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

......................................

1

Admission of new members:
Application of the People’s R&public of Bangladesh for admission to membership in the United Nations . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1775

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a IJnited Nations document.

I’

’ Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normaliy published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Dwiskms of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.’

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 7 June 1974, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Moulaye EL HASSEN (Mauritania).

Admission of new Members

Present: The representatives of-- the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

Application of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
for admission to membership in the United Nations
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I think
it would be appropriate for me to sum up for the Council
the question we have just decided to place on our agenda.
3. Members of the Council will recall that the ,Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
addressed to the Secretary-General a letter in which he
requested that his country be admitted to mcmherslr;p in
the United Nations.1 This letter also contains the formal
statement that the People’s Republic of Bangladesh accepts
the obligations contained m the Charter of the United
Nations and solemnly undertakes to fulfi those obligations.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l775)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new members:
Application of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
for admission to membership in the United Nations.

4. From the consultations begun by my predecessor and
continued by me it emerged that members of the Council
were generally prepared to re-examine the request from the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, and consequently this
meeting was convened.

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.

5. 1 believe that members of the Council will agree that in
examining the request of Bangladesh for admission the
Council should follow its normal practice, that is to say,
refer this request to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members, in accordance with rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

‘-

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Before
the Council proceeds to the adoption of its agenda and
since this is the first time that it is meeting in June, I should
like to discharge an agreeable duty, namely, to convey my
gratitude and thanks to my friend and brother, Ambassador
Charles Maina of Kenya, who had the responsibility of
presiding over our proceedings last month. The wise and
effective way in whit+ he conducted the proceedings of the
Council during -the many important meetings that took
place last month, and which thanks to him led to positive
results, surprised no one who is familiar with his experience
of international problems. His qualities as a diplomat and an
enlightened man were highlighted by the excellent work
done under his presidency, at a time when he had just
assumed his responsibilities as Permanent Representative of
his country to the United Nations. I am certain that I am
.-expressing the views of all the members of the Council
when I ask the Ambassador of Kenya to accept our deep
gratitude and thanks.

6. Consequently, and if there are no objections, I shall
take it that the Council decides to refer the request from
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the Committee on
the Admission of New Members.
It was so decided.
7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Committee will meet immediately after this meeting is
adjourned.
8. Before adjohming the meeting, I think I should remind
members of the Council that following unofficial consultations it has been agreed that the Council will meet again on
Monday, 10 June, at 10.30 a.m. in order to consider the
report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members.
The meeting rose at II a.m.
- . --_--

Adoption of the agenda

1 Set Officio! Records of the Security Council, Twenty-seventh
Year, Sup,olement for July, August and September 1972, document

The agenda was adopted.

s/10759.

1

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
puhlicattonr;
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PL’BLICATIONS

may be ohtxxined
from
bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write
to: United
Nations,
.Sal~z

LES

PCBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

1,~s .puhlic*ations
drs Nations
Unies sent cn vente dans les librairies
clCpwt;~~rc~s du monclc awtirr
Informer-vow
auprPs de votre libraire
A : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Gentve.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

CONSEGUIR

Pt:BLICACIONElS

Price:

DE

%U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

LAS

NACIONES

in other

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

t*NIDAS

currencies)

a2071-June

1975-2.050
