S/2018/344

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 April 2018
Original: English

Final progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2333 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for a final period until 30 March 2018
and requested to be kept informed of the situation in Liberia and the implementation
of the Mission’s mandate. The present report provides an update on major
developments that have occurred in the country since the issuance of my previous
report, of 16 June 2017 (S/2017/510), including the electoral process and the
democratic transfer of political power, the closure of UNMIL and the transformation
of the United Nations engagement in Liberia.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The presidential and legislative elections and the subsequent transfer of
presidential power from Ellen Johnson Sirleaf to George Manneh Weah on 22 January
2018 dominated the reporting period, which was also defined by the ongoing
establishment of a new Government, the launch of the development agenda planning
process and the conclusion of the UNMIL mandate on 30 March, which was marked
by a visit to Liberia by the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations, Amina
J. Mohammed, on 22 and 23 March.
Electoral process
3.
Electoral preparations began with the exhibition of the preliminary voter roll
from 12 to 17 June 2017, followed by the candidate nomination period from 19 to
21 July. While there were complaints concerning the final registration roll, these were
eventually resolved with the support of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNMIL
and other international partners.
4.
The National Elections Commission approved 1,026 legislative candidates,
comprising 84.1 per cent men and 15.9 per cent women, from 26 political parties. The
Commission also approved 20 presidential candidates, including one woman. The
elections held on 10 October proceeded peacefully, with more than 1.6 million, or
75.2 per cent, of the country’s 2.1 million registered voters casting their ballots. As

18-05670 (E)

160418

*1805670*

160418

S/2018/344

no candidate received an absolute majority, on 19 October the Commission
announced that a presidential run-off would be held on 7 November between the two
front-runners, Senator George Weah of the Coalition for Democratic Change (CDC)
and Joseph Boakai, Vice-President of Liberia and a member of the ruling Unity Party.
5.
The run-off election was delayed owing to a legal challenge from the Liberty
Party, whose presidential candidate, Charles Brumskine, placed third and which was
subsequently joined by the ruling party, both of which denounced the voter list and
alleged massive irregularities and fraud. On 7 December, the Supreme Court, after
granting a stay order on 6 November on the run-off to allow litigation to run its course,
dismissed the case and ordered the National Elections Commission to proceed,
provided that it addressed a number of irregularities encountered during the first
round, in particular regarding the duplication of names on the voter roll. With support
from international partners, including ECOWAS, UNDP and UNMIL, the
Commission took corrective measures and fulfilled the requirements set by the
Supreme Court. On 26 December, the Commission held the run -off election, which
had a turn-out of nearly 56 per cent of registered voters. On 29 December, the
Commission declared George Weah the winner, with 61.5 per cent of valid votes cast.
6.
Throughout the electoral process, my Special Representative for Liberia , Farid
Zarif, proactively carried out his mandate of good offices and political support,
encouraging political leaders to comply with their commitments under the
Farmington River Declaration to resolve elections-related disputes through legal and
peaceful means. On 4 July 2017, the Independent National Commission on Human
Rights, with UNMIL support, convened a conference that brought together
representatives from political parties, civil society organizations and the media,
during which political parties committed themselves to non-violence and to focusing
on issues and avoiding hate speech during campaign activities.
7.
During both rounds of the elections, UNMIL supported the situation rooms
established by the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding and the Angie Brooks
International Centre for Women’s Empowerment, Leadership Development,
International Peace and Security, and regional and local non -governmental
organizations. The Mission also coordinated with ECOWAS, the Mano River Union
and the African Union, as well as with the European Union, the Carter Centre and the
National Democratic Institute. Four joint communiqués of UNMIL, the African Union
and ECOWAS were issued at critical points during the electoral period, calling upon
all political actors to remain peaceful and accept the will of the Liberian people. The
electoral process also benefited from the support of the then-Chair of the African
Union, President Alpha Condé of Guinea, and the Chair of ECOWAS, President Faure
Gnassingbé of Togo, who visited Liberia on 1 November. In addition, to complement
the good offices of my Special Representative for Liberia, Olusegun Obasanjo, former
President of Nigeria and, a member of my High-level Advisory Board on Mediation,
visited Liberia on 28 December with my Special Representative for West Africa and
the Sahel, Mohamed Ibn Chambas. The Peacebuilding Commission also provided
political accompaniment throughout the electoral period, convening an ambassadorial
meeting on 21 November and expert meetings on elector al preparations.
The new Government
8.
The fifty-fourth Legislature began its session on 15 January 2018. A week later,
on 22 January, George Weah was sworn in as President of Liberia in a ceremony
attended by thousands of Liberian citizens and numerous African Heads of State and
Government, as well as other foreign dignitaries. In his inaugural address, President
Weah reaffirmed his campaign promise to work towards poverty eradication and
equality, and committed to a “pro-poor” agenda — a pledge on which he elaborated
during his first “State of the Nation” address, given on 29 January, in which he
2/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

committed to prioritizing, inter alia, education, health, gender, youth empowerment,
infrastructure development, agriculture, the rule of law, land reform, security sector
reform and accountability. He also proposed constitutional amendments that would
remove exclusionary clauses and announced a 25 per cent cut to his personal salary,
encouraging other branches of government to follow suit given the dire fiscal situation
that his Government had inherited.
9.
For his first international trip as Head of State, President Weah attended the
African Union summit held in Addis Ababa on 28 January, which was followed by
visits to France, Morocco and Senegal from 14 to 23 February. Among those who
pledged support for Liberia during his travels were Presidents Macky Sall of Senegal
and Emmanuel Macron of France, Moroccan government officials and potential
investors, including high-profile African soccer players. The Vice-President of the
World Bank pledged $20 million in additional budget support and $5 million to
enhance the sports agenda of Liberia. On 5 March, President Weah travelled to
Nigeria for a State visit, during which he and President Muhammadu Buhari discussed
issues of mutual concern and President Weah sought the support of Nigeria in
improving the education, health, agriculture, mining and private sectors of Liberia,
while also expressing appreciation for the role played by Nigeria in maintaining peace
and stability in Liberia.
10. The National Elections Commission has scheduled for 8 May the by-elections
for the Montserrado County and Bong County senatorial seats, vacated by President
Weah and the newly elected Vice-President, Jewel Howard-Taylor, respectively,
although the budget for conducting the elections has not been approved and the
Commission still has some outstanding financial obligations relating to the 2017
elections.
11. The Deputy Secretary-General visited Liberia on 21 and 23 March to participate
in events marking the closure of UNMIL, the conferences on national reconciliation
and the launch of the new national development agenda, as well as the handover of
UNMIL Radio to ECOWAS, as described below. She also held separate meetings with
President Weah; the women’s legislative caucus and representatives of civil society;
and development partners, and visited a project funded by UNMIL assessed
contributions that was aimed at improving food security in New Kru Town, a suburb
of Monrovia. In all of her interactions, the Deputy Secretary-General stressed that the
Sustainable Development Goals provided the needed foundation for sustainable
development and sustaining peace, as did national reconciliation, which could be fully
achieved only with the full participation of all citizens, including women and young
people.
12. The Chair of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission also
visited Liberia from 21 to 24 March, to signal the ongoing willingness of the
Commission to support Liberia.
National reconciliation
13. Owing to lack of funding or legislative delays, limited progress was made in
implementing aspects of the Liberia peacebuilding plan of 4 April 2017 (see
S/2017/282). The plan detailed reconciliation objectives to be completed prior to the
departure of UNMIL and set out specific proposals for advancing reform legislation
and youth policies. Donor-funded reconciliation initiatives linked to the prevention
of election-related conflict, including youth engagement, were more success ful.
14. From August 2017 to March 2018, the outgoing and incoming Governments
revised the Strategic Road Map for National Healing, Peacebuilding and
Reconciliation, with support from UNMIL. In addition to confirming the relevance
of the Road Map’s 12 existing thematic areas to national reconciliation, it was decided
18-05670

3/17

S/2018/344

to develop annexes focused on resource mobilization, government commitments in
the peacebuilding plan, policy, and programme interventions based on the social
cohesion and reconciliation index findings.
15. During the same period, non-governmental organizations facilitated
reconciliation dialogues in Bong, Grand Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh, Lofa, Margibi,
Nimba, Rivercess and Sinoe Counties, which culminated in a Government -led
national reconciliation conference held in Monrovia on 21 and 22 March. In closing
the conference, President Weah recalled the short-lived impact of previous
reconciliation initiatives, including those he had attempted while serving as Peace
Ambassador in 2012, after which people had returned to their old resentments and
divisions. Paraphrasing the late Nelson Mandela, the President stressed that
reconciliation would take root and be sustained only when all citizens felt heard and
included, especially in the economic life of the country, and when there was a change
in people’s hearts and minds so that all Liberians saw one another as members of a
single family. The Deputy Secretary-General underscored the importance of full
political and economic inclusion in order for reconciliation to be achieved, as required
for sustaining the peace.
16. As at 30 March 2018, legislation proposed four years previously to promote
reconciliation, specifically the land rights and local government bills, remained
pending. In December 2017, the county service centre for Montserrado County
opened, completing the Government’s de-concentration programme that had begun
in February 2015. Each of the 15 counties now hosts a service centre, allowing
citizens, for the first time in the history of Liberia, to access services outside
Monrovia, which was achieved with support from UNMIL and other partners.
Sustaining this expansion in the delivery of government services will require adequate
provisions in the national budget to meet operational costs, as well as the adoption of
the local government bill.

B.

Security situation
17. The security situation remained stable. The Liberia National Police recorded
10,263 incidents during the period from 1 June 2017 to 30 March 2018, comprising
primarily such crimes as theft, burglary, robbery and simple assault, as well as
sporadic demonstrations and land disputes. The Liberia National Police effectively
responded, without the use of force, to all incidents, including in remote counties,
although police officers used personal assets to compensate for understaffing and
inadequate resources.
18. The Liberia National Police organized and led a joint election security task force
that included all law enforcement agencies and UNMIL. Despite high political
tension, no major security concern arose during the electoral period, including at large
campaign rallies, some of which reached an estimated 80,000 persons. On
20 September, there was a clash between Liberty Party and CDC supporters in
Sanniquellie, Nimba County, resulting in one serious injury. On 21 September,
supporters of the Unity Party and CDC candidates contesting the legislative seat in
Paynesville, Montserrado County, clashed, resulting in minor injuries caused by
stone-throwing. The Liberia National Police brought both incidents under control
without using force. During the inauguration ceremony on 22 January, some 50 people
were reportedly injured during a stampede, which was brought under control by the
Liberia National Police without the use of force.

4/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

C.

Humanitarian situation
19. As at 30 March 2018, Liberia hosted 10,791 registered Ivorian refugees, down
from the peak of approximately 224,000 reached in 2011. Since December 2015,
when the voluntary return process resumed after the Ebola virus disease e pidemic,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has
facilitated the return of 27,638 refugees. Conditions in Côte d ’Ivoire remained
generally conducive to return, although some refugees cited insecurity as well as lack
of access to land, basic services or livelihood opportunities in areas of return as
disincentives, in addition to scepticism about the national reconciliation and social
cohesion processes. To mitigate those concerns, UNHCR organized visits by refugees
to villages of return so they could assess conditions and the availability of services.
20. During the period from 1 June 2017 to 12 March 2018, there were 23 outbreaks
of diseases, including Lassa fever, measles, monkeypox, meningococcal disease and
shigellosis; out of 352 cases of such diseases, 13 deaths were reported. The World
Health Organization (WHO) and other partners supported the Ministry of Health and
the National Public Health Institute in strengthening national capacity for detection,
prevention and response with respect to public health threats and events. WHO, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, UNDP and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) also supported the Government in
strengthening multi-hazard preparedness and response capacity, with funding from
the multi-partner trust fund established to address Ebola. As a result, international
health regulations are applied at all points of entry into the country.

D.

Human rights
21. The human rights situation continued to be characterized by violations
perpetrated primarily against women and children. Between June 2017 and February
2018, the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection recorded 596 cases of
sexual and gender-based violence, including 391 cases of rape or sexual assault;
67.3 per cent of the victims were children. However, societal and cultural factors, as
well as systemic shortcomings in the criminal justice system, contribute to impunity
for such crimes. Harmful traditional practices such as female genital mutilation also
continued. Amid protracted delays in establishing a legislative framework
criminalizing such practices, then-President Johnson Sirleaf signed an executive
order on 20 January 2018 criminalizing the genital mutilation of girls under 18 years
of age, only partially achieving the full criminalization of female genital mutilation,
to which her Government had committed itself in 2016 in the context of the universal
periodic review.
22. On 15 June 2017, the Civil Society Human Rights Advocacy Platform, a
consortium of national human rights-focused non-governmental organizations
established in December 2016 with UNMIL support, signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Independent National Commission on Human Rights aimed
at enhancing the joint coordination, monitoring and decentralization of human rights
initiatives. Between August and December 2017, human rights-focused civil society
networks were established in Bong, Grand Bassa, Grand Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh,
Maryland, Nimba and Rivercess Counties.

E.

Economic situation
23. Characterizing the country as “broke”, President Weah set up a committee, on
28 February 2018, charged with developing an agenda for rapid recovery and

18-05670

5/17

S/2018/344

transformation. The 2017 estimate for the current account balance is minus
$0.6 billion, or minus 26.6 per cent of gross domestic product, while the budget
deficit is estimated at minus 4.7 per cent of gross domestic product. During his “State
of the Nation” address, the President reported a 13 per cent decline in revenue to
$489.1 million in 2017 compared with $565.1 million in 2016. The global decline in
commodity prices, the residual impact of the 2014 Ebola outbreak and the leakage of
public funds through corruption have had a negative impact on the macr oeconomic
situation. Gross domestic product is projected to rise to 4 per cent in 2018 as a result
of expansions in gold production and agriculture; by 2020, growth is projected to rise
to 6 per cent, which would still be below the pre-Ebola level of 8.7 per cent.
24. Consolidation measures attempted during previous fiscal periods proved
ineffective; budget imbalances remain unsustainable, impeding growth and
development. Recurrent expenditures consumed 87 per cent of the national budget for
2016/17; wages alone accounted for 57 per cent of the budget. Revised allocations in
the budget for 2017/18 are recommended in order to cut certain expenditures on goods
and services, such as travel, communication and workshops, leading to a reduction of
$27.4 million from $563.5 million, in recognition of the requirement to reduce
expenditure. Allocations, however, protect compensation, drugs and food, among
other things. Also needed is economic diversification, which will require investments
in foreign trade and infrastructure while effective efforts are made to combat
corruption. Depreciation of the Liberian dollar against the United States dollar
accelerated during the electoral period, with the exchange rate rising to 125.6 on
5 December 2017 from 117.2 on 30 September 2017. Halting or reversing this trend
will require increased domestic production that reduces dependency on imports and
addresses supply- and demand-side constraints. The exchange rate and changing
consumer patterns are pushing small businesses to suffer exchange losses for goods
that they buy in United States dollars but trade in Liberian dollars. Domestic prices
are rising. The retail price of a 50 kg bag of rice, a staple food, has risen by 25 per
cent since September 2017 compared with the same period in 2016, while exchange
rate depreciation is leading to high prices of inputs. Prices of petroleum products have
also risen, raising transportation costs, which affect most significantly Liberians
living below the poverty line.

III. National security and justice capacity
A.

National security strategy and architecture
25. The revised national security strategy and implementation plan were completed
in September 2017, with support from UNMIL, and are scheduled for approval by the
National Security Council in April 2018. The strategy, which emphasizes human
security, clarifies the roles and responsibilities of security institutions. The costs of
its implementation are being factored into an ongoing public expenditure review that
will assist the Government in sustaining the financial planning of the justice and
security sectors, which is being led by the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, with support from the World Bank and the United Nations.
26. Efforts continued to implement the Liberia National Police Act of 2016, the
Liberia Immigration Service Act and the Liberia Firearms and Ammunition Control
Act. Policy management boards for the police and immigration services established
during the reporting period contributed to the development and approval of
regulations and administrative instructions; however, no action was taken to establish
the civilian oversight boards provided for under the Acts. Although the uniform code
of military justice was enacted in October 2017, it has yet to be fully operationalized;
the army remains subject to the civilian justice system in accordance with a

6/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

memorandum of understanding signed between the Ministries of Justice and Defence.
A draft public safety act that includes the regulation of private security comp anies
was finalized in February and is awaiting review by the Government.
27. Since October 2017, the gender and security sector task force, which comprises
three ministries and eight security sector agencies, has undertaken training and
capacity development activities along with information exchange and advocacy with
a view to increasing the participation of women in security sector reform and to
mainstream gender into security operations. In addition, to widen public participation,
four open dialogues were held by the security sector reform think tank at the
University of Liberia.
28. With the end of the UNMIL mandate on 30 March, United Nations support for
the justice and security sectors will continue to be provided under a three -year joint
programme led by UNDP and focused on the development of institutions, including
the Liberia National Police and the Liberia Immigration Service. The gender and
security sector task force will receive financial support from the Peacebuilding Fund,
which will be managed by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. Bilateral and regional support is expected to continue; the
Government has also begun to explore options for expanding the cooperation to
include new bilateral partners.

B.

Liberia National Police
29. As at 30 March 2018, the strength of the Liberia National Police stood at 5,053
officers, including 959 women. Seventy-five per cent of the police service is deployed
in Montserrado County.
30. The Liberia National Police led electoral security operations through a joint
security task force that planned and implemented the nationwide deployment of 7,355
law enforcement officers. Throughout the electoral period, the Liberia National Police
were proactive, focusing on community-oriented policing and conflict prevention,
initiating and sustaining effective engagement with community leaders and local
youth associations and communicating with political parties. After each electoral
round, the Liberia National Police, with UNMIL suppor t, conducted after-action
reviews in which challenges were identified and recommendations were developed
that focused on improving the chain of command, human resource management,
logistics and media engagement.
31. In January 2018, President Weah appointed a new Inspector General and three
new deputies from within the police service. The Deputy Inspector General for
Administration, the ranking female officer in the Liberia National Police, was
reappointed. In February, the Liberia National Police conducted a self-assessment to
determine strengths and weaknesses, prioritize areas for institutional and operational
development, and review progress in the implementation of the Liberia National
Police Act. The findings have been incorporated into the police ’s development
framework for 2018, which reflects the structural and organizational capacity that the
service requires in order to consistently deliver high-quality law enforcement services
for all citizens.

C.

Liberia Immigration Service
32. As at 30 March 2018, the strength of the Liberia Immigration Service stood at
2,606 personnel, including 756 women, 63 per cent of whom were deployed to border
areas.

18-05670

7/17

S/2018/344

33. The Liberia Immigration Service took significant steps to strengthen border
management and security during the reporting period, undertaking community
engagement in border areas, implementing the migration information and data
analysis system in four strategic official points of entry and training 212 officers in
integrated border management. Those efforts, which were supported by UNMIL and
IOM, were aimed at promoting regular migration and addressing transnational crime.
34. President Weah reappointed the Commissioner General and the Deputy
Commissioner General for Administration of the Liberia Immigration Service. In
February, the Service undertook a self-assessment process to identify its strengths and
weaknesses and key priorities for institutional development.

D.

Justice and corrections
35. Election-related pressures dominated the focus of the legal system during the
reporting period. Both UNDP and UNMIL provided support for electoral dispute
resolution mechanisms at the National Elections Commission, the Ministry of Justice
and the Liberia National Bar Association. Those mechanisms functioned effectively,
building confidence in the fairness and professionalism of the judiciary.
36. In November 2017, 60 newly trained magistrates were deployed to 59
magisterial courts in all 15 counties; Liberia now has 353 magistrates serving in all
counties. The Judicial Institute began to train an additional class of 60 prospective
magistrates. With support from UNMIL, instructors received training in human rights,
which was also mainstreamed into the curriculum, and future training will include
gender and sexual and gender-based violence.
37. In January 2018, policies were finalized that are focused on sentencing
guidelines, legal aid and a hearing procedure for complaints against lawyers.
However, the justice system continued to face systemic shortcomin gs, which also had
a negative impact on living conditions and security at correctional facilities, where
nine prison escapes were reported. As at 30 March, 1,496 persons, or 58 per cent of
the prison population, were pretrial detainees, representing a decr ease of 7 per cent
since the issuance of my previous report in June 2017.

E.

Armed Forces of Liberia
38. The strength of the Armed Forces of Liberia stood at 1,948 personnel as at
30 March 2018, in addition to 60 personnel in the Liberian Coast Guar d. The army
receives mentoring from the United States of America and ECOWAS; UNMIL
provided some training on explosive ordnance disposal, operational planning and
predeployment training for the 75 troops contributed by Liberia to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
39. The army continued to face operational challenges due in part to insufficient
funding. UNMIL, through quick-impact projects, supported the renovation of army
barracks in Grand Bassa and Lofa Counties to facilitate deployment at borders with
Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea.

IV. Closure of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
A.

Military component
40. UNMIL has been progressively drawing down since 2006, reducing from its
peak authorized strength of 15,250 military personnel. The withdrawal of the 434

8/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

military personnel provided for in resolution 2333 (2016), including a company and
aviation, medical and staff officers, took place between 31 December and 30 March.
The force headquarters formally closed on 28 February with the departure of the Force
Commander.
41. The quick-reaction force established within the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) in accordance with Security Council resolution 2162 (2014)
and transferred to MINUSMA in accordance with Council resolution 2295 (2016)
ceased its readiness to respond in Liberia with the end of the UNMIL mandate.

B.

Police component
42. The police component of UNMIL has been progressively drawing down from
its peak authorized strength of 1,795, reaching a ceiling of 310 personnel by
28 February 2017 in accordance with resolution 2333 (2016), including two formed
police units and 50 individual police officers consolidated in Monrovia. The
withdrawal of the component took place in a phased manner beginning on 31 January
2018 and concluded with the departure of the remaining United Nations police
officers and the Police Commissioner on 30 March.

C.

Civilian component
43. The departure of 808 civilian staff provided for in General Assembly resolution
71/304 of 30 June 2017 has been conducted in a phased manner, on the basis of an
assessment of work and comparative reviews, with a view to ensur ing mandate
delivery until 30 March 2018. Surges in departures were aligned with periods of
relatively reduced substantive activities. As at 30 March, UNMIL had 521 civilian
personnel, comprising 174 international personnel, 269 national personnel and 78
United Nations Volunteers; a further 141 personnel will depart by 30 April. During
the period from 1 May to 30 June, the departure of the 380 personnel remaining to
complete the Mission’s liquidation will be gradually carried out.

D.

Liquidation process
44. Given the complexity of liquidating a mission with a historically large logistical
footprint, UNMIL formed a steering committee and a technical working group in
September 2017 to oversee the process. In addition, technical specialists were brought
in to provide support, while external and internal auditors were advised about the
deadlines for reviewing mission activities in advance of the archiving of records and
the departure of personnel.
45. Particular emphasis has been placed on ensuring an environmentally responsible
liquidation. In July 2017, UNMIL had 79 field sites. As at 30 March 2018, nine sites
remained, all of which will be closed by 30 June. For each site that is closed, the
Environmental Protection Agency of Liberia conducts an inspection jointly with
UNMIL and provides certification that it was left in an environmentally sound manner.
46. UNMIL has made gifts of equipment to government and regional entities,
non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies, in keeping with exi sting
financial regulations and rules and following an evaluation of the suitability of the
requests. Among the donated assets were prefabricated buildings, passenger and
specialized vehicles, generators, medical and information technology equipment and
office furniture; part of the Mission’s logistics base at the Port of Monrovia was handed
over to ECOWAS to serve as a forward logistics base for its regional Standby Force.

18-05670

9/17

S/2018/344

E.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
47. Proactive outreach was conducted in all communities where UNMIL troops
have been deployed since 2003. Working with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, UNMIL identified a number of individuals who had made allegations
against former UNMIL personnel. As part of a victim-centred approach, efforts were
made to respond to the medical, psychosocial and legal needs of the complainants.
Quick-impact projects provided vocational training opportunities in Monrovia for
both victims and community members to lessen stigmatization and vulnerability to
future exploitation. Furthermore, UNMIL and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization launched a literacy programme for persons
victimized by, or vulnerable to, sexual exploitation and abuse .
48. All allegations recorded were referred for appropriate investigation by Member
States or jointly with the United Nations. The Organization will continue to follow
up on the outcomes of those investigations for which information from the Member
State concerned remains pending.
49. UNMIL established an exit plan to facilitate the handover of its responsibilities
after the completion of its liquidation. Any allegation pending as at 30 June 2018 will
be transferred to the regional conduct and discipline team based in MINUSMA, which
will be responsible for processing remaining matters. In addition, any new allegation
made against former UNMIL personnel may be brought to the Resident Coordinator
Office, which will be responsible for receiving complaints an d transmitting them to
the conduct and discipline teams in MINUSMA and the Department of Field Support
for appropriate review and follow-up action, including referral for investigation.
UNMIL has also funded a project aimed at strengthening the Government ’s capacity
to respond when it receives claims against former UNMIL personnel.

F.

Safety and security of personnel
50. No major security incidents against United Nations personnel or installations
were recorded during the period from 1 June 2017 to 30 March 2018. There were 105
traffic accidents involving United Nations vehicles and one emergency landing of a
United Nations aircraft. One armed robbery, six burglaries, one attempted burglary,
two thefts, one attempted theft and three minor fires were rec orded at the residences
of United Nations personnel, while street crime included two armed robberies, two
attempted armed robberies, four robberies, three thefts, five assaults, six incidents of
intimidation/harassment/threats of violence and two arrest and detention incidents.
Five United Nations staff members died of natural causes.
51. With the conclusion of the UNMIL mandate, responsibility for the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and facilities rests fully with the Government of
Liberia. Security for the United Nations country team will be coordinated by the
Department of Safety and Security with three professional security officers and five
local security associates. A common radio room will provide 24 -hour coverage in
close collaboration with government security counterparts.

V. Transition of the United Nations in Liberia
52. My Special Representative for Liberia, Farid Zarif, concluded his assignment
on 30 March, in line with the end of the UNMIL mandate. Building on best practic es
from the closure of UNOCI, some continuity of United Nations leadership will be
facilitated by the retention of the Resident Coordinator at the level of Assistant
Secretary-General. In that regard, my Deputy Special Representative, Yacoub El
10/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

Hillo, retaining his functions as Resident Coordinator and UNDP Resident
Representative, assumed leadership of the United Nations family in Liberia on
31 March.
53. The United Nations is working to strengthen the Resident Coordinator Office to
ensure that it is able to deliver on strategic requirements in the areas of political and
economic analysis, peacebuilding and mediation, and field coordination, which will
support the people and the Government of Liberia in sustaining peace. In August
2017, the Government and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) signed an agreement authorizing the establishment of an
OHCHR country office, which commenced its work on 2 April 2018. Meanwhile,
since December 2017 the UNMIL headquarters has been transitioning into a “one
United Nations house” where 16 agencies, funds and programmes will eventually be
co-located, which will reduce operational and transactional costs while increasing
coherence, coordination and delivery.
54. Communicating to the people of Liberia about the transformation of the United
Nations engagement in their country remained a priority. To that end, a public
information campaign involving national civil society organizations and traditional
communicators was focused on ensuring that all local communities were aware that,
although the peacekeeping operation would come to an end on 30 March, the United
Nations country team would continue its work after the departure of UNMIL. Such
messaging was also aimed at raising awareness about issues essential for maintaining
peace and stability.
55. An integrated transition plan jointly prepared by UNMIL, the United Nations
country team, the Government of Liberia and its development partners was adopted
under Executive Order 91 on 10 January as the working document to guide the
transition. The plan is focused on both the transfer of authority to a new Government
and the evolution of the United Nations engagement in Liberia.
56. The Peacebuilding Commission provided political accompaniment t o the
transition from UNMIL to the follow-on United Nations presence, actively engaging
through a visit of the Chair of the Liberia configuration and the convening of
ambassadorial and expert meetings on preparations, as well as providing a forum to
discuss and support the implementation of the peacebuilding plan. The Commission
has expressed its willingness to continue to provide support and accompaniment to
the country beyond the transition.
57. On 23 March, President Weah, the Deputy Secretary-General and my Special
Representative participated in a conference in Monrovia, dubbed the “Liberia
moment”, that was convened by the Government to launch the process of formulating
a new national development agenda for the period 2018–2024. In addition to senior
government officials and United Nations and development partners, the event
included the voices of young people and other civil society representatives. In his
speech, President Weah reaffirmed his commitment to ensuring that all Liberians had
a voice in the future of their country. The Deputy Secretary-General welcomed the
space made for young people in the new Government, while also stressing that the
inclusion of women as indispensable partners would make for a better nation. She
also welcomed the intention to ensure that national reconciliation and social cohesion
would serve as the basis for the new development agenda. The event provided an
opportunity for the Government, its partners and civil society to express appreciation
for the role played by UNMIL in establishing the foundations of the peace in Liberia.
58. A Liberia multi-partner trust fund has been established; the final steps for its
activation are nearing completion. The pooled fund is aimed at increasing coherence
in the delivery by the United Nations and partners of joint programmes to sustain
peace and address priority development challenges. Prioritization will be guided by
18-05670

11/17

S/2018/344

the Liberia peacebuilding plan, the forthcoming national development agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals. The Peacebuilding Fund lent its catalytic support to
the peacebuilding plan in the amount of $10 million in 2017 and has indicated its
willingness to extend its support to priority areas of the multi -partner trust fund in
2018.
59. UNMIL also continued its efforts to facilitate sustained regional engagement in
Liberia, including in cooperation with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel. On 23 March 2018, President Weah and the Deputy Secretary-General
participated in a ceremony during which the UNMIL Radio station, facilities and
broadcasting network were handed over to the ECOWAS Commission, which
commenced broadcasting within Liberia as a regional radio station, using the same
on-air personalities, on 31 March. Eventually, ECOWAS plans to expand the reach of
the radio station throughout its regional co mmunity, broadcasting in three regional
languages. As the facilities housing the radio station are adjacent to the United
Nations House, ECOWAS relocated its in-country headquarters and early warning
system to the compound in February 2018.

VI. Financial aspects
60. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/304, appropriated the amount of
$110 million for the maintenance of UNMIL for the period from 1 July 2017 to
30 June 2018.
61. As at 20 March 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNMIL amounted to $26.4 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $2,256.2 million.
62. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 January 2018, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2017, in accordance with
the quarterly payment schedule.

VII. Observations
63. When Ellen Johnson Sirleaf handed presidential power over to George Manneh
Weah at noon on 22 January 2018 in Monrovia, thousands of Liberian citizens and
dozens of regional and international leaders witnessed a moment symbolically
concluding a historical arch spanning more than a century and a half of
constitutionally sanctioned exclusion of the vast majority of the population, a quarter
century of political crisis, 14 years of successive brutal civil wars and nearly 15
subsequent years of laying the foundations for recovering from conflict. The
inauguration of President Weah was a milestone symbolizing the burgeoning
democratic maturity of the oldest republic in Africa and its progress along the path of
post-conflict transformation. I wish to recognize the contribution that President
Johnson Sirleaf made to the consolidation of peace and other achievements during the
12 years of her tenure.
64. Liberia is a country fully at peace with itself and with its neighbours.
Consequently, on 30 March UNMIL concluded its mandate. It is important to recall
the historical context: the Liberia to which UNMIL was deployed in October 2003
was a completely failed State in which three warring factions controlled sections of
Monrovia and the interior; the public sector had collapsed; the infrastructure lay in
ruins; the national police and the army had disintegrated into various factions; what
remained of the security sector was dominated by a proliferation of agencies created
12/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

by successive regimes to persecute political opponents and repress citizens; the
justice sector had disintegrated; more than a third of the population was displaced; an
estimated 80 per cent of women and girls were victims of sexual violence; and
criminal economic exchange, dominated by the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, was thriving. Despite that very low starting point, Liberia has had a
remarkable journey of transformation, accompanied by UNMIL, and is on the cusp
of a new era that promises greater inclusiveness and equitable participation o f all
Liberian citizens in the political and economic space.
65. I congratulate the people of Liberia and their political leaders on the progress
achieved in restoring peace, and on their resolve to remain peaceful throughout the
electoral process. I also salute the National Elections Commission and the Supreme
Court, which carried out their responsibilities with professionalism and
independence, thereby helping to strengthen perceptions about the credibility of the
electoral process. I also recognize the effective, professional and peaceful manner in
which the Liberia National Police, in collaboration with other law enforcement
agencies, managed security throughout the country. These elections were a positive
demonstration of the capacity and capability of national institutions, which has had a
positive effect on public confidence. Furthermore, they are a demonstration of a fact
that I have stressed in my reports on Liberia over the years: consolidating the hard won peace requires sustained efforts to build institutions that are inclusive,
corruption-free and able to provide opportunities for, and services to, all citizens.
66. I also wish to recognize the essential role played by civil society, which helped
to restore peace in Liberia and which continues its tireless efforts to sustain that hardwon peace. Religious and traditional leaders and women and youth representatives,
as well as electoral observation groups and the media, made many diverse
contributions to the collective national effort aimed at main taining a transparent and
peaceful electoral process. Among the important initiatives were the Farmington
River Declaration and the Liberian Youth Peace Declaration, as well as mediation
efforts resulting in mutual recognition by the Legislature and the ju diciary of each
other’s respective roles and responsibilities in accordance with the Constitution. Civil
society will continue to have an invaluable role to play as a partner with the
Government as it takes forward its reform agenda in a spirit of inclusio n and
transparency.
67. The new Government has inherited many challenges, not least of which are a
dire economic situation and the limited progress achieved thus far in addressing the
root causes of the conflict in Liberia, removing structural inequalitie s, enhancing
accountable governance and building the democratic foundations of a nation that
reflects the will and aspirations of all Liberians. I welcome President Weah ’s
commitment to fighting corruption, promoting good governance and taking forward
national reconciliation, constitutional reform and decentralization. These are critical
processes that could help heal the cleavages of the past and build a unified nation for
the future. They would also support his pro-poor development agenda, which will
help sustain the peace and lay the foundation for sustainable development. His
aspiration to transform the hearts and minds of the Liberian people so that they see
one another as members of a single family is essential, as, in his words, a family tree
can bend, but can never break.
68. I welcome the leadership that President Weah has demonstrated by urgently
recasting the national budget to address the fiscal difficulties of the country, as well
as his steps to fight corruption. I call upon the partners of Lib eria to stand with this
new Government as it moves forward with its efforts to correct the current
shortcomings, while working to make the economy grow in order to generate the
revenue needed to reduce its current dependence on donor aid, and also seeking to
avoid transactions that put the country and communities at a disadvantage. President
18-05670

13/17

S/2018/344

Weah has also demonstrated a welcome commitment to placing the Sustainable
Development Goals at the core of his national development plan in order to ensure
that no one is left behind, as maintaining peace and development requires. I also
welcome the intention of partners to align their support with the Government ’s vision,
as they committed to doing during the “Liberia moment” event.
69. Consolidating peace requires the full commitment of the Government and
citizens to a comprehensive and meaningful process of national reconciliation. I am
encouraged by the new administration’s determination to give the national
reconciliation process a new impetus underpinned by a political vision, rather than
disparate initiatives with limited impact, which characterized past reconciliation
efforts. One of the objectives of such a process must be defining and agreeing on a
shared sense of nation. This is particularly pertinent and pote ntially fraught with
difficulties for Liberia, as the scars of the conflict, some of which were brought to
light during the recent electoral process, have yet to heal. I continue to insist on the
importance of adopting legislation that addresses the root causes of the conflict, such
as the land reform and decentralization, which should be given priority attention and
acted upon without further delay.
70. The young people of Liberia have declared, and have demonstrated, that they
are the custodians of its peace. It will therefore be essential that the Government
manage the considerable expectations of its predominantly youthful constituency,
which is looking for the dividends of social and economic transformation that could
provide opportunity and alleviate inequality. Managing those expectations will
require herculean efforts on the part of the new administration, in addition to
considerable support from its partners, and should be aimed at demonstrating a
sincere commitment to bridging the continuing divides in Liberia by reaching out to
the poorest and most disenfranchised, as part of the national development agenda. I
am optimistic that such transformational change is within the grasp of the people and
the Government of Liberia.
71. The socioeconomic situation of Liberia continues to have a negative impact on
women and girls, including low levels of education; poverty; maternal mortality; and
increased risks and exposure to sexual violence and harmful traditional practices. I
am concerned by statistics such as the literacy rate — 80.6 per cent for males and
54.8 per cent for females — which demonstrate the impact of continued barriers that
pose risks to girls at all levels, including with respect to education, sexual and gender based violence, early marriage and teenage pregnancy, as well as other forms of
abuse. I would therefore reiterate my call to the Legislature to prioritize the adoption
of pending enabling legislation, in particular the proposed law on affirmative action
for equal participation and representation, aimed at promoting women’s political
participation. I would also strongly urge the Legislature to amend the Domestic
Violence Act to ensure the protection of women and girls from sexual and gender based violence, in particular female genital mutilation.
72. While I welcome the increase in Liberia National Police female recruitment
from 2 to 18 per cent, I encourage the new Government and other stakeholders to
address women’s marginalization and inequality in conformity with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). Significant advances have been made since 2003 in the
development of the legal and policy framework for the security sector, but gaps
remain, including in terms of legislation to regulate private security companies and
to modernize the Bureau of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the Liberia National
Fire Service. Furthermore, it will be essential that the National Security Council
review the revised national security strategy as a priority, which should be
complemented by capacitating the Office of the National Security Adviser. I urge the
Government of Liberia to prioritize the full implementation of police and immigration
acts, in particular the establishment of the civilian oversigh t bodies provided for
14/17

18-05670

S/2018/344

therein. The Government should also commit additional resources to addressing
systemic weaknesses in the justice system and harmonizing the formal and customary
justice systems through urgent attention to the many unimplemented, yet n ationally
validated, recommendations pertaining to justice sector reform, including addressing
an unacceptably high level of pretrial detentions. In addition, I strongly encourage
donors and partners to continue to work closely with the United Nations and to
maintain their support for the justice and security sectors of Liberia in the years ahead.
73. The closure of UNMIL brings to an end the peacekeeping phase of the United
Nations engagement in the Mano River Union, which at one time also hosted
operations in Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire. All of the Organization’s peacekeeping
endeavours in the subregion have stood on foundations set by regional organizations,
including the Mano River Union, ECOWAS and the African Union. I therefore
warmly welcome the fact that UNMIL Radio will serve as the nucleus of the regional
radio station of ECOWAS, and that it will immediately sustain nationwide broadcasts
in Liberia, while working towards full regional coverage, with the support of the
Liberian Broadcasting System. I also welcome the fact that the ECOWAS Standby
Force will benefit from the use of part of the former logistics base of UNMIL. The
closure of the peacekeeping operation notwithstanding, the United Nations will
remain closely engaged in supporting Liberia in meeting its challenges in sustaining
peace and achieving sustainable development, including through the enhanced and
strengthened Resident Coordinator Offices and the broader United Nations country
team, which will include a separate OHCHR office. This arrangement will help to
preserve the achievements of UNMIL, while also helping to sustain continued
dialogue regarding the persistent human rights challenges that the country still faces.
74. I am enormously proud of the role played by UNMIL in restoring and sustaining
peace in Liberia. My profound gratitude goes to each of the civilian and uniformed
personnel who served with UNMIL over the course of its deployment, and their
families, and pay particular tribute to the 202 United Nations peacekee pers who lost
their lives in pursuit of peace in Liberia. I also wish to express appreciation to my
Special Representative for Liberia, Farid Zarif, for his excellent leadership, and to his
predecessors, all of whom contributed to the achievement of the UN MIL mandate. In
addition, my appreciation goes to the Mission’s troop- and police-contributing
countries, and I wish to recognize in particular the role of ECOWAS, whose green
helmets paved the way for UNMIL, as well as the African Union, the Mano River
Union, the European Union and other regional organizations, multilateral and
bilateral partners, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
non-governmental organizations and all other partners, for their invaluable
contributions to the restoration of peace in Liberia.

18-05670

15/17

S/2018/344

Annex
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police strength as
at 31 March 2018
Military component
Military
observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Bangladesh

–

–

–

–

–

Benin

–

–

–

–

–

Bhutan

–

–

–

–

–

China

–

–

–

–

Egypt

–

–

–

–

–

Gambia

–

–

–

–

–

Germany

–

–

–

–

–

Ghana

–

–

–

–

–

India

–

–

–

–

–

Kenya

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

–

–

–

–

–

Nigeria

–

–

–

–

Norway

–

–

–

–

–

Pakistan

–

–

12

12

–

Poland

–

–

–

–

–

Republic of Korea

–

–

–

–

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

–

Russian Federation

–

–

–

–

–

Senegal

–

–

–

–

–

Serbia

–

–

–

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

Togo

–

–

–

–

–

Turkey

–

–

–

–

–

Ukraine

–

–

–

–

–

United States of America

–

–

–

–

–

Zambia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

12

12

Country

Total

16/17

Formed police units

–

12

12

Police officers

–

–

–

18-05670

18-05670

S/2018/344

17/17
