S/PV.8785*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8785th meeting

Thursday, 3 June 2021, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson/Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 May 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/514)

* Reissued for technical reasons on 10 June 2021.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-13805 (E)
*2113805*

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

been in regular contact with counterparts at the OPCW
on activities related to this matter. Per established
practice, I held a monthly call with the OPCE DirectorGeneral on 1 June 2021 to receive an update and
ascertain his views. In the light of the participation
of Director-General Arias in this meeting today, my
statement will be brief.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 May 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/514)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, United Nations High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Fernando Arias,
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons.
Director-General Arias is joining today’s meeting
via video-teleconference from The Hague.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the Council members
to document S/2021/514, which contains the text of a
letter dated 27 May 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council once again
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic. It is so nice to be able to brief
members back in the Chamber.
It is also a pleasure to be joined here today
virtually by the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
Mr. Fernando Arias, who will update the Council on
the elimination of the Syrian Arab Republic chemical
weapons programme.
Since the previous Security Council meeting
on resolution 2118 (2013), held on 6 May 2021 (see
S/2021/446), the Office for Disarmament Affairs has
2/31

03/06/2021

At the outset, I want to take this opportunity to
reiterate my appreciation to Director-General Arias
and the staff of the OPCW Technical Secretariat for
the professional and impartial efforts to uphold the
norm against the use of chemical weapons and for our
partnership in the pursuit of the elimination of these
inhumane weapons.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ability to
deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic remained subject
to the evolution of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
However, despite continued restrictions, the Technical
Secretariat has been able to pursue its mandated
activities related to the elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme and its engagement with
the Syrian Arab Republic in that regard.
I welcome efforts to clarify all the outstanding
issues regarding the initial declaration by the Syrian
Arab Republic to the OPCW. Engagement and dialogue
by the Syrian Arab Republic with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat are essential to close the outstanding issues.
As has been stressed on multiple occasions, due to the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
continues to assess that, at this stage, the declaration
submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be
considered accurate and complete in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. I have no doubt
that Director-General Arias will provide the Security
Council members with an update on the efforts to
ensure the timely resolution of those outstanding issues.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat intended to deploy the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria last month and
was rescheduling the next round of consultations
with the Syrian National Authority in the absence of
confirmation from the Syrian Arab Republic with
sufficient time to finalize the necessary preparations.
I look forward to Director-General Arias’s update on
this matter.
I note that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
(FFM) remains in the process of studying all available
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and continues its
engagement with the Syrian Government and other
States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
with regard to “a variety of incidents”. As previously
reported, further FFM deployments will be subject to
the evolution of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
I also understand that following the issuance
of its second report, in April, the Investigation and
Identification Team is continuing its investigations
into incidents in which the FFM has determined that
chemical weapons were used or likely used in the
Syrian Arab Republic and will issue further reports in
due course.
As I previously informed the Council, on 21 April
2021 the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, at its twenty-fifth session,
adopted decision C-25/Dec.9, entitled “Addressing the
Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic”, suspending the Rights and privileges
of the Syrian Arab Republic under the Convention.
A copy of that decision was shared with the Security
Council and General Assembly members as document
A/75/871- S/2021/425, pursuant to paragraph 12 of the
aforementioned decision of the Conference of the States
Parties. I look forward to Director-General Arias’s
update on the next steps for the implementation of
that decision.
There is an urgent need not only to identify but hold
accountable all those who have used chemical weapons
in violation of international law. It is an obligation on
all of us. Without such an action, we are allowing the
use of chemical weapons to take place with impunity.
Unity in the Security Council is required to re-establish
the norm against chemical weapons. The Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide whatever
support and assistance it can in the hope that those
dreadful weapons can be truly relegated to the past.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arias.
Mr. Arias: It is a great pleasure to see all present
gathered here once again in person, protected and in
good health. Here in the Netherlands we are still in the
process of getting vaccinated, and we help to once again
be fully operationally engaged in person very soon.

S/PV. 8785

I thank the Estonian presidency of the Security
Council for giving me this opportunity to inform
the Council about developments at the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
since my most recent appearance in the Council, on
11 December 2020 (see S/2020/1202), when I engaged
in a comprehensive exchange with members at the
invitation of the South African presidency.
The Syrian people have been suffering from war
for more than 10 years; the Council is well aware of
that. The grim reports of that suffering include, among
the atrocities inflicted in that war, the use of chemical
weapons. Chemical weapons have been used in the
Syrian Arab Republic both before and after its accession
to the Chemical Weapons Convention, in 2013. Those
well-documented and repeated uses have taken place
despite the successful destruction of more than 1,300
tons of declared Syrian stockpiles and stringent OPCW
verification measures.
One of the deadliest attacks took place in Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. It involved the use of sarin
and led to several dozen casualties and more than 500
people injured. The Syrian Arab Republic acceded to the
Chemical Weapons Convention in September 2013, one
month after another sarin attack — this time in Ghouta
and which claimed more than 1,300 lives — took place
and was investigated by the United nations mission.
Since then, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has
been providing ample information to the Conference
of the States Parties and the Executive Council of
the OPCW as well as the Security Council through
the United Nations Secretary-General, with monthly
reports and my direct briefings. It is a disturbing reality
that eight years down the road, the Syrian chemical
weapons dossier remains far from closed. I shall now
provide the council with an update on developments
related to the Syrian dossier.
On 12 April, in line with its mandate to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) issued
its second report. In that report, the IIT, on the basis of
all the information obtained and analysed, concluded
that there were reasonable grounds to believe that at
approximately 21:22, on 4 February 2018, during
ongoing attacks against Saraqib, a military helicopter
of the Syrian Arab Air Force, under the control of the
Tiger Forces, hit eastern Saraqib by dropping at least
one cylinder. The cylinder ruptured and released a toxic

21-138053/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

gas, chlorine, which was dispersed over a large area,
affecting 12 named individuals. That established case
of chemical-weapons use by the Syrian Arab Air Force
is in addition to the three other cases identified in the
first IIT report, of April 2020, and presented to the
Council in detail during my briefing to the Council on
12 May 2020.
Let me therefore just recall that in its first report,
the IIT concluded that there were reasonable grounds
to believe that the perpetrators of the use of chemical
weapons in Ltamenah on 24, 25 and 30 March 2017,
were individuals belonging to the Syrian Arab Air
Force that used sarin on two occasions and chlorine on
one occasion. After the publication of those two reports,
in 2020 and 2021, the IIT continued its investigation
into cases of the use or likely use of chemical weapons.
Currently five cases are being investigated. The IIT
will report on them in due course.
On 21 April 2021, the OPCW Conference of the
States Parties decided to express grave concern at
the proven cases of chemical-weapons use in Syria
that contravene the provisions of the Convention. It
also decided to deprive Syria of the following rights
and privileges: to vote in the Conference and in the
Council; to stand for election to the Council; and to
hold any office in the Conference, the Council or any
subsidiary bodies.
Through that decision, the Director-General is to
regularly report to the OPCW Executive Council on
whether Syria has completed the measures that it had
failed to fulfil thus far. These are, first, to declare to the
Technical Secretariat the whereabouts of the facilities
in which the chemical weapons used in March 2017 in
three attacks in Ltamenah were developed, produced,
stockpiled and operationally stored for delivery;
secondly, to declare to the Technical Secretariat all
of the chemical weapons it currently possesses, as
well as chemical-weapon production facilities and
other related facilities; and thirdly, to resolve all the
outstanding issues regarding its initial declaration on
its chemical weapons stockpile and programme. Once
I have reported that all of those measures have been
completed, Syrian rights under the Chemical Weapons
Convention will be reinstated.
Over the years, the policymaking organs of both
the OPCW and the Security Council have been calling
for an end to impunity for chemical-weapons use and
for the perpetrators to be held accountable. Resolutions
4/31

03/06/2021

2118 (2013), 2209 (2015) and 2235 (2015) all contain
those strong messages. The Secretary-General also
supported that call in several of his statements by
underlining that accountability is an essential part of
deterrence against the use of chemical weapons.
The OPCW, including the Investigation and
Identification Team, as part of the Technical Secretariat,
is never a court or a tribunal; and neither was the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
established by the Security Council in 2015 and
discontinued in 2017. Through its work, however, the
OPCW provides the international community with
materials that will assist accountability mechanism
in their tasks. As mandated by the Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Technical Secretariat has continued the transfer
of information to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, established
in 2016.
It should be recalled that all the mandates given
to the Convention and the decisions by the OPCW
policymaking organs concerning the Syrian chemical
dossier remain binding on all States parties and on the
Technical Secretariat. Our work therefore continues
on multiple fronts, including through engagement with
Syria. The Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to establish facts surrounding
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. To
date, the Fact-Finding Mission has already investigated
77 allegations of chemical-weapons use and has
determined 17 cases of likely or confirmed use of
chemical weapons in Syria.
The report of the Fact-Finding Mission related to
the incident in Douma on 7 April 2018 is still a matter
of interest for some Member States, including here in
the Security Council. Let me recall the facts.
The Fact-Finding Mission released its report on
1 March 2019. In it, the Mission concluded that there
were reasonable grounds to believe that the use of
chlorine as a weapon likely took place. Following
the issuance of the report, two former inspectors of
the Technical Secretariat could not accept that the
conclusions of the Fact-Finding Mission were different
from their own personal views that were not backed by
evidence. When their positions could not gain traction
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

within the Technical Secretariat, they tried to publicly
portray the work of the OPCW as biased and partial,
and the report, somehow, doctored. By doing so, they
violated all their fundamental obligations towards the
OPCW and its member States.
I would like to highlight that one of the two former
inspectors was never a member of the Fact-Finding
Mission and had only played a supporting role for
the Mission for a limited period of time. The other
inspector participated in the Fact-Finding Mission
investigation for the first time, but only in a limited
capacity. He could not be deployed in the field, as he
had not completed some of the inspector training.
Moreover, after their deployment to Douma in the
summer of 2018, both of them ceased to be involved in
the work of the Fact-Finding Mission and, consequently,
neither had access to the critical information and
analysis performed by the Mission since the end of
August 2018 and for a period of more than six months
preceding the conclusions of the Mission’s investigation
and the publication of its report on 3 March 2019.
So far, none of the 193 member States of the OPCW
have challenged the findings of the Fact-Finding
Mission that chlorine was found on the scene of the
attack in Douma. It must be recalled that the mandate of
the Fact-Finding Mission is to establish facts pertaining
to the use of toxic chemicals as weapons — not to
identify the perpetrators.
Since 1 March 2019, the report of the FactFinding Mission about Douma is under the authority
of the Executive Council and the Conference of the
States Parties, and it will be further examined by the
Investigation and Identification Team.
Additionally, the Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) continues its efforts to clarify the shortcomings
found in the initial Syrian declaration. One new issue
was recently opened and will be taken up during the
twenty-fifth round of consultations we are preparing.
It pertains to the presence of a neat chemical-weapons
agent found in samples collected in large storage
containers in September 2020.
On 30 April, I sent a letter to the Syrian National
Authority announcing that the next round of
consultations would take place between 18 May and
1 June. On 5 May, the Technical Secretariat requested
the necessary and usual issuance of visas for the
members of the Team. In the absence of a response, the

S/PV. 8785

Technical Secretariat informed the Syrian authorities,
on 14 May, of the postponement of the DAT mission
to 28 May. On 26 May, still not having received any
response from the Syrian authorities on the issuance
of the visas, I decided to postpone the mission until
further notice. The Technical Secretariat will continue
to seek the next opportunity to deploy the DAT in order
to support the Syrian Arab Republic in complying with
all its obligations.
The biannual inspections of the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre continue. The Technical
Secretariat also continues to prepare for inspections
of the Syrian airbases identified in the JIM and IIT
reports as having been involved in the use of chemical
weapons. These inspections will take place as soon as
both the security conditions and the evolution of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) will allow them to do
so.
I wish to stress at this point that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to deliver on all the
various Syrian-related mandates under extraordinarily
difficult conditions, namely, the numerous and
sophisticated cyberattacks it suffers, the massive
spread of disinformation about our work and sometimes
even the denigration of some staff members of the
organization, and, thirdly, over the past year, the
challenges imposed by the restrictions stemming from
the COVID-19 pandemic.
I am constantly heartened by the determination
and courage of my staff in meeting such challenging
circumstances, which have been displayed in particular
during the deployments that we managed to undertake
notwithstanding all the obstacles and the risks.
Along with the Syrian chemical-weapons dossier,
there are a few important matters related to chemical
weapons that also require our attention. As I reported
to Council members previously, chemical weapons
have also been used in the last seven years in several
countries. Many of these cases of use involved highly
sophisticated chemical agents and have to be tackled
with expertise and competence. The OPCW Technical
Secretariat has delivered assistance upon the request of
concerned States parties. It is the responsibility of the
international community at large, as well as the OPCW
and beyond — the wider United Nations — to take
further measures.
We must also take into account that despite the
OPCW’s almost universal reach, there are still four States

21-138055/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

Members of the United Nations that have not ratified or
acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention. Should
any of those States join the Convention as a possessor
State, another operation of elimination of chemical
weapons stockpiles under OPCW verification would be
set in motion.
All of these matters, together with the evolution
of the global security environment and the progress
of science and technology, required the Technical
Secretariat’s full preparedness in terms of knowledge,
skills and capacity. We need to stay abreast of science
and technological developments. The unique knowledge
on chemical weapons that we presently possess must
be preserved and retained. Our staff must be able to
further develop skills and expertise so as to be able to
assist the States parties in facing all kinds of chemical
threats.
The Technical Secretariat will continue to actively
promote chemical-security culture in all States
parties to counter the threat of chemical terrorism.
To this end, and despite the fact that our budget is
subject to zero nominal growth, we continue to make
progress on all those essential aspects of our work. An
example is the new OPCW Centre for Chemistry and
Technology — the ChemTech Centre — which we are
building in the Netherlands, and which will be a key
tool at our disposal. The building can be seen in this
image of the structure’s final design.
The ChemTech Centre will empower us to better
address the emerging chemical-weapons threats and to
contribute to the use of chemistry solely for the benefit
of humankind. The Centre will function as a repository
of knowledge and skills pertaining to chemical
disarmament, non-proliferation, chemical security and
safety, and the peaceful uses of chemistry. It will also
contribute to exchange and acquisition of the expertise
and skills necessary to stay at the forefront of science
and technology and technological developments. It will
be a global forum for chemical research and analysis,
enabling Member States to establish networks of
experts, researchers and laboratories through a wide
range of activities. The construction of this Centre for
Chemistry and Technology will start this month and,
according to current plans, will be completed at the end
of 2022.
In the coming two years, the organization is
preparing to reach two other important milestones:
first, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the organization,
6/31

03/06/2021

in 2022, and, secondly, the end of the destruction of
all declared chemical-weapons stockpiles, which is
expected to be completed in 2023.
Keeping the world secure from a re-emergence of
chemical weapons requires commitment and efforts by
a full range of stakeholders: Governments, of course,
parliaments, the chemical industry, international
organizations and bodies, academia, the scientific
community, and, obviously, civil society. I take it as an
integral part of my duties to reach out to representatives
of all those stakeholders, including United Nations
partners and the members of the Security Council. We
will not succeed without all of them.
The President: I thank Mr. Arias for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This is the first time since last October
that the Security Council has met in order to discuss
resolution 2118 (2013) in person (see S/PV.8764), and
we are grateful to the Estonian presidency for that. This
is yet one more step towards the return of the Security
Council to its traditional methods of work, which is very
timely. We are also grateful to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu
for her briefing.
We would like to also welcome the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Fernando Arias. It is
great that the leadership of the OPCW has finally found
an opportunity to participate in the meetings of the
Council. We think that this format of our interaction
should become a regular one.
The Syrian chemical dossier is a specific topic, and
first-hand information in this context is irreplaceable.
Many delegations have questions — frequently very
specific questions — about OPCW activities. So far,
Mrs. Nakamitsu has had to answer these questions,
and we are very grateful to her for that. But exhaustive
answers on this topic cannot be provided by the
representative of the United Nations Secretariat, so
it would be much more logical to put these questions
directly to the Director-General of the OPCW and give
him an opportunity to answer them in an open format.
We are convinced that is in the interest of the Security
Council to have maximum transparency in this regard,
and we hope that this is in the interest of the OPCW
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

as well. We expect that this kind of open interactive
exchange is exactly what we are going to have today.
In December last year, we put to Mr. Arias a
number of questions having to do with the line that
OPCW has taken as regards the Syrian chemical file
(see S/2020/1202). Members of the Council have the list
of questions, so I am not going to repeat them today, but
let me just dwell on some salient points.
First of all, I would of course refer to the infamous
report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
(FFM) on the Duma incident in April 2018 (S/1731/2019).
As confirmed by various sources, including former
OPCW inspectors who participated directly in the
investigation, the final version was massively redacted
compared to the initial draft, and this was done under
pressure from some delegations. In other words, what
we are dealing with in this context is fraud. The attempts
by these inspectors to make sure that the leadership of
the OPCW investigates the matter resulted in nothing.
Moreover, the inspectors were prosecuted for trying to
get to the bottom of this issue.
Today’s statement by Mr. Arias brings me back to
this issue. Mr. Arias claims in his statement that none
of the 193 States Members of the United Nations has
questioned the findings of the final report on Douma.
First, that is factually incorrect. Take our country,
for example, and we are not the only ones to have
questioned that. On many occasions, including today,
the Director-General has said that much of the Douma
investigation was carried out when the dissenting
inspectors were no longer involved. For example, in his
speech of 6 February 2020, he said:
(spoke in English)
“Both had no involvement in the last six
months of the FFM investigation, when most of the
analytical work took place”.
(spoke in Russian)
Furthermore, he said that some of the inspectors,
especially one in Douma, played no role in the
investigation. That is refuted by the available facts and
documents. At the 15 April Security Council meeting,
journalist Aaron Maté showed us with documents in
hand that much of the work was undertaken in the first
few months of the investigation when Inspector B. was
still a key member of the FFM and the author of the
original report. For example, comparing the original
report with the final report, Maté showed that 70 per

S/PV. 8785

cent of all samples were analysed in the first month,
including 100 per cent of the wood samples. Can he
explain what specific analytical work was done by the
FFM in the last six months of the investigation? Perhaps
it had to do with altering the original findings of the
inspectors who investigated the case.
Secondly, in June 2018, the FFM approached four
toxicologists and pharmacologists from NATO with
expertise on chemical weapons. The materials of that
meeting were leaked, and WikiLeaks published them.
They show that the experts ruled out the use of chlorine
as the cause of death of the victims filmed in Douma.
That conclusion was acknowledged in the original
report but was omitted in the final report. The final
report also excluded the June meeting from the list
of what the team had been doing. Why did the final
report exclude the toxicologists’ findings that chlorine
was not the cause of the deaths of the victims whom we
were shown?
The final report makes reference to later meetings
with toxicologists in September and October, which
are included among the meetings held by the Inquiry
Team. However, the final report does not provide
no information as to what conclusions the new
toxicologists came to. Why and how did it happen that
their conclusions became more important and allowed
the findings of the first toxicologists to be ignored?
Why does the final report not explain exactly what
those toxicologists found? Why are their findings
and conclusions not compared to those of the original
toxicologists? Why were those first findings omitted
from the report? I very much hope to have answers to
those questions.
Thirdly, this is Syria’s initial declaration under the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). We asked for
an explanation of the differences in approach on that
issue between Damascus and other countries that have
faced similar problems but have not been subjected to
the same barrage of criticism for it as Syria.
Fourthly, the methodology of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, which in its investigations relies on
information from partisan sources opposed to the
Syrian Government, collects evidence remotely and
draws “highly likely” conclusions based on it. That
is in direct contravention of the CWC, which has a
chain-of-custody requirement to ensure that evidence
is preserved. Moreover, former OPCW spokesman
Mr. Lujan said in 2013 that the organization would

21-138057/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

never examine samples that had not been collected
by its inspectors in the field. It turns out that now
the Technical Secretariat is openly violating its own
declared principles and is not ashamed to admit it in
its reports. We are interested in what measures the
leadership of the OPCW Technical Secretariat intends
to take to rectify the situation.
Another issue is the double standards of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat in selecting sources of
evidence. The OPCW inspection teams readily grasp
any, even the weakest and most inconclusive, material
from the infamous White Helmets, while evidence of
the involvement of the opposition in the organization
of provocations using chemical weapons provided by
professionals — the Syrian authorities and the Russian
military — is blatantly ignored, as well as the numerous
confirmations by local witnesses, that is, living
witnesses, of the staged nature of those incidents. In
particular, that was once again confirmed in the FFM
report on the November 2018 incident in Aleppo.
Time is running out and questions to the DirectorGeneral, as head of the OPCW’s Technical Secretariat,
are snowballing. Not only is the story of the Douma
report not over, but there are more and more twists in it.
It is now not even the OPCW inspectors themselves who
are being persecuted but the independent experts who
are trying to get to the bottom of this story. It is doubly
sad that so-called independent and democratic Western
media, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation,
are joining the campaign to smear them. An appeal by
prominent public figures, in particular the well-known
non-governmental organization (NGO) the Courage
Foundation, calling on the leadership of the Technical
Secretariat to finally get to the bottom of the numerous
irregularities in its work, including the evidence of
fraud in the preparation of the report on Douma. We do
not understand that selective approach. The Technical
Secretariat actively cooperates with some NGOs, such
as the White Helmets, and engages them in highly
sensitive matters, while it blatantly turns its back on
others that ask inconvenient questions. What kind of
freedom of speech, transparency or consideration for
the views of civil society are we talking about?
However, since last December, new questions have
also emerged. First of all, they concern the new report
of the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) on the
Saraqib incident in February 2018, which was thrown in
on the eve of the voting at the Conference of the States
Parties to the CWC in April. None of the breaches in the
8/31

03/06/2021

investigation methodology that we have been talking
about for years have been corrected in it. The report
itself reveals that the IIT never went to the scene of
the incident. All the physical evidence was collected
by representatives of the again infamous NGO White
Helmets. Half of the witnesses interviewed, again for
the most part White Helmets, and their testimony were
analysed by anonymous so-called authoritative experts
and scientific institutions. What kind of impartiality
or chain-of-custody requirement can we talk about in
such circumstances?
As with the case of Douma, it is not at all clear why
Damascus would use chlorine in Saraqib and clearly
expose itself to international criticism if it would not
have benefited militarily or otherwise anyway? The IIT
refers to the alleged use of just one chlorine cylinder
in Saraqib, resulting in minor injuries to 12 people,
who were discharged from hospital within two hours
of arriving there. The group itself says that the Syrian
army was not carrying out any offensive operations in
the area during that period.
The report is full of other glaring inconsistencies,
such as the testimony of pseudo-witnesses about
helicopters flying at low altitude with their lights on,
which, in fact, is unacceptable when carrying out
combat missions at night, or a cylinder that somehow
was-corroded in less than 12 hours after hitting
the ground.
We would like Mr. Arias to comment on those
points today.
But there is another element in the new IIT document
that goes beyond any reasonable limit. Paragraph 5.18
states that one of the most likely motives for the chlorine
air strike was “a ‘punishment’ for the downing of the
Russian aircraft”. At the same time, the IIT draws that
conclusion, citing an anonymous “military expert”.
We call on Mr. Arias to explain to us why the
Technical Secretariat, which according to its leadership
is engaged in strictly technical analysis, is going beyond
its mandate and engaging in politicized conjecture? Who
instructed the inspectors to include that deliberately
false conclusion in the final document?
During the April Arria Formula meeting organized
by Russia, one of the briefers — independent reporter
Aaron Maté — asked the representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom whether they would
support an investigation, conducted by the OPCW
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Scientific Advisory Board, and with the participation
of former inspectors of the FFM, into the manipulation
of the FFM report. We have not heard an answer from
our colleagues.
However, let me remind the Council that, according
to paragraph 45 of section D of article VIII of the
CWC, the responsibility for the activities of the Board
lies with the OPCW Director-General. Therefore, we
would like to ask Mr. Arias whether he would agree
to organize a purely technical discussion within the
framework of the OPCW Scientific Advisory Board,
with the participation of well-known inspectors, to
discuss all the inconsistencies concerning the Douma
report. I think that our Western colleagues, who so
actively advocate transparency and the depoliticization
of the work of the OPCW, should welcome that. We are
all interested in a frank and, as many delegations have
emphasized, technical discussion among professionals.
If Mr. Arias does not think it is possible to organize such
a discussion in the OPCW Scientific Advisory Board,
what other options can he suggest for resolving that
situation? Is he ready to meet with former inspectors
and discuss their concerns directly with them? We
expect to hear answers to all these questions in the open
part of today’s meeting.
I want to emphasize that we have gathered in the
Chamber today not, as some colleagues try to describe
it, to cross-examine the OPCW Director-General by
asking him inconvenient questions. This is a necessary
collective effort to rectify the regrettable situation in
the OPCW. An open discussion with the leadership
of the organization is urgently needed in order to
prevent further erosion of its authority and a repeat of
the humiliating situation that occurred in April, when
a decision was made at the Conference of the States
Parties to deny a sovereign State complying with the
Convention its rights. That decision was yet again
pushed through in violation of Convention norms and
the long-standing practice of consensus in the OPCW.
It is encouraging that, in fact, less than half of
the OPCW member States voted for it, including only
six Western States members of the current Security
Council. The rest either voted against it or abstained in
the voting. The same position was taken by a number
of former members of the Security Council who
participated in meetings on the Syrian issue last year
and know the situation inside out.

S/PV. 8785

In conclusion, we, like many other responsible
participants in the CWC and as a country that stood
at the origins of the OPCW, are concerned about the
politicization of its work, which is being imposed on it by
Western colleagues. The OPCW should be the guardian
of the chemical non-proliferation regime and must not
be turned into an instrument for implementing political
interests or for punishing undesirables. Unfortunately,
it is becoming increasingly likely that Syria is not the
only State at risk and that any State could come under
attack and be subject to pressure through the leverage
of accusations of the use of chemical weapons.
The Security Council has a special responsibility
to prevent such an outcome. We must all work to ensure
that the OPCW is fully capable of implementing its
mandate and remaining an impartial guardian of the
chemical non-proliferation regime. Therefore, we hope
that today’s conversation with the Director-General of
the OPCW will not be the last and will enable us to
move at least somewhat closer to that goal. Russia is
ready to further work in all forums to restore trust in
the OPCW and strengthen its authority and to defend
the foundations of the regime for the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her briefing today, and the
United States welcomes the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Fernando Arias, to today’s discussion. We
thank him for his thorough presentation. And let me
just say that the United States remains grateful for his
commitment and leadership at the OPCW in upholding
the norm against the use of chemical weapons.
We also want to thank the courageous men and
woman who carry out the impartial and independent
work of the OPCW, often doing so — as the DirectorGeneral has indicated — in dangerous and difficult
conditions. Their service and professionalism should
never be taken for granted. The United States, along
with an overwhelming number of responsible nations,
will continue to support the work of the OPCW in
carrying out its critical mandate against the backdrop
of the continued threat of chemical weapons use.
Let us be clear — the Al-Assad regime is responsible
for innumerable atrocities, some of which rise to the
level of war crimes and crimes against humanity. As
the Security Council was briefed just this past April
(see S/2021/337), the OPCW’s Investigation and

21-138059/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

Identification Team (IIT) released its second report.
This report concluded that there were reasonable
grounds to believe that the Syrian Arab Air Force
used a chemical weapon in Saraqib, Syria, in February
2018. This act imposed deliberate and unconscionable
suffering on Syrian victims.
The Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons
against the Syrian people is well documented. The IIT
has now attributed four separate chemical weapons
attacks in Syria to the Al-Assad regime. These incidents
are in addition to the four chemical weapons attacks
attributed to the Al-Assad regime by the former OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. The
United States concurs with the OPCW’s conclusions
cited in this most recent report (see S/2021/415).
Despite the OPCW’s efforts to encourage and assist
Syria to adhere to its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013), the
Al-Assad regime — supported by Russia — continues
to ignore calls from the international community
to fully disclose and verifiably destroy its chemical
weapons programme. Without accountability for the
atrocities committed against the Syrian people, lasting
peace in Syria will remain out of reach. The United
States once again calls for justice and accountability
as critical components to help move Syria towards a
political resolution to the conflict.
The United States welcomes the 21 April
decision of the OPCW’s Conference of the States
Parties, which condemned, as we heard, Syria’s use
of chemical weapons and suspended its rights and its
privileges under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
This decision — the first time that the Conference
of States Parties has taken such action — is in direct
response to the Al-Assad regime’s repeated use and
possession of chemical weapons and its failure to
complete the measures set out in the OPCW Executive
Council’s July 2020 decision. The adoption of this
Conference of States Parties decision — which was
overwhelmingly supported by nearly 90 nations around
the world and opposed by only 15 — sends the clear and
unequivocal message that the use of chemical weapons
has consequences.
As we made clear at the Council’s last meeting on
this subject (S/2021/446), no amount of disinformation
espoused by Syria and its very small number of
supporters can negate or diminish the credibility of the
evidence that has been presented to us by the OPCW.
The Al-Assad regime must comply with its obligations
10/31

03/06/2021

under the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013).
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): At the outset, I thank
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu and
the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Fernando
Arias González, for their briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey in this meeting.
Let me start by reiterating Viet Nam’s consistent
policy of strongly supporting the non-proliferation
and disarmament of weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons. Chemical weapons are
indiscriminate and inhumane and can have long-term
effects on human life in the environment. My delegation
unequivocally condemns the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
Sharing the common goal of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of these weapons,
we re-emphasize the vital importance of the full
implementation by all State parties of their obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The
role of the OPCW as the multilateral body entrusted
with assisting the implementation of the CWC is pivotal
to the achievement of that goal. In this regard, the work
of the organization should be carried out in the most
comprehensive, objective and impartial manner. These
high standards, particularly in terms of the investigation
of alleged Convention violations, should help establish
irrefutable facts and evidence with a view to ensuring
justice and in preventing violations.
On the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, we share
the concerns over the alleged use of these weapons. The
reported information regarding their possession and
use by armed groups is also deeply troubling. While
progress towards closing this file during the reporting
period seems to have been limited, we would like to
share the two factors that we deem essential.
The first is continued engagement between the
OPCW and Syria. My delegation takes note of the
monthly reports of the OPCW Director-General on this
issue, including on the engagement between Technical
Secretariat and Syria through technical meetings,
field visits and exchange of letters. We call for close,
continuous and constructive cooperation between the
Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Authority in addressing the remaining issues relating to
the initial declaration — the first step of a State party in
implementing the CWC. We look forward to receiving
updates on the outcomes of the consultations between
the two sides, including on the new outstanding issue, as
mentioned in the ninety-second report (see S/2021/514).
While taking note of the 21 April decision of the
Conference of States Parties to the CWC, my delegation
strongly believes that engagement needs to be enhanced
constantly in order to move towards the closure of this
protracted dossier.
Secondly, I turn to effective international
cooperation. The divergent views on this matter are
blocking our way towards the full implementation of
the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013). It is crucial that
the international community be united, including in
The Hague and in New York. Accordingly, constructive
and non-politicized international cooperation is
extremely important to support the efforts of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government in
finding solutions. Differences must also be addressed
constructively and must not be politicized.
In closing, Viet Nam would like to stress the need
for a comprehensive political settlement of the crisis
in Syria, led and owned by the Syrian themselves and
facilitated by the United Nations, in full accordance
with principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. That is the key to addressing all
issues and bridging all differences, and the only path
towards bringing back stability for the Syrian people.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I recognize the participation
in this meeting of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Mr. Fernando Arias, to whom I reiterate
Mexico’s support for the work of the OPCW. I also
thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her detailed briefing. We
also welcome the presence of the representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Turkey.
My country has taken note of the report and of the
areas where we continue to hope for full cooperation
from Syria in declaring all agents produced and turned
into weapons. Mexico urges Syria to consider a new
round of talks with the Declaration Assessment Team
in order to shed light on the issue of the presence of a
neat chemical warfare agent found in September 2020
in the samples taken from large storage containers. We

S/PV. 8785

also trust that inspections in Syria by the Fact-Finding
Mission will continue at sites identified by the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigation Mechanism and the
Investigation and Identification Team. The cooperation
of Syria is essential to ensuring that these missions can
carry out their work. For example, it would be helpful
for everyone to know whether there has been any
progress in implementing the measures mandated by
the OPCW Executive Council on 9 July 2020.
Mexico believes that ongoing dialogue between the
Security Council and the OPCW is useful in making
objective progress on some of the outstanding issues. At
the same time, we believe that it would be worthwhile
to reflect on the format of these monthly informational
meetings. Mexico favours the idea of holding public
meetings, which allow for greater transparency and
accountability for the Security Council. Unfortunately,
however, on the issue before us, these meetings have
not led to progress in achieving the common goal we
all share of preventing any possible use of chemical
weapons in the region.
It is not very helpful to exchange views that are
already well known, which promotes polarization at the
expense of finding viable alternatives and complying
with the provisions set forth by the Security Council.
Mexico reiterates its call on the Secretary-General
to step up his good offices between Syria and the
OPCW, as well as with interested parties, in order
to work towards a solution of this matter, which has
already been before us for many, many years.
If the Security Council is united in its condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons by any actor and in
any circumstances, it is therefore up to the Council to
uphold the norm against the use of chemical weapons
and their inhumane effects and to support the mandate
of the OPCW, requesting that it play its due role, but we
must also devote the same attention to listening.
Mexico will continue to follow any new
developments closely. The only way to find a solution
to this issue is through diplomatic means. We must
therefore ensure that all relevant parties are always able
to participate at the negotiating table.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu and the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition

21-1380511/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Fernando Arias, for
the briefings.
We have noted the contents of the latest report of the
Director-General of the OPCW on the progress made
in the elimination of the Syrian Chemical Weapons
programme, published on 28 May (see S/2021/514).
The report highlights the outstanding issues in the
implementation of Syria’s declaration and destruction
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention as
well as the possible use of chemical weapons.
India views the Chemical Weapons Convention as
a unique, non-discriminatory disarmament instrument
which serves as a model for the elimination of an entire
category of weapons of mass destruction. India attaches
high importance to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and stands for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. It is important to maintain the
credibility and integrity of the Convention. Further,
India is against the use of chemical weapons by anybody,
anywhere, at any time and under any circumstances.
India has consistently maintained that any
investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective, following
scrupulously the provisions and procedures embedded
in the Convention, and in conformity with the delicate
balance of power and responsibility entrusted to it to
establish facts and reach evidence-based conclusions.
We again ask and expect the OPCW to follow those
parameters scrupulously.
We encourage Syria to continue its cooperation
with the OPCW to resolve pending issues, and we hope
that the next round of Declaration Assessment Teamrelated consultations will take place soon.
India has been cautioning about the possibility of
chemical weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
entities and individuals. The latest report of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (S/2021/419) refers to the repeated
successful deployments of chemical weapons by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) against
civilian populations between 2014 and 2016. That
is a cause for serious concern and needs to be fully
recognized and acted upon, given that the core area
of operations of ISIL has been both Syria and Iraq. It
is deeply concerning that the involvement of external
actors in Syria has given a fillip to the growth of
terrorism in the country and in the region. We are
12/31

03/06/2021

concerned at the frequent reports of the resurgence
of terrorist groups in the region. The international
community cannot afford to ignore terrorist activities
in Syria and the region.
Lastly, India has consistently called for a
comprehensive and peaceful resolution of the Syrian
conflict through a Syrian-led dialogue taking into
account the legitimate aspirations of the people of
Syria, facilitated by the United Nations, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). We note the results of the
recent presidential elections in Syria, which fall within
their sovereign purview. We reiterate our support for
the United Nations-led efforts to find an expeditious
resolution to the decade-long conflict in Syria.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank Director-General Arias and the Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for their informative briefings.
To begin, I will restate Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines’ well-established position that the use
of chemical weapons anywhere and by anyone
constitutes an abominable violation of international
law. Chemical-weapons atrocities cannot be ignored,
and impunity cannot be encouraged. Perpetrators must
be held accountable. The Council and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
bears the tremendous responsibility of protecting the
international non-proliferation regime, and future
generations will judge us very harshly if we fail to act.
We therefore support the mandate of the OPCW
and encourage efforts aimed at strengthening its
capacities to ensure that the quality of its work is of the
highest possible standard. We continue to reiterate that
all facets and activities of the organization, including
the work of the Fact-Finding Mission, the Identification
and Investigation Team and the Declaration Assessment
Team must be impartial, transparent and not politicized.
The OPCW must be above reproach; anything less erodes
trust, undermines its efforts and renders it ineffective.
Its findings must be able to withstand rigorous scrutiny
to enable States parties to maintain confidence in its
processes. Further, consensus-based decisions ought
to be pursued to prevent further polarization and
divisiveness and to promote international cooperation.
We reiterate the importance of resolving the
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in the initial
chemical-weapons
declaration.
The
continued
cooperation of the Syrian Government is essential to
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

the ongoing process and the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). Despite the obstacles presented by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, work must continue
on this file, and we encourage the parties to remain
committed to continuing technical consultations. The
Technical Secretariat and the various teams ought to
be provided with comprehensive information and given
access to effectively fulfil their respective mandates.
We hope that all parties will engage constructively in
that regard.
Consequently, the elements of trust and confidence
are critical, as without them cooperation becomes
strained. We therefore have a duty to promote and
facilitate dialogue between the Syrian Government and
the OPCW. That not only demonstrates respect for the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, but it
also helps to foster much-needed trust and cooperation
between the parties.
The weaponizing of toxic chemicals is
unquestionably one of the great threats to international
peace and security. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
shares the vision of a chemical-weapons-free world,
and we support all efforts to make certain that applied
science and technology are used only for the peace,
progress and the prosperity of all humankind.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Nakamitsu and DirectorGeneral Arias for their respective briefings.
The latest monthly report submitted by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) (see S/2021/514) states that the Technical
Secretariat conducted a seventh round of inspections
of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre in
November last year and found no chemicals or related
activities that violated the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons convention. The report also indicates that
the Technical Secretariat is in communication with
Syria on the timing of the next round of consultations.
We hope that the two sides will finalize the relevant
arrangements as soon as possible and continue to resolve
outstanding issues through dialogue and consultation.
The report covers the activities of the Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT), the ninety-fourth session
of the Executive Council and the actions taken at the
twenty-fifth Conference of the States Parties. It must be
pointed out that those actions are highly controversial
and have significantly deviated from the right track of
resolving the Syrian chemical-weapons issue.

S/PV. 8785

The Convention authorizes only fact-finding
investigations into the alleged use of chemical
weapons and does not authorize the identification of
perpetrators. The establishment of the IIT overstepped
the authorization of the Convention and was replete with
political motives and inconsistent with the technical
nature of the OPCW.
Some countries have forced votes at the OPCW,
including a vote at the twenty-fifth Conference of the
States Parties, held in April, which led to a decision
supported by less than half of the States Parties to
suspend Syria’s right to vote and stand for election.
Half of the members of the Security Council did not
support that decision, which speaks volumes about the
controversial nature of that decision.
China expresses its deep concern at the high degree
of politicization of the OPCW’s work and the deep
division of the States parties. Maintaining the authority
and effectiveness of the Convention and bringing
the OPCW’s work back on to the right track as soon
as possible is the common responsibility of all States
parties. It is also the only viable way to resolve the
Syrian chemical-weapons issue.
China calls on all States parties to maintain and
practice multilateralism in its true spirit, uphold
the Convention as a yardstick, remain committed to
consultation and cooperation and refrain from being
confrontational. We hope that the OPCW will adhere
to the principles of independence, objectivity and
impartiality and play a positive and constructive role in
achieving the goal of a chemical-weapons free world.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
who is here in person today for her regular briefing,
as well as Mr. Fernando Arias for his comprehensive
presentation. We also welcome the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey.
We take note of the ninety-second monthly report
(see S/2021/514) of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the submission of the
ninetieth monthly report by the Syrian Arab Republic.
Kenya reaffirms its support for the mandate of the
OPCW and its important responsibility in relation to the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Kenya condemns any use of chemical weapons by any
actor and under any circumstances. The use of chemical
weapons is a special category of threat — not only to the
Syrian people but also to the international community.

21-1380513/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

Their use anywhere, by any party, threatens to open the
door to their widening and escalating use. It is therefore
not an overstatement to argue that future generations
may condemn or praise how this situation is dealt with
now by the Security Council and its members.
The gravity and sense of urgency in dealing with
this matter needs to inform the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). In particular, there is need to
inject sufficient measures to reinforce the required
faith and confidence in the work and processes of the
OPCW. We can move forward if members embrace
pragmatic approaches that cool down politically charged
perceptions of its management and decision-making
structures in relation to this agenda item.
A prompt conclusion and closure of the ongoing
investigations will bring about optimism for a
peaceful Syria. We therefore encourage the Syrian
Arab Republic and the OPCW to collaborate better
and finalize their work. We are encouraged that the
Declaration Assessment Team continues its efforts to
clarify all outstanding issues. We welcome the Team’s
deployment to Syria from 28 May to 11 June 2021 and
look forward to its report.
I reiterate that Kenya stands with the people of
Syria. We believe that their peace and security will
emerge only from a political solution achieved through
an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue.
We will continue to urge all parties to be vigilant in
their engagement, in multiple ways, with militant groups
that adhere to the aims of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Shams. Too often, short-term expediency
when dealing with such groups has turned out to be
extremely harmful to the international community.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Director-General Arias and Mrs. Nakamitsu for
their briefings today. This is the third time the DirectorGeneral has briefed the Security Council in the past two
years. I think that underlines the Security Council’s
enduring concern at the use of these banned weapons,
as well as the importance the Director-General places
on dialogue and collaboration between the Council
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
I would also like to thank the Director-General for
the work of the various teams of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, as set out in his monthly reports to the
Council. Despite the challenges posed by the pandemic
14/31

03/06/2021

and the intense scrutiny under which the Technical
Secretariat operates, it is clear that the OPCW continues
to implement the duties conferred on it objectively and
professionally and to prioritize dialogue, cooperation,
discretion and candour with the Syrian authorities and
OPCW States parties.
The United Kingdom’s position on this issue is well
known, and I would like to underline three points.
First, we remain deeply concerned about the
unresolved issues in Syria’s initial chemical-weapons
declaration, which now stands at 20. Coupled with
the independent findings of the United Nations and
the OPCW, which, with the latest Investigation and
Identification Team report, have now attributed eight
chemical-weapons attacks to the Syrian regime, it is
clear that Syria retained a chemical-weapons capability
and the willingness to use it after 2013.
Secondly, the retention of that capability means
there is an ongoing risk of further use of chemical
weapons. Given the unaccounted-for whereabouts of
significant amounts of chemical agents and munitions,
there is also the potential for those weapons to fall into
the hands of other groups with an intent to use them.
Thirdly, and for that reason, we will continue to
insist on Syria’s full cooperation with the OPCW, in
accordance with resolution 2118 (2013), and on the full
and verified destruction of Syria’s chemical-weapons
programme, so that the ongoing threat to international
peace and security can be neutralized to the satisfaction
of the international community.
I would like to take advantage of the DirectorGeneral’s presence to ask two questions.
First, resolution 2118 (2013) requires Syria to
cooperate fully. How does one assess the cooperation
of the Syrian Arab Republic? After seven years of work
and 20 unresolved issues in Syria’s declaration, what
are the next steps and what more is required to start
to reduce the number of issues and move towards a
resolution?
Secondly, with regard to the methodology of
the Investigation and Identification Team, could the
Director-General set out the starting point of the
investigation and tell us more about how the Team
gathers evidence and conducts the investigation? Does
it simply accept the Fact-Finding Mission’s findings, or
does it question them?
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing
on the most recent monthly report (see S/2021/514)
on the progress towards the full elimination of the
Syrian chemical-weapons programme. I would also
like to thank Director-General Arias and to reiterate
Norway’s steadfast confidence in him and the work of
the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Norway regrets to note that the monthly report
from the OPCW yet again describes very little
progress and that the planned May deployment of the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) did not happen.
We are also concerned that the Syrian Arab Republic
has not responded to the DAT’s proposed rescheduled
deployment. We encourage the Syrian authorities to
respond in a timely fashion so that the DAT can confirm
its next round of inspections, which remain an essential
component of the verification regime in order to ensure
that activities are consistent with the objectives of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
We reiterate our concern that such a large number
of issues — now 20 — remain outstanding. We urge
Syria to fully cooperate with the OPCW and provide
further information about the types and quantities of
chemical agents produced and/or weaponized in certain
inspected facilities. Again, the Syrian Arab Republic
must fulfil its obligations pursuant to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). We
also call on Syria to implement the necessary measures
in order to lift the suspension of its rights and privileges
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The elimination of chemical weapons in Syria
requires urgency. For far too long, numerous issues have
been left outstanding, and many questions have been
left unanswered, both for the international community
and the people of Syria. Accountability for the use of
chemical weapons remains a priority, and we reiterate
the statement of the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons of 18 May,
which Norway fully supports.
There is a global norm against the use of chemical
weapons. As a Council, we cannot ignore violations and
allow the vital international norm to erode.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Fernando Arias for their
briefings. I thank the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Turkey for their participation in today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8785

The prevention and deterrence of the production
and use of chemical weapons rests on our ability to
respect and enforce the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. The role of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in this
regard is essential. It is therefore crucial for this quasiuniversal organization to continue to work towards
this goal by ensuring that it builds the confidence of
Member States through transparency and by fostering a
spirit of consensus in its deliberations.
Similarly, the OPCW Technical Secretariat must
adopt more inclusive and inclusive approaches in its
work so as to ensure that the conclusions of its work
are accepted by all. It is regrettable that, eight years
after the unanimous adoption of resolution 2118 (2013),
the issue of the elimination of the Syrian chemical
arsenal and the responsibilities for the use of these
weapons has still not been completely resolved. There
is a lack of consensus on how to deal with this issue,
and the definitive identification of the perpetrators
is an impediment to the accountability of the real
perpetrators, to the detriment of the victims who are
waiting for justice.
As the primary body responsible for eliminating
threats to international peace and security, the Security
Council must show unity in closing this file and focus
on the other equally important aspects of this crisis,
notably the humanitarian situation and the political
process. The credibility of the Council and the authority
of the OPCW are at stake.
In the light of the foregoing, I would like to make
the following remarks. First, my delegation would like
to reiterate that any action other than that aimed at the
full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the
OPCW report and its conclusions should be avoided.
Secondly, cooperation between Syria and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat must continue and be in
good faith in order to resolve all outstanding issues,
including advancing the work of the Declarations
Assessment Team. To this end, my delegation notes the
Syrian Government’s continued efforts to shed light
on the use of these weapons on its territory through
its communications with the OPCW and the Security
Council and its willingness to continue to work with
the Technical Secretariat by ensuring greater access
for it to listed sites across Syria in the conduct of
its investigations.

21-1380515/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, my delegation calls on the United
Nations, the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to cooperate more closely on this
issue and pay rigorous attention to all allegations of
chemical-weapons use throughout Syria.
In conclusion, the Niger reiterates its position that
the use of chemical weapons, for whatever reason and by
whomever, remains unjustifiable and in contravention
of international law. We support the work of the
OPCW and its Technical Secretariat to ensure that no
one suffers the effects of these prohibited weapons
ever again.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Director-General Arias for his briefing today. Ireland
has full confidence in his leadership in guiding
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). I also want to thank
Under-Secretary General Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The OPCW plays an essential role as the impartial
and technical body mandated by the international
community to address chemical weapons. The
professionalism and integrity of the staff of the OPCW is
clear, and we deeply regret that some Council members
continue once again today to challenge and undermine
their work without any factual basis. We remain deeply
worried by the lack of progress by Syria in addressing
the serious and growing list of issues to be resolved
under its initial declaration.
It is asserted by some in this Chamber that these
issues are not significant, that there are similar issues
with other States’ initial declarations and that Syria
is being treated differently. Like others before me,
I would like to ask Director-General Arias for his
reflections on this aspect and how we should assess
Syria’s efforts to address these issues in the seven years
since the Declaration Assessment Team was formed,
in particular given the very serious nature of many of
these outstanding issues. It would also be interesting to
hear how the Director-General would assess the level
of cooperation provided by Syria and the nature of its
responses to issues raised by the OPCW.
Equally, Syria has placed great emphasis on the
material it has circulated on the possible possession
of chemical weapons by non-State actors in Syria. I
would ask for the Director-General’s assessment of the
materials supplied by Syria as well as the country’s
cooperation in efforts to follow up on this information.
16/31

03/06/2021

We must separate the facts from the noise. In the
end, what is evident is that Syria must fulfil its legal
obligations. It must cooperate fully with the OPCW. It
must resolve the serious issues with its declaration. It
must ensure that its entire stocks of chemical weapons
are declared and verifiably destroyed.
Those responsible for the attacks at Ltamenah
and Saraqib, as well as the multiple other documented
chemical-weapons attacks conducted by Syrian forces,
must be held to account. Impunity cannot be an option.
The use of chemical weapons anywhere and at any time
is abhorrent and unacceptable. The Security Council
should be united and firm in its response to any use of
these terrible weapons. We must effectively uphold the
international prohibition against them. This is what the
Conference of State Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention has done in April through their action on
Syrian non-compliance. It is regrettable that we on
the Council have been unable to provide a similarly
clear response.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, and the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Ambassador Arias, for their briefings. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey in today’s meeting.
At the outset, Tunisia reiterates its firm
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons anywhere,
by anyone and under any circumstances, regardless
of the motivations and justifications. We emphasize
the need to hold the perpetrators of such horrendous
crimes accountable.
Given the complexity of the situation in Syria, it
is necessary to join efforts and work to find a margin
for consensus solutions and constructive engagement
to address ongoing and emerging problems of the
Syrian dossier based on international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions, and through more
confidence building.
Tunisia expresses once again its support for the
regime of the prohibition and non-proliferation of
chemical weapons. It is a regime based on rules,
consensus and multilateralism with a view to ending
the chemical threat to humanity. Tunisia also supports
the mandate of the OPCW, whose mission is critical to
carrying out the responsibilities of independent and
impartial verification, including in the Syrian Arab
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Republic, by providing a platform for consultation and
cooperation among States on relevant issues.
We have taken note of the ongoing efforts to advance
the dialogue between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian Government. In that regard, we
urge both parties to resume the necessary regular and
continuous technical consultations as soon as possible
in the context of constructive engagement and mutual
trust in order to achieve rapid progress in resolving
outstanding issues and ensure that Syria fulfils its
contractual obligations.
We reiterate the importance of the organization’s
Technical Secretariat continuing its work in Syria
in accordance with its mandate, while ensuring that
thorough, transparent and impartial investigations
are conducted into the allegations of the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons by any party, including by
terrorist groups, whose presence and spread in some
parts of Syria still constitute a challenge to Syria and
the international community in general. Such groups
do not legally or morally recognize the ban on chemical
weapons. That will also require facilitating regular
field access for the various Technical Secretariat teams
to Syrian territory, in coordination with the Syrian
Government, while taking into account the challenges
still posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, the international community
and the Security Council need to coordinate efforts
and shoulder the responsibility entrusted to them to
monitor the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013) in order to
eliminate the chemical threat, ensure the rule of law
and accountability, restore trust in the effectiveness
of chemical-weapons prohibition regime and prevent
their proliferation, in the service of international peace
and security.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing
as well as the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
participating in our meeting today. This is an excellent
opportunity to set the record straight.
Reading the latest OPCW report (see S/2021/514),
I see once again that the situation is not improving. On
the contrary, the presence of a neat chemical warfare
agent, found in storage containers, has led to the start
of a new outstanding issue. This issue is one more in
a long list. The Syrian regime has still not responded

S/PV. 8785

to the new request for the deployment of the original
Declaration Assessment Team. I would therefore like
to ask the Director-General a simple question: how
does he assess Syria’s cooperation with the OPCW, in
particular with regard to the initial declaration more
than seven years after the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013)?
Decision C-25/Dec.9, adopted at the twenty-fifth
Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, was necessary. We could not
allow a State party to blatantly and repeatedly violate
its international commitments without reacting. It is
now up to Syria to comply with its obligations if it
wishes to restore its rights and privileges.
The issuance of the second report of the Investigation
and Identification Team was prepared completely
independently. It highlights once again the crimes of the
Syrian regime. We know that the Syrian Arab Air Force
dropped a chlorine cylinder by helicopter on Saraqib.
The conclusions are clear; the evidence is irrefutable.
Yet some countries are questioning that report in a very
unconvincing way. I would therefore like to ask the
Director-General again, if I may, to explain to us the
methodology that was followed by the Investigation and
Identification Team to reach those conclusions?
I repeat every month, and will continue to do
so, that the use of these shocking weapons cannot
go unpunished. Legal proceedings will take place,
including before national courts. Those proceedings
will be based in particular on the reports of the OPCW.
That is why I say to the Director-General that his
work is so important. The evidence continues to be
collected and will be used. That is the message that we
are pushing with our partners, in particular within the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons. In that regard, finally, let me ask
the Director-General how the exchange of information
and cooperation with the United Nations International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism works?
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu
and the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
Mr. Fernando Arias, for their briefings. We appreciate
their participation today and the opportunity to have
a transparent and open discussion with them about

21-1380517/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

03/06/2021

the progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme.

I take this opportunity to also pose a couple of
questions to Mr. Arias.

The most recent — the ninety-second — monthly
report of the Director-General (see S/2021/446) raises
several concerns in reflecting very little progress,
if not even regress, in the efforts to close the gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies in the initial
declaration. There are unanswered questions pertaining
to a former chemical-weapons production facility. A
new outstanding issue has been opened with regard to
the finding of a neat chemical warfare agent. Sufficient
explanation is still lacking with regard to a detection
of a Schedule 2.B.04 chemical at the Barzah facilities.

Several of our colleagues have already raised
the question of cooperation. The fact is that, after
seven years, the Syrian declaration remains open. My
question is: what are the main obstacles that prohibit
making tangible progress in resolving the outstanding
issues concerning the declaration?

Those are not just minor technical or theoretical
issues but indicate that Syria has not declared and
destroyed all its chemical weapons and their production
facilities and continues to pose a threat to international
peace and security. The second report of the Investigation
and Identification Team, which affirmed all together
now the eighth instance of chemical weapons use by
the Syrian regime, is the latest reminder of that.
There is no hiding the fact that there are serious
shortcomings in Syrian cooperation with the OPCW.
It is regretful that the deployment of the Declaration
Assessment Team for the next round of consultations is
on hold pending Syria’s response. Given the seriousness
of the outstanding issues, we hope that the consultations
between the OPCW and Syria can take place soon.
We should not forget that chemical weapons are
a particularly gruesome and indiscriminate type of
warfare. That is why they were comprehensively
outlawed by the Chemical Weapons Convention. That is
why the Security Council determined in resolution 2118
(2013) that the use of chemical weapons anywhere and
by anyone constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and expressed its strong conviction that those
individuals responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be held accountable. The Security Council must
live up to its words. Impunity, tolerance and inaction
cannot be an option when chemical weapons are used
against civilian populations.
I will conclude by expressing Estonia’s full support
for the professional and impartial work of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and for its leadership and experts.
For the past seven years, they have been under intense
scrutiny, but have shown nothing less but integrity and
dedication to the task of upholding the norm against the
use of chemical weapons.
18/31

My second question pertains to the accusations
and notifications of terrorist use of chemical weapons
in Syria. Can Mr. Arias walk us through how those
notifications are dealt with by the OPCW and what
have been the outcomes?
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I will now give the floor to the briefers to respond
to the questions posed and comments made, bearing in
mind that they will also have an opportunity to make
further comments in the consultations that follow
this meeting.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I believe there were no questions
posed to me.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Arias to
respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Arias: I thank you, Mr. President, for your
kind words of support and for your invitation to brief
the Security Council. At this meeting, the Security
Council has accepted to be briefed and to respond to
my questions in an open format. I communicated that
to you, Sir, in the first contact we had on the telephone,
underlining that the Russian delegation insisted in
December that it wanted to have an open meeting
with a briefing, statements, questions and responses
in an open format. I am very pleased that the Security
Council accepted this format upon the suggestion of the
Russian Federation in December.
Some of the responses will be valid for several
questions because some of the questions are
very similar.
I will start with the questions posed by the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
who said that perhaps his were inconvenient questions.
I must say that I do not consider them to be inconvenient
at all. I am used to responding to the questions of my
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

colleague at The Hague Ambassador Shulgin. We have
a very good, close and friendly relationship. I respond
to all the questions he poses. Sometimes the questions
are difficult to respond to, but I am used to it and I do
not mind at all.
The Russian Ambassador should not worry — we are
good guardians of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the non-proliferation regime. We do our best. I am
going to try to give him as much information as I can
in my responses.
A general comment: what I was pleased to realize is
that there is general support for the implementation of
the Convention by the members of the Security Council.
I appreciate that very much, and I also appreciate
the comments supporting the work of the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Let us start with Douma, since that has been
mentioned frequently in this meeting. In a few
sentences, let us refresh our memories. On 7 April
2018, there were reports that alleged the use of chemical
weapons in Douma. On 12 April 2018, the OPCW FactFinding Mission in Syria deployed. The Fact-Finding
Mission deployed to Beirut just five days later, because
it was not allowed to go to Damascus for three days for
reasons that were justified. On 15 April, exactly eight
days after the deployment, the Fact-Finding Mission
arrived in Damascus. On 6 July 2018, the Fact-Finding
Mission was able to produce an interim report.
The interim report was based on some samples
that had been sent to designated labs. The interim
report was completed, with a final report produced
by the time I had become Director-General of the
organization in March 2019. The designated labs, as
Council members know, are completely independent
labs. They cooperate with the organization, they work
in a completely independent way and they have the
highest professional standards. All the designated labs
agreed that a chlorinated organic chemical — the report
says “molecular chlorine”, a reactive chlorine — was
found in the samples. There were not only two or three
samples; more than 100 samples were collected and
analysed. Most of the samples were analysed after the
summer of 2018, when the two inspectors who have
already been mentioned were completely uninvolved in
the tasks of the Fact-Finding Mission.
Some argue that the report of the Fact-Finding
Mission has something to do with attribution. The Fact-

S/PV. 8785

Finding Mission has a clear mandate. It is to establish
the facts related to the origin of the attack in connection
with the chemical weapon used, and not to the origin of
the perpetrators, or the persons who could be involved.
Its mandate is only related to the chemical weapon used
in the attack. That is the subject of the report of the
Fact-Finding Mission.
Two former inspectors have been mentioned at this
meeting, and they are both making claims with regard
to the origin of the chemicals that could be related to
those who are responsible for the attacks. The OPCW
does a completely independent investigation, and those
inspectors were part of the inspection carried out by the
team of the Fact-Finding Mission.
Inspector A was never a part of the Fact-Finding
Mission team that went to Douma. We have a permanent
office in Damascus — called the Command Post — and
we always have one inspector there on a rotating basis.
That inspector, who is there for a couple of months at
a time, is in charge of providing general support to the
different missions that we have in Syria. Inspector A,
who claims to know a lot about the attack in Douma,
was, as usual, requested to support the tasks of the FactFinding Mission, as he happened to be in the Command
Post at the time of the deployment. He had no access to
all the information. He stopped working in the summer
of July 2018, when he came back from his assignment
at the Command Post in Damascus and was assigned
to prepare an inventory of the two cylinders that were
analysed in Douma. He contacted companies and
engaged professors at a university without authorization,
and he produced the report that some media have called
the “engineering report”. That report is only a personal,
private report of Inspector A. It was unauthorized and
used incomplete information, and it was written after
having illegally provided highly protected information
to persons outside the organization who had nothing to
do with the Fact-Finding Mission. Inspector A stopped
providing support — support only — to the FactFinding Mission more than six months before the final
report was released by me on 1 March 2019.
Inspector B, mentioned here today, was, after many
years working in the organization, appointed for the
first time as a member of the Fact-Finding Mission in
April 2018. He could not be deployed on-site in Douma
because he had not completed his special training.
He was involved in the drafting of the interim report
of the Fact-Finding Mission related to Douma. He
confirmed in writing— and I have the document — to

21-1380519/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

senior management in the organization, at that time,
because I was not yet here, that he agreed with the
interim report’s conclusions. Inspector B departed the
organization in August 2018 — and, to be accurate, he
left at the beginning of August because he had holidays
and did not work on anything related to the Fact-Finding
Mission during the rest of August.
The Fact-Finding Mission, after Inspector B
departed, worked for more than six months, during
which the bulk of the results of the investigation were
obtained by the team. For instance, out of the more than
100 samples, more than 70 results were obtained in
those final six months of investigation.
The conclusions of the reports produced personally
by Inspector B are, of course, erroneous and
uninformed. Because a lot of misguided information
has been shared about the Douma case, when I have
the opportunity I quote the report of the International
Independent Commission of Inquiry — the so-called
Pinheiro report — to the General Assembly in August
2018 — that is, around seven months before the Douma
report was released to me on 1 March 2019. That report
of the Pinheiro Commission contains a paragraph that
refers to the Douma attack as follows:
“Throughout 7 April, numerous aerial
attacks were carried out in Douma, striking
various residential areas. A vast body of evidence
collected by the Commission suggests that, at
approximately 7.30 p.m., a gas cylinder containing
a chlorine payload delivered by helicopter struck a
multi-storey residential apartment building located
approximately 100 metres south-west of Shohada
square. The Commission received information
on the death of at least 49 individuals, and the
wounding of up to 650 others.” (A/HRC/39/65,
para. 92)
This report refers to helicopters, cylinders, chlorine,
many people’s deaths and apartment buildings — much
more than the report we produced almost seven months
later as the result of the investigation of the Fact-Finding
Mission. Our report is deeper but concentrates more on
the mandate of the Fact-Finding Mission, which refers
only to the establishment of the kind of chemical used
in an attack.
The Douma report is based on what were the
standard reasonable grounds to establish which toxic
chemical weapon was used, and this toxic chemical
contained reactive chlorine. The Executive Council
20/31

03/06/2021

discussed the report in session, and no one rejected
the report.
It was said earlier in this meeting by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation that there
were some doubts about what I have said. I have here
in front of me note verbal No. 759, form the Russian
Embassy in The Hague dated 26 April 2019, which
includes an attachment: a Russian Federation paper
containing commentary on the conclusions of the
report of the Fact-Finding Mission to Douma. This note
verbal required me to disseminate the attached paper.
It stated, as a conclusion, that the Russian Federation
did not challenge the findings contained in the FactFinding Mission report regarding the possible presence
of molecular chlorine in the cylinders, et cetera. This
text is available on the webpage of the organization.
The two inspectors who have been accused or
pressured openly violated their obligations to the
organization. That is why we organized an internal
investigation, which produced a report that all members
of the Council have.
Regarding the question of reopening the case
and suggestions of organizing a briefing with all the
inspectors and the Scientific Advisory Board, I have to
say that the report of the Fact-Finding Mission related
to Douma is in the hands of the Executive Council and
the Conference. The Director-General has no authority
whatsoever to reopen this investigation, which
concluded and reported to the Executive Council, and
through it to the Conference. The matter is in the hands
of the policymaking organs and not of the DirectorGeneral. The Executive Council was already seized of
the matter in March 2019.
In connection with the Scientific Advisory Board
and the possibility of a meeting, I will expound on
the information now. This means that reopening
an investigation or organizing anything related to
reassessing the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission
related to the Douma attack would require a decision of
the policymaking organs of the OPCW.
In connection with the Scientific Advisory Board,
lately I received a lot of queries, especially from one
country, as to why the Scientific Advisory Board does
not meet with the two inspectors referred to earlier.
In 2004, the Conference of the States Parties directed
the Director-General to establish a body called the
Scientific Advisory Board. The goal of the Scientific
Advisory Board, as written in the terms of reference,
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

is to enable the Director-General to render specialized
advice in connection with very sophisticated or
complicated matters and issues related to chemicals
and chemical weapons, which means that the Scientific
Advisory Board has no role in assessing the findings of
the Fact-Finding Mission. The Fact-Finding Mission is
entrusted with investigating and subsequently producing
a report — a report that I merely sign; I do not touch
it. It goes directly to the policymaking organs — in
this case, the Executive Council. This means that the
Scientific Advisory Board has no authority to reassess
an investigation of the Fact-Finding Mission or to assess
any opinion of the inspectors in their personal capacity.
I realize, also, that some in the Chamber are
interested in the Declaration Assessment Team. Again,
a very clear question has been raised, querying why no
State party has been under such a stringent verification
regime — of our 193 States parties, why has not a
single one been put under such a stringent verification
regime as Syria? The response is clear, and it is not
mine; it is in Article IV, paragraph 8, of the Chemical
Weapons Convention — specifically, the framework for
the accession of a possessor State. We are talking here
about the framework for a possessor State to join the
Convention more than 10 years after its entry into force
in 1997. After exactly 29 April 2007, any possessor
State having acceded to the Convention has to destroy
the chemical weapons that it possesses following an
order of destruction and a procedure of verification
established by the OPCW Executive Council. That
means that it was the Executive Council of the
organization that determined the order of destruction
and the procedures for the verification of the declared
chemical weapons in Syria.
That decision of the Executive Council was taken
on 27 September 2013 and was endorsed by resolution
2118 (2013), I think it was the same day or perhaps a few
days later. What happened after Syria’s accession to the
organization? Several States parties started to express
concern about the accuracy and completeness of
Syria’s initial declaration. That is why my predecessor,
following the normal legal procedure, put in place the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) in April 2014.
What was the goal of the DAT? The DAT is not
an investigative body. It is in charge of verifying that
the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic was
accurate and complete through technical consultations,
high-level reviews, visits to sites, samples, analyses and

S/PV. 8785

interviews — everything in close cooperation with the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.
After more than seven years of joint work, the DAT
has not yet been able to put on my desk a document
saying that the original declaration of the Syrian Arab
Republic is accurate and complete.
New elements initially not declared or stated by the
Syrian Arab Republic have emerged. I shall mention
several of them. They include one chemical-weapons
production facility, four research and development
facilities, five chemical-weapons agents and thousands
of large-calibre chemical-weapons munitions. We
have been working with the Syrian Arab Republic
through the DAT for several years, during 24 rounds
of consultations. The original declaration has been
amended 17 times, each time because of the proposals
the DAT made on the basis of the information that it
was getting. Today we still have 20 outstanding issues.
Their number counts, but their nature also counts. Why?
Because hundreds of tons of agents and munitions were
reported to have been destroyed or consumed prior to
accession, but we cannot verify that that happened.
Secondly, three chemical agents have been found in
samples by the DAT. That is another pending issue; it
has not been clarified.
Thirdly, the declarable activities of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre are inaccurate
and incomplete. As everybody knows, the Centre
is the place where all the research and development
programmes on chemical weapons took place.
Fourthly, the quantity of chemical-warfare agents
is not clear. The production or weaponization of the
chemical-weapons production facility that has been
discovered is not clear. We have even discovered
samples that reveal that production has taken place in
a former chemical-weapons storage facility that was
declared; what was not declared was its production.
I can provide additional information on the last
two outstanding issues; one of them arose after the
twenty-third round of consultations in Syria by the
DAT in September 2020. They went to analyse large
storage containers that had previously been declared as
a chemical-weapons site. We took samples; the samples
were analysed, and, of course, the explanation so far
has not been completed. That is why we put it as an
outstanding issue. One of the chemicals detected in

21-1380521/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

03/06/2021

those containers is a neat chemical-warfare agent; it is
undeclared, so we put it as a new outstanding issue.

that Member States all know about the process that led
to the conclusions reached.

We have asked the Syrian Arab Republic to respond
to what the Council mentioned. What can we do? We
have requested the Syrian Arab Republic to provide
documents and to organize more meetings with us
to visit two sites. We have not been able to go again
because the visas have not been issued. Indeed, I am
afraid that we will not be able to go until the end of
summer. Council members are well aware of the fact
that in summer it gets very hot at the sites and that we
cannot deploy because the inspectors and experts must
wear very heavy protective suits and carry very heavy
equipment, so it is really impossible for them to work in
the summer. The postponement of the DAT dates, as I
mentioned in my opening statement, may mean that the
DAT will not be able to go to the Syrian Arab Republic
until the end of the summer.

Sometimes it is difficult to go on-site, of course.
In those cases, our approach is to analyse everything
we can on the basis of the information provided
by witnesses and medical personal and documents
of all kinds — satellite imagery, forensic analysis,
metallurgy, military engineering, photos and videos. In
other words, we adopt a holistic approach and come to
conclusions when the various missions and teams see
that all the information leads to the same origin, that
one piece of information after another corroborates the
whole. That is the system we need.

In connection with the two sites that have been
inspected in relation to the Scientific Studies and
Research Centre — Barzah and Jamrayah — we are
inspecting them; we are in charge of verifying that
no research, development, production or stockpiling
of chemical weapons is taking place there. During
the third round of inspections, in November 2018, the
DAT discovered a Schedule 2.B.04 chemical, which
is a degradation of a product included in the list of
Schedule 1 chemicals. The Schedule 1 chemical is
listed in the annex of chemicals to the Convention,
which has the same value as the treaty. It is a list of the
most dangerous chemicals that exist and that are usable
only for warfare purposes. The Syrian Arab Republic
has not yet provided an explanation.
I now turn to the working methods of the FactFinding Mission. The Fact-Finding Mission was set up
in 2014, as the Council is aware, and, I would stress, is
in charge of establishing the facts relating to allegations
of chemical weapons use. It has nothing to do with
finding the perpetrators, those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons, only the facts. That means that
the Fact-Finding Mission is in charge of establishing
if a chemical has been used as a chemical weapon or
not. It uses standard methodology. The Fact-Finding
Mission is a young body, as it was set up only in 2014.
There is a long tradition of commissions of inquiry, and
these are standard methodologies. The methodology
used by the Fact-Finding Mission in its investigation is
reflected in the facts that the mission has reported. We
very much stress that the reports must be detailed, so
22/31

Sometimes people ask why we do not give them
more information related to the consultants, medical
personnel, hospitals and designated labs we use? I do
not go into those details because I cannot. It would
make no sense, because witnesses need to be protected.
That is also true in other places. Police and judges
have to protect the witnesses. We too have to protect
our sources. As such, the names of the designated labs
are not published. The names of the witnesses are not
published. The names of the consultants we use are not
published. We cannot publish that information because
we want to guarantee their protection and independence,
that is, no interference in their work.
Every report of the Fact-Finding Mission has
detailed information — the facts collected, the
analysis made and the methodologies applied. These
respond to long-standing international standards
that we have not invented. We do not leave anything
out of our conclusions. The processes that lead the
Technical Secretariat have been presented repeatedly,
in detail, to the Security Council and to the OPCW
Executive Council.
The Security Council, the Conference of the States
Parties and the Executive Council of the OPCW have
produced resolutions and decisions, many times on
the basis of the work of the Technical Secretariat. I
understand that my responses do not satisfy everyone,
especially one Ambassador in particular. I am very sorry
for that; I cannot please everybody. There is nothing
that can alter the reality; I cannot change the truth.
In connection with the insistence to release
information related to teams of experts we have hired, I
have to say that I have a really important responsibility.
The Director-General of the OPCW has the primary
responsibility to protect the information in the
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

organization and must adopt, on the basis of his judgment,
a decision on whether to disclose information, but that
must always be done on the basis of safeguarding the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In addition, part of the information is automatically
protected and confidential, such as when it belongs to a
State that provides it or when it affects a certain State.
Without the authorization from that member State, we
cannot publish that information.
Those are the rules; I did not invent them. The rules
to protect the information are based on the Policy on
Confidentiality document adopted in February 2006 by
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, as well as on the annex on
confidentiality to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The annexes to the Convention have the same value as
the Convention itself. As a result, those requirements
are very serious, and I must respect them.
I know that the majority is interested in my
comments on the second report of the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT). I will comment on that if I
have the time, but I would prefer to start with the first
report. The Fact-Finding Mission has been producing
reports, and the IIT uses those reports, but it also
investigates, with additional sources of information.
The second report of the IIT, covering the period
of April 2020 to April 2021, in connection with an
attack on Saraqib, concluded that on 4 February 2018,
at approximately 9.22 p.m., a military helicopter
belonging to the Syrian air force and controlled by the
Tiger Forces dropped at least one cylinder releasing
chlorine — a toxic gas — and affected 12 individuals.
The chlorine that was released is not the chemical
one can find in a market for cleaning at home. It is a
special chlorine.
The information used by the investigation carried
out by the IIT was based on the information provided
in the second report —although the first report is very
similar — by State parties that have given us a lot of
important, needed information. We also conducted many
interviews, analysis of samples, analysis of remnants in
the field, analysis of glass-dispersion models, forensic
studies and topographic studies. All of these together
—and perhaps I am forgetting some — make up 400
gigabytes of information, assessed holistically by a very
competent team, with the support of the specialized
team of the rest of the Technical Secretariat, of course.

S/PV. 8785

The methods reflect the best practices of international
fact-find missions.
The lines of inquiry suggested by the Syrian
Arab Republic in connection with this case were also
analysed, but no concrete information supporting them
was found. I insisted that the IIT work off of leads with
different kinds of information. The combination and
the consistency of all the information collected as well
as corroboration among the various sources help us to
reach conclusions.
The challenge for the IIT has not been a lack of
information; we got a lot of information. Its real
challenge has been the inability to access the territory of
the Syrian Arab Republic because its authorities did not
allow the IIT in — despite the requests I made and the
obligation of the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance
with article VIII of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013), which calls for immediate
and unfettered access to the territory of Syria.
I would also like to express my consistent position
on the reasonable grounds to believe as the basis for
the conclusions. This is standard; we did not invent it.
It is customary; and it is a very well-known legal term.
It means a very strong basis to conclude that chemical
weapons have been used.
In connection with the comments related to the BBC
podcast in November 2020, a person named “Leon” was
being interviewed on the programme. The word “león”
in Spanish means “lion” in English.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat does not know
this person, and, of course, it did not authorize any
staff members to go to the BBC for this programme.
If this person is identified, I will naturally open an
investigation to find out if there is a breach of the rules
of confidentiality. For the time being, what we did is
open an internal investigation.
Let me now address progress in Syria’s cooperation,
which is a question that has been posed by more than
one member of the Council. I have already implicitly
responded to this question: no visas, a lack of access
to Syrian territory, but what I have to say is that the
position of the Director-General is very often very
difficult. When asked about cooperation with the Syrian
Arab Republic, I will say that all States parties are
obliged to implement rules and decisions and that they
have to adopt measures in case of non-implementation.

21-1380523/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

03/06/2021

My task is to implement the Convention and to run the
Technical Secretariat in the best way possible.

was already involved in the field of chemical weapons,
so I went.

The Director-General is not a judge. I cannot
judge the Member States. I cannot judge the work of
the Executive Council or the Conference. It is up to
Member States to forge their perception of the situation
and, if they consider it necessary, take action.

All the Member States — all of them, without
exception — agreed with the declaration in which
they reaffirmed their condemnation in the strongest
possible terms of the use of chemical weapons. They
also expressed their strong conviction that those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons should be
held accountable.

Let me refer also to something that is in the
background of the many commentaries, which have
been on the whole very positive. I thank Council
members very sincerely for that. But what I see is that
there is general support for the implementation of the
Convention and general support for the work of the
Technical Secretariat. However, there are some critics,
for example, of the mandate of the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT). The IIT has a mandate that is
not recognized by some — very few — Member States.
That those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons must be held accountable is a principle that is
found in resolutions of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, and in many
decisions of the Conference of the States Parties, and in
countless national statements at the United Nations, at
the OPCW and in other bodies.
I want to properly state the following: if I requested
hard copies of all the statements of the States Members
of the United Nations or the member States of the
OPCW declaring that those responsible must be held
accountable, my office would be filled with documents.
It is a declaration that constitutes the prohibition and is
based on universal uncontested doctrine of international
law and undisputed customary international law,
because the use of chemical weapons can be a war
crime, even a crime against humanity.
This principle was of course not established by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat. The Technical Secretariat
is in charge of implementing States parties’ and Council
members’ decisions, on the basis of international law.
And resolution 2118 (2013) clearly states that those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be
held accountable.
On 21 April 1915, the first large-scale
chemical-weapons attack took place. It looked horrible.
It happened in a little village in the south-west of
Belgium called Ypres. On 21 April 2015, a hundred
years later, we commemorated the centennial of the
attack in Ypres for an entire day. I was invited because I
24/31

At that time, everyone agreed on this declaration. But
now some Member States are opposed to investigating
and identifying the origin of those chemical weapons
and therefore assigning responsibility for their use;
those countries cannot be comfortable with the OPCW
Technical Secretariat. Some Council members are
perhaps not comfortable with the Technical Secretariat,
but we implement the decisions and resolutions of the
Council, which have basically the same goals.
The decisions of the Executive Council and the
Conference are also in line with this uncontested
universal international law doctrine I mentioned, and
with resolution 2118 (2013). The OPCW Technical
Secretariat is a target of criticism because it is
implementing the decision of the Conference of the
States Parties of the 27 June 2018, which set up the IIT
to investigate the identity of the perpetrators of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria.
We have no choice, and we do have to understand
that. My legal obligation is to implement what the
Member States decide, and all of us in the Technical
Secretariat work in a modest, dedicated, professional
way because we feel a moral, professional and above all
legal responsibility to do so.
Not long ago, in the Security Council, Mr. Geir
Pedersen, on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
the start of the war, said,
“The Syrian tragedy will go down as one of
the darkest chapters in recent history, with the
Syrian people as among the greatest victims of
this century... [I]n the face of the unimaginable
violence and indignities[,] ... [t]hey have endured
the unspeakable horrors of chemical weapons”
(S/2021/265, annex I).
This was said in the Security Council on 15 March
2021. As I said, I cannot judge. I must not judge the
decisions or the task of the Member States, but thinking
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

about its limitations, I have to say that I have difficulties
understanding the system.
In conclusion, because the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has been recently — and unfairly, I have
to say — criticized, I want to underline that, at its
twenty-fifth session, in April 2020, the Conference of
the State Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
in its decision entitled “Addressing the possession
and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab
Republic”, expressed its full support and appreciation
for the professional, impartial independent work of the
Director-General and the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
In addition, last July, in the twenty-first preambular
paragraph of decision C-25/DEC.9, entitled “Addressing
the possession and use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian Republic”, the Executive Council said:
“Expressing its full support and appreciation
for the professional, impartial, and independent
work of the Director-General and the Secretariat”.
In recent years, we have seen the re-emergence
of chemical weapons in several places. The Technical
Secretariat has tackled those new challenges with
determination, commitment, independence, expertise
and with the will to serve Member States and the
international community.
Since I started work at the OPCW at the end of July
2018, I saw in the organization a group of dedicated,
honest and professional people who support me in an
incredible way with very high professional standards.
But, of course, I want to make it clear that, if someone
breaks the rules, I will react and I will take action.
I will also respond to the question with regard to
the materials supplied by the Syrian authorities. We
were receiving a lot of materials. We received a great
deal of information from the Syrian authorities. But I
want to tell the Council precisely how much. Regarding
the information supplied by Syria, in the past five years
we received, and I think that the High Representatives
received the same or something very similar, 197 notes
verbales from the Syrian permanent representation
in The Hague related to alleged chemical weapons
activities in terms of storage, movements, intent
of use or staging, with no details or no supporting
documentation that could be verified independently.
I can assure Council members that the Technical
Secretariat has been examining and analysing in depth
everything that we have received from the Syrian Arab

S/PV. 8785

Republic through the permanent representation of Syria
here in The Hague. But it has not been possible to link
that information to any real origin of use of chemical
weapons or to any of the investigations that we are
carrying out.
Regarding the accusation of use by terrorists in
Syria, I said that in my opening statement. One of my
main concerns is that it could be in favour of terrorists,
who can cause a great deal of harm with very small
amounts of extremely dangerous substances. We are
working to investigate, safeguard the knowledge and
have the means to deal with that threat, assisting and
protecting Member States.
The Centre for Chemistry and Technology shown
here will be a fantastic tool for research, investigation,
international cooperation, which is highly demanded by
the vast majority of member States, training, expertise
and skills. We have been making serious efforts all
together in the Technical Secretariat to progress in this
project. We have the trust and confidence of member
States, and the proof is that, despite the fact that we have
a budget with zero nominal growth, in approximately 18
months we received voluntary contributions to the tune
of more than €34 million euros to build the Centre. We
respond to that trust and to that rapport with concrete
results. I can say that we are on schedule and are
respecting the budget in the construction of the Centre.
We are not delayed. The construction will start this
month, in June. We have one of the top companies in
the Netherlands for the construction. If everything goes
as it has so far thanks to the Board that we have here
in the organization, chaired by the Deputy DirectorGeneral and our experts under my supervision, member
States will have a fantastic tool for different activities
with the programmes that we are preparing.
I think that I have responded to the questions posed.
It remains only for me to again thank you, Mr. President,
for your invitation and your kind words.
The President: I thank Mr. Arias for the
clarifications he has provided.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): I will switch
to English for clarity and straightforwardness. It is
good that we engaged in a dialogue with the DirectorGeneral. It looks as if the Director-General came to this

21-1380525/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

meeting prepared to speak, or rather he was prepared
to speak.
Today we heard from some of our colleagues that
we should separate the facts from the noise, that there
are some allegations or accusations that are not based
on facts. To that I may say that, unfortunately, some
of our colleagues prefer to turn a blind eye to the facts
that we provide, substituting them with convenient
conclusions. It seems as if, when we speak, providing
scientific facts, they switch off and do not listen to us.
The Director-General said that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has
no alternative but to investigate and, he added, identify.
I will not comment on the second one, but I will with
regard to investigate — investigate with the tools that it
has, such as the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria.
We also would like to investigate. The problem is that
we do not accept the methods that the OPCW employs
to investigate because they contradict the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
The Director-General spoke a great deal today.
Frankly, we did not hear anything from him that he had
not said before. The recent narrative of the Technical
Secretariat continues. We again heard claims that those
inspectors, in particular Inspector A, was not in any way
involved in the Douma investigation. That contradicts
the facts that we provided and the documents that we
showed. We saw that inspector among us on at least
two occasions. He was among us at the Arria Formula
meeting that we organized in January, as well as
some time later in April. I do not think that any of the
Council members who listened to him — and he was
very reserved in his comments — doubt his integrity,
the facts that he provided or the information that he
provided about himself and his role at the OPCW.

03/06/2021

Eleven biological samples were analysed during that
period, which is 100 per cent. So there is a clear gap,
an inconsistency and discrepancy in what the DirectorGeneral was telling us today. Allow me to finish.
I was frankly surprised when the Director-General
said that he was surprised to see that Syria was not
cooperating with the Investigation and Identification
Team. That is not surprising at all. Syria has never
recognized the legitimacy of the group. Neither have
we. That group was established illegitimately, and Syria
cannot be expected to cooperate with it. I think that
Syria made that very clear from the very beginning. But
I was surprised, personally, when the Director-General
referred to the Pinheiro Commission — the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic — as an ultimate authority on gathering
evidence and testimony on alleged chemical weapons
use in Syria. I wonder where the Commission draws
its expertise and authority from to issue judgments
on this if we doubt or challenge the outcomes and the
conclusions of the body that is designed to deal with
this issue, namely, the OPCW Technical Secretariat.

Many questions remain unanswered. The DirectorGeneral spoke a lot today. We reserve the right to
deliberately and meticulously answer or comment on
all those issues mentioned today. I will refer to only a
few things.

Mr. Arias referred to how the inspectors went to
Douma. I want to remind everybody, just for the sake
of reminding, about a document that we distributed in
the Security Council, on 25 May, recalling how, in fact,
inspectors went to Douma and how they were prevented
from doing so. But before they were prevented from
going to Douma at the right time, on 10 April, our
Western partners rejected our draft Security Council
resolution, providing for unimpeded access for
chemical expert members of the mission to any location
where an alleged accident chemical accident took place.
That draft resolution was blocked. On 12 April, these
experts were in Damascus waiting to go to Douma, but
they were prevented from doing so from Headquarters
by the three well-known permanent members of the
Security Council, citing security reasons, before the
strikes of 14 April took place.

The Director-General said that the bulk of the
investigations came after the inspectors left and that
it was done when the final report was prepared. That
contradicts the facts, which say that the interim report
was produced first, from 3 to 22 May 2018. Thirty-one
samples were analysed, which is 70 per cent of all the
samples that were analysed. Five wood samples were
analysed. That is 100 per cent of the wood samples.

The Director-General today quoted the Russian
communication to the OPCW Technical Secretariat
under the note verbale. This is a seven-page document
with a detailed technical analysis by our experts of the
incidents in Douma and their findings. The DirectorGeneral choose to quote one phrase of the conclusions
that were provided. With the permission of the Council,
I will quote the whole part of the conclusions.

26/31

21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

“The Russian Federation does not challenge the
findings contained in the FFM report regarding
the possible presence of molecular chlorine on the
cylinders. However, the parameters, characteristics
and exterior of the cylinders, as well as the data
obtained from the locations of those incidents, are
not consistent with the argument that they were
dropped from an aircraft. The existing facts more
likely indicate that there is a high probability that
both cylinders were placed at locations 2 and 4
manually, rather than dropped from an aircraft.
Apparently, the factual material contained in the
report does not allow us to draw a conclusion as
to the use of a toxic chemical as a weapon. On that
basis, the Russian Federation insists on the version
that there was false evidence and on the staged
character of the incident in Douma.”
I think that quotation gives Mr. Arias a true
account of what the Russian Federation meant when it
sent that communication. By the way, that corroborates
the conclusions that those “pariah inspectors”, who the
Director-General claims violated the norms, rules and
ethics of the OPCW, set down in their interim report.
The Director-General says that he will not engage
in a dialogue with some of the Scientific Advisory
Board. And by the way, I am not the only person who
doubts the conclusions of the reports that the Technical
Secretariat produces on the incidents. There are other
authoritative people in the world and countries that
challenge it, but the Director-General prefers not to
notice. If he is not prepared to engage through the
Scientific Advisory Board, as he said, we propose
that we organize an Arria Formula meeting to which
we would invite all those who have doubts about the
conclusions that the OPCW reached and we would be
happy to invite the Director-General there to defend
the position of the OPCW Technical Secretariat, if it is
challenged, and to provide facts that will make it clear
that he was right and they were wrong.
Again, as I said, this is just a fraction of what
we could have said in response to the DirectorGeneral’s comments. We thank the Director-General
wholeheartedly for being with us today. But I think that
my list is incomplete, and we will use the opportunity
to provide the Director-General with more comments
on what we heard today from him.
The President: I call on Mr. Arias to respond.

S/PV. 8785

Mr. Arias: It has been said that I came to this
meeting well-prepared. I came well-prepared because
I respect the Security Council and when I come to
brief Council members, I consider it to be an extremely
important task and I make an effort to prepare my notes
and my knowledge in the best possible way, which I
think is a very normal thing. Nothing has been said
that was not known. I do not know if Council members
know everything. Perhaps it is not necessary for the
Director-General to come back to the Security Council,
but I would come back with my best will and highest
interests to transmit to members what I know. If
members know everything, that is all the better.
The Investigation and Identification Team (IIT)
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) is not recognized by the Syrian
Arab Republic. The IIT was set up by a decision of the
Conference of the States Parties. The Conference of
the States Parties, according to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, must deal with any matter or issue related
to the implementation of the Convention.
On the other hand, this decision is in line with
what I have commented on extensively previously.
All this international doctrine is related to the general
will that those who used chemical weapons had to be
held accountable. The Conference of the States Parties
decided, on 27 June 2018, that the IIT had to be set up
of its own authority and in line with Security Council
resolutions, and not only resolution 2118 (2013).
Of course, the bulk of the investigations related
to Douma came after I arrived at the organization,
after July 2018. Out of the more than 100 samples,
more than 70 good samples were analysed after the
summer of 2018. The bulk of the investigation, the bulk
of the information, the bulk of the analyses of all the
information that had been gathered came after the two
inspectors left.
I do not understand why the Pinheiro
Commission — the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic — is
contested. The Commission has legitimacy because it
was set up by the General Assembly, and it has this
authority because it reports to the General Assembly.
The Commission reported to the General Assembly in
August 2018 what I have already said in connection with
Douma referring to helicopters, cylinders, chlorine,
apartment buildings and casualties.

21-1380527/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

The Russian note verbale is published and that is
what they have to say. Again, I thank the members of
the Security Council, and especially the President and
the Russian Permanent Representative. We have to be
open. We have to work together in the best spirit that
we can for the benefit of the United Nations, the OPCW
and, of course, the international community.
The President: Unfortunately, I have to remind all
representatives that we went beyond the time limit 10
minutes ago. The rule 37 speakers have not even started
to speak, but we will lose interpretation in 20 minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to begin, Mr. President, by
begging your indulgence in granting me sufficient time,
as a relevant party concerned, to address the multiple
aspects covered in the briefing by the Director-General
and in other statements.
It is unfortunate that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has been
transformed from a technical organization into an
instrument in a geopolitical game led by the United
States and its Western allies. The unprecedented
decision recently illegitimately taken by the OPCW
Conference of the States Parties against Syria is clear
evidence of the extent of the manipulation, politicization
and pressure exerted by those countries within the
organization. My delegation categorically rejects the
groundless accusations included in some statements
and considers them as mere means of pressure and
political blackmail.
The use or threat of use by terrorist organizations
of chemical weapons and toxic chemicals in Syria from
2013 until now has posed a real danger to the Syrian
people and a serious challenge to the implementation
of the non-proliferation regime, as represented by
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). It is
reprehensible that the States sponsoring those terrorist
organizations worked during the past eight years
to divert the attention of the States Members of the
United Nations and the States parties to the CWC
from confronting this chemical terrorist threat, and
simultaneously put pressure on the various international
investigation teams to impose their agendas and get
them to carry out their activities in violation of the
working methods stipulated in the Convention and in
the terms of reference document.
28/31

03/06/2021

This deliberate subversive approach to the rules
and principles of the work of the OPCW — followed
by some members of the Council — has led to wrong
conclusions that undermined the credibility and
professionalism of their work and limited the ability
of the international community to truly confront this
terrorist threat. This behaviour is in stark contrast
to those countries’ responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security.
In that context, I would like to refer to the important
information that we have frequently provided the
United Nations and the OPCW regarding the possession
and transfer of chemical weapons and toxic chemicals
by terrorist organizations to stage incidents of chemical
attacks with the aim of accusing the Syrian Arab Army.
Dealing seriously with such terrorist threats requires the
OPCW and relevant United Nations organs to deal with
this information with the utmost care and to coordinate
with the relevant Syrian authorities to conduct the
necessary investigations. But unfortunately, none of
that has happened. The Director-General referred to
more than 197 memorandums from Syria about the
possession, transfer and attempts to use chemical
weapons. However, the Fact-Finding Mission did not
carry out investigations into any of that information
swiftly or seriously, whereas it would promptly act upon
any information contained in open sources or received
from suspicious sources about accusations against the
Syrian Government.
I would also like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the fact that we recently provided
the Secretary-General with information we obtained
regarding the incident of terrorist organizations’
use of chemical weapons in Khan Al-Assal in
2013 — the Director-General completely forgot that
information — that confirmed the involvement of the
so-called National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary
and Opposition Forces in that terrorist crime, which
claimed the lives of 25 martyrs and injured more than 110
civilians and military personnel. Unfortunately, despite
our many demands, that remains without investigation.
Regarding comments made in some statements
concerning Syria’s initial declaration, I would like to
make the following clear.
First, the Declaration Assessment Team is not an
investigation team; rather, it was established to assist
the Syrian authorities.
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8785

Secondly, the holding of consultations between the
Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National
Authority and the dates of the Team’s visits to Damascus
are subject to arrangements agreed upon between the
two sides, in line with the obligations of each party.
Therefore, any round of consultations will of course be
postponed if a date is not appropriate.

The Director-General says that 193 States do not
question the report. I would like to remind him that
I personally, during my numerous statements before
the Executive Council, presented many aspects of the
flawed methodology, which is far from credible and
professional. And Syria has rejected the conclusions of
the report.

Thirdly, the experts of the Syrian National
Authority, during their mutual rounds of consultations,
provide the Declaration Assessment Team with many
technical explanations that fully support the information
announced by Syria. Accordingly, it is unacceptable for
anyone to make pre-accusations about issues that are
still under discussion.

Accordingly, we face a case of non-compliance
by the Technical Secretariat with the parameters
governing its work. In that regard, I would like to ask
the Director-General again: Why does the Technical
Secretariat insist on refusing to listen to the substantive
observations and valid inquiries made by Syria, Russia
and others, along with eminent persons, specialized
experts and prominent academics?

Fourthly, finding traces of a chemical agent in a
test sample is not evidence of prohibited chemical
activity. The continuation of technical consultations on
such issues requires refraining from prejudgement or
jumping to unrealistic conclusions and false perceptions.

The Director-General mentioned that the FactFinding Mission that went to investigate the Douma
incident was delayed in Beirut for several days. Could
he explain the reasons for the delay? I would like to
ask why the team leader — who reached Syria on
Saturday, 13 April, and left on the morning of the
following day, Sunday, 14 April — did not visit the site
of the incident in Douma, while Investigator A went to
Douma and carried out the investigation? Accordingly,
his observations and report are excluded, whereas the
observations of the leader, who did not visit the site, are
taken into account.

In the light of this, we categorically reject the
insistence of some to question Syria’s initial declaration
and its cooperation with the Technical Secretariat and
the deliberate disregard of any progress made.
My delegation took note of what was referred to in
the Director-General’s report on the results of the seventh
round of inspections of the two facilities of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre. The report
indicated that the inspections found “no substances
or activities that are inconsistent with the Syrian
Arab Republic’s obligations under the Convention”
(S/2021/514, annex, para. 17). We would have hoped
that the report not to ignore the assistance, logistical
support and facilitation provided by Syria. Despite that,
the Centre is not relevant to the chemical programme.
Concerns about procedural flaws and professional
irregularities in the working methods of the FactFinding Mission still exist. They raise many questions
about the professionalism and credibility of the mission’s
reports; the latest report on the alleged incident in
Douma continues to resonate in various capitals.
How can those reports be credible if their sources are
suspicious, witnesses are terrorist agents, samples are
collected by While Helmets and investigations are
carried out remotely? Are these normal methods under
the Convention? Does basing ourselves on “reasonable
grounds” and “most likely” create credibility?

I would have also liked to ask him why it takes
years to issue reports on the investigations into
incidents reported by the Syrian Government? We have
five or more incidents that have been investigated since
2017 — it is now almost four years without a report
having been issued by the Technical Secretariat — while
priority is given to reporting on investigations of
alleged incidents raised by hostile or suspicious parties.
This is a clear indication of a double standard,
In conclusion, I reiterate that Syria has fulfilled
its obligations arising from its voluntary accession
to the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2013. In
an unprecedented and exemplary manner, we have
disposed of our stockpiles of these weapons and
destroyed our production facilities in record time and
under difficult and complex conditions. Syria regrets
that its continuous cooperation with the Technical
Secretariat of the OPCW has been met only with
ingratitude and denial.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

21-1380529/31

S/PV.8785

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
As a major victim in contemporary history of the most
systematic use of chemical weapons, Iran once again
condemns, in the strongest possible terms, the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances.
As a staunch advocate of the prohibition of the
use of chemical weapons, we share the view that the
use of these inhumane weapons must not be tolerated.
However, this rule must not be politicized or exploited
to mount political pressure against others in order to
advance narrow national interests or to pursue certain
geopolitical objectives. That is indeed as poisonous as
the chemical weapon itself.
While ensuring the prohibition of the use of
chemical weapons is a must, we all know well that this
will not and cannot happen in isolation. To that end, we
need first and foremost to ensure the full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). Moreover, we must
uphold and ensure the authority and credibility of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).
It is, however, a source of deep concern that, in recent
years, Western countries have exploited the CWC and
politicized the OPCW’s work in order to advance their
narrow interests in Syria. This has seriously undermined
the Convention, resulted in a deep legitimacy and
credibility crisis for the OPCW, sowed the seeds of
division among its member States, and challenged the
long-standing consensual decision-making tradition in
disarmament and non-proliferation forums.
In this process, the OPCW has been forced to
use flawed procedures, defective methodologies,
fabricated information and an improper and broken
chain of custody. Additionally, that process has totally
failed to acknowledge the strategic decision of Syria
to accede to the Convention, as well as its cooperation
in fulfilling its relevant obligations, including by
expeditiously presenting its initial declaration and
verifiably destroying all its 27 chemical weapons
production facilities. Indeed, the OPCW process in
Syria is but a clear regression from the very basic
norms of impartiality and professionalism. It is also
obvious that such a process will definitely lead to
erroneous conclusions.
Finally, in the threshold of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the CWC’s entry into force and the
30/31

03/06/2021

OPCW’s establishment, we call for enhanced efforts
to uphold the authority of the OPCW and the full,
effective and non-discriminatory implementation of the
CWC and its universality. We stand ready to actively
and constructively contribute to such efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council during this month.
I thank the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
Mr. Fernando Arias, and High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for their informative briefings. Our further
appreciation goes to Director-General Arias for the
comprehensive and meticulous responses that he
provided to the questions from the Council.
It has been almost eight years since the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), yet we are still discussing
the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in the
Syrian regime’s declaration. The regime’s refusal
to completely and accurately declare its chemical
weapons programme constitutes a serious violation of
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The ninety-second monthly report of the OPCW
Director-General (see S/2021/514) provides yet another
record of this alarming situation. Not only is the presence
of an undeclared chemical weapons production facility
a source of grave concern; it also raises serious doubts
about the regime’s real intentions. There is no plausible
explanation of why the regime still fails to declare the
chemical warfare agents produced or weaponized at
that site. This is clearly in violation of its obligations.
Moreover, the analysis of the samples collected
during the twenty-third round of inspections by the
Declaration Assessment Team revealed the existence of
a chemical warfare agent previously not declared by the
regime. The Declaration Assessment Team’s analysis
hints at further undeclared production activities by the
regime.
Instead of clarifying existing discrepancies and
inconsistencies, the regime keeps piling up new items
on the long list of outstanding issues regarding its
chemical weapons declaration. The regime’s defiant
behaviour cannot be condoned or tolerated. The Council
must enforce the regime’s full cooperation with the
21-13805

03/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

OPCW and ensure immediate and complete declaration
of its chemical weapons programme.
In response to the Syrian regime’s non-compliance
with its obligations, the OPCW Executive Council
adopted a landmark decision in July 2020, which
required the Syrian regime to declare the chemical
weapons it used during the Ltamenah attacks in
2017 and the production facilities in which they are
developed, as well as the chemical weapons it currently
possesses. The Executive Council decision, which
Turkey supported, set clear and verifiable parameters
for action and required the Syrian regime to return to
full compliance with the Convention within 90 days. It
also urged the regime to resolve all of the outstanding
issues regarding its initial declaration.
Yet, continuing its blatant defiance of its legal
obligations, the regime refused to abide by the
requirements of this decision, which triggered further
measures. Accordingly, the decision, adopted by an
overwhelming majority during the second part of the
twenty-fifth session of the OPCW Conference of the
States Parties, provided a measured response in the
face of the Syrian regime’s persistent non-compliance
with its obligations. Turkey co-sponsored this decision
as an important step towards ensuring accountability
in Syria.
Establishing truth is of paramount importance to
our joint efforts to achieve peace and justice in Syria.
Investigations by the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
and the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT)
on chemical weapons use in Syria are crucial in this
regard. The IIT has a unique role to play in identifying
the perpetrators of chemical weapons use. We welcome
its growing cooperation with the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. In our fight against flagrant impunity, we must
employ all possible avenues effectively.
The regime’s refusal to grant visas to the IIT is
another violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
This is also a clear attempt to hide the truth. The Syrian

S/PV. 8785

regime has never intended to stop using chemical
weapons against its own people. As we all know, the IIT
identified that, on 4 February 2018, chlorine was used
by the regime air force in an attack against civilians
in Saraqib. With this latest IIT report, it has now been
proven that the Al-Assad regime is responsible for
at least eight chemical-weapon attacks. We strongly
condemn the continued use of chemical weapons by
the regime.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support to the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its
investigative bodies. The professionalism, impartiality
and expertise of the OPCW is commendable.
Targeting the integrity and credibility of the OPCW
is unacceptable. Creating an alternate reality and
polarization on this file only undermines the global
norm against chemical-weapon use and emboldens
the perpetrators. The cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW remains essential for a robust
non-proliferation regime. We must all strive to
enhance that cooperation and stand against attempts to
undermine it.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our strong
condemnation of the repeated and well-documented
chemical attacks by the Al-Assad regime against its own
population. The regime’s violation of international law
and its crimes against humanity cannot go unanswered.
Ending impunity is a pressing task for the international
community, particularly the Security Council. That is
the only way to honour the victims of chemical-weapon
attacks and achieve peace in Syria. The Council must
be unified in urging the regime to provide swift and
tangible cooperation with the OPCW without further
delay. This is also key to preventing the recurrence
of chemical-weapon use in Syria. In that respect, we
would like to highlight once again the responsibility of
those who have influence over the Syrian regime.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I would like to thank the interpreters and the
Secretariat for staying with us a bit overtime.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

21-1380531/31
