A/65/PV.52

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

52

nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 23 November 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kleib
(Indonesia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued) and 120
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Draft resolution A/65/L.12
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/65/362,
A/65/394 and A/65/394/Add.1)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/71 and
A/65/71/Add.1)
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
items 13 and 115, members will recall that the
Assembly adopted resolution 65/7 at its 41st plenary
meeting on 29 October.
I now call on the representative of the Republic
of Korea to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.12.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): We have
held a great number of United Nations conferences and
summits in the past two decades that have had a huge
impact on our thinking, priorities and especially our
actions. Clearly, all of the discussions and outcomes of

these major conferences and summits have been
channelled to the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), which have become the international
community’s most comprehensive and powerful action
plan. Just two months ago, in this same venue, world
leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the MDGs and
set out a concrete action plan for achieving those Goals
by 2015. One of the tangible achievements of the
summit was undoubtedly to raise over $40 billion in
resources over the next five years in order to
strengthen child and maternal health.
However, from our perspective, another
important milestone that our leaders set up was to
deliver a clear message to the global community about
the type of economic growth that will lead to poverty
eradication and the achievement of the MDGs. We note
that growth is an important driving force for the
achievement of the MDGs and poverty eradication, but
not every kind of growth has been as effective as we
expected.
There are key policies or mechanisms that can
translate growth into progress on the MDGs. First, in
order to contribute to poverty eradication and progress
on the MDGs, needless to say, growth should be
sustained without any halt or reversal.
Secondly, if growth does not guarantee the
participation of the broadest possible spectrum of
people and excludes marginalized people or regions, it
cannot properly expedite poverty reduction and may
weaken national unity. Therefore, growth should be as
inclusive as possible.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-64830 (E)

*1064830*

A/65/PV.52

Thirdly, growth cannot be a central strategy for
fighting poverty if it does not evenly distribute the
opportunities and gains it offers. As a recent survey
shows, in circumstances where the poverty rate and
growth rate are the same, an inequitable society may
take six times longer to eradicate poverty than a more
equitable society might. That is why world leaders
have declared that sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth is the key to poverty eradication and
the achievement of the MDGs. They have sent a clear
message that economic growth should enable everyone,
in particular the poor, to participate in and benefit from
economic opportunities leading to job creation and
income opportunities, complemented by effective
social policies.
Now it is our turn to carry this message forward.
In this regard, I have the honour and privilege to
introduce for adoption today the draft resolution
contained in document A/65/L.12, entitled “Sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth for poverty
eradication and achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals” on behalf of the 70 sponsors
listed in the document, including the Government of
the Republic of Korea.
At this time, I would also like to name the other
countries that have since signed on as sponsors of the
draft resolution but are not listed in the text itself.
Those countries are Andorra, Armenia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Croatia, the Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Mexico, Qatar, the Russian Federation,
Serbia, South Africa, Togo and Uzbekistan.
I thank all sponsoring countries for their
unwavering support and cooperation. In particular, I
would like to express special appreciation to the
12 countries — Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China,
Indonesia, Japan, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam — that together
initiated the draft resolution from scratch and closely
cooperated as needed.
All sponsors share the view that we need to
strengthen discussion on the economic dimension of
development in order to complement and create
synergy with the discussion of the human dimension of
development. Also, we concur that, in order to translate
into action our leaders’ declaration on the importance
of sustained, inclusive, equitable growth, we urgently

2

need to formulate policy guidelines that aim to
encourage institutions and policies favourable to
sustained growth, maximize the impact of growth on
health, education and gender equality, and devise
specific policies that will necessarily allow the poor to
gain their fair share.
The draft resolution that we are introducing today
is a follow-up to the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly on the MDGs and also a procedural
resolution that asks for the facilitation of an active
discussion on sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth. In order to do that, the draft seeks to
facilitate this discussion by inviting Member States to
share best practices and lessons learned, inviting
regional commissions to facilitate a discussion of this
issue in each region, requesting the Economic and
Social Council to hold a panel discussion during the
2011 substantive session and, finally, requesting the
Secretary-General to include policy recommendations
on this issue in his annual report on the MDGs by
2015. Based on the expected discussion, we will be
able to extract important and detailed policy elements
for the successful achievement of sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth.
Before closing, I would like once again to express
my deep, sincere gratitude to the many sponsors and
supporters of the draft resolution. I now call upon the
General Assembly to give its unequivocal support to its
adoption.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
13 initial sponsors of draft resolution A/65/L.12 on
sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth for
the eradication of poverty and the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), namely,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Indonesia,
Japan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
We attach great importance to the achievement of
the MDGs while promoting regional integration and
narrowing the development gap. We provided
constructive inputs based on regional experiences to
the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly with a view to accelerating progress towards
the MDGs, especially through strengthened global
partnership.

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

On the sidelines of the High-level Plenary
Meeting, we — the 13 countries from South-East Asia
and East Asia — hosted a ministerial-level panel
discussion on 21 September on “Achieving the MDGs
through partnership, sharing experiences and
challenges in Asia”, chaired by His Excellency
Mr. Kasit Piromya, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Thailand, and moderated by Ms. Nila Moeloek, the
Indonesian President’s Special Envoy for the
Millennium Development Goals. Among measures
identified in the resulting way forward, we agreed that
“emphasis should be placed on reducing poverty
through sustained economic growth”.
While recognizing the diversities within and
among countries, including on how to achieve the
MDGs, we are united in the view that economic growth
should be given higher priority in the discussions on
the MDGs. Despite slow and fragile global recovery
from the worst international financial crisis, the East
Asian economies were among the first to rebound
soundly and became some of the key drivers of the
global economic recovery.
At the same time, we are placing greater
emphasis on the kind of growth that enables everyone
to benefit equally from economic development, with
job creation and social protection measures aiming at
protecting and empowering people and communities,
the most vulnerable groups in particular. This is a
lesson learned from the Asian monetary and economic
crisis that our region experienced in the late 1990s.
Recently, the seventeenth Summit of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) held
in Hanoi, Viet Nam, on 28 October 2010 adopted the
Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity, which
emphasizes that policies for sustained strong growth
will have to be complemented by targeted interventions
and will require increased investment in basic
infrastructure, health care and education. Furthermore,
the thirteenth ASEAN+3 Summit held in Hanoi,
Viet Nam, on 29 October 2010 reaffirmed the
importance
of
promoting
regional
economic
competitiveness and equitable economic development.
We are pleased that the notion of “sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth” was
included in the Outcome Document of the United
Nations High-level Plenary Meeting on the MDGs
(resolution 65/1), and further encouraged by the
support given to draft resolution A/65/L.12 to promote

10-64830

the sharing of national experiences and best practices
on this subject, taking into account the fact that there is
no one-size-fits-all solution.
We are pleased to announce that the draft
resolution is currently co-sponsored by 75 countries.
We wish to thank all the sponsors for their constructive
engagement and contributions. We encourage all other
Member States to consider joining the ownership of the
draft resolution. By initiating the draft resolution, we
hope that useful policy guidelines will be shared, and
we look forward to the contributions of the regional
commissions and the Economic and Social Council
panel discussion. We remain fully committed to
supporting this process with a view to contributing to
poverty eradication and the achievement of the MDGs
within the established time frame.
Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen): The Group of 77 and
China is pleased to participate in this morning’s joint
debate under the agenda item “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”.
The Group of 77 and China places a high priority
on global public health and the achievement of healthrelated Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). We
welcome the significant achievements made in some
areas, but also note that much more needs to be done to
achieve the health-related Goals, as was evident at the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly
held in September.
Factors such as poverty, coupled with the effects
of the global food, financial and economic crises, have
severely hampered the efforts of developing countries
in implementing the internationally agreed development
goals and commitments, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
Health and poverty are interlinked and are central
to sustainable development, as recognized in the
Ministerial Declaration of the 2009 High-level
Segment of the Economic and Social Council. The
emergence of non-communicable diseases, the
prevalence of which is increasing faster in poor
countries, highlights the connection between health and
poverty and its impact on social and economic
development. Thus, the Group of 77 and China will
focus its statement on the issue of non-communicable
diseases, one of the main challenges to development in
the twenty-first century.

3

A/65/PV.52

The Group of 77 and China thank the SecretaryGeneral for the transmission of the report of the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO) on the global status of non-communicable
diseases, with a particular focus on the development
challenges faced by developing countries (see
A/65/362).
We note all the relevant resolutions and decisions
adopted by the World Health Assembly on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.
The Group of 77 and China support the call for
continued implementation of the 2008-2013 Action
Plan for the Global Strategy for the Prevention and
Control of Non-communicable Diseases, the WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and the
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health.
We also recognize the role of the United Nations
system, the Bretton Woods institutions, the private
sector and civil society in the promotion of public
health at all levels.
The General Assembly’s unanimous adoption on
13 May of resolution 64/265, on the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases, which was
submitted under agenda item 114, “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”, clearly
underscored the need for concerted action and
coordinated responses to this issue.
As the report of the Director-General of WHO
details, non-communicable diseases affect countries in
every region of the world, from the Americas to the
Eastern Mediterranean, Europe, South-East Asia and
the Western Pacific. While we take note of the various
national and regional initiatives undertaken on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
the statistics are daunting and paint a clear picture of
the great human suffering and the financial toll these
diseases are exacting on our populations, particularly if
seen from a gender perspective. This fact was noted by
the Secretary-General in his report entitled “Review of
the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, the outcomes of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly and its
contribution to shaping a gender perspective towards
the full realization of the Millennium Development
Goals” (E/CN.6/2010/2).
Non-communicable diseases account for an
estimated 35 million deaths every year, including the
premature deaths of an estimated 8 million persons

4

before the age of 60. Over 90 per cent of these
premature deaths occur in developing countries, in
particular among the poorest and most disadvantaged
populations.
The World Health Organization predicts that, by
2015, non-communicable diseases will increase by 90
per cent and will contribute significantly to, among
others, the increased loss of productivity, slow
economic growth, rapid rise in health-care costs,
overwhelmed national health systems and an
unprecedented level of poverty if we, the international
community, do not take immediate and concerted
action at the national, regional and global levels to
address the development challenges posed by these
factors.
In the African region alone, deaths from
non-communicable diseases are predicted to increase
by more than 20 per cent by 2015 while, in South-East
Asia and the Western Pacific, non-communicable
diseases account for an estimated 54 per cent of the
14.7 million annual deaths and over 75 per cent of
deaths, respectively.
Given the socio-economic impact of noncommunicable diseases and its link to health and
poverty, the Group of 77 and China cannot underscore
enough the importance of strengthening international
cooperation in the area of public health. We also urge
developed countries, in accordance with their
commitments, to meet the agreed target of 0.7 per cent
of gross national product for official development
assistance to enable developing countries to meet their
internationally agreed development goals.
In the case of global public health, there is an
urgent need for increased and sustained levels of
assistance to, among other things, build the capacity of
public health systems; to improve access to affordable,
safe, effective and high-quality medicines; to train,
recruit and retain skilled public health personnel; and
to develop necessary infrastructure and the transfer of
technology if we are to tackle the growing threat of
non-communicable diseases.
The Group of 77 and China supports the call, in
the report of the WHO Director-General before us, for
global development initiatives to consider the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
as one of the priorities to be included as an integral
part of the global development agenda, including
through poverty reduction initiatives.

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China was
pleased to join consensus on resolution 64/265 and its
call for a high-level meeting of the General Assembly,
with the participation of heads of State and
Government, to be convened in September 2011 to
address non-communicable diseases and their
socio-economic impact. We welcome the appointment
of the Permanent Representatives of Jamaica and
Luxembourg as co-facilitators of the informal
consultations under way on the scope, modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly to be convened in September
2011.
The Group of 77 and China is participating
actively in the consultations and, given the enormity of
the crisis facing us, looks forward to the adoption of a
resolution that reflects the views of all Member States,
and which will result in a satisfactory, targeted and
action-oriented outcome of the process.
Mr. De Bassompierre (Belgium): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Due to the nature of the joint debate today, my
remarks will bear on two different points, the first
being on the draft resolution on growth (A/65/L.12)
and the second on non-communicable diseases.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Montenegro; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this declaration.
The European Union is pleased to co-sponsor the
General Assembly resolution on sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth for poverty reduction
and achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). We would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Republic of Korea and other sponsors for
taking the initiative of formulating this draft resolution.
Growth plays a particularly important role in our
common endeavour to eradicate poverty, achieve the
MDGs and promote sustainable development.
Economic growth, provided it is socially inclusive,
produces a much greater effect in terms of poverty
reduction than direct transfer of resources. It can have
a multiplier effect through employment creation and
social protection. As for development aid, it should act

10-64830

increasingly as a catalyst, supporting the efforts of
developing countries to generate growth. Adequate
national policies that create an environment conducive
to growth play an important role in this respect.
The sustainability of growth is also a major factor
that we have to take into consideration; hence the vital
importance of the link established in the MDG
outcome document (resolution 65/1) between, on the
one hand, sustained, inclusive and equitable growth,
and on the other, sustainable development in its three
economic, social and environmental components.
The policy message that the General Assembly is
sending with this draft resolution is an important one.
It shows the capacity of the United Nations to tackle
the main issues and challenges of our time. The
European Union looks forward to continuing our
discussions on sustained, inclusive and equitable
growth.
(spoke in French)
I would now like to discuss the note by the
Secretary-General (A/65/362), transmitting the report
of the Director-General of the World Health
Organization (WHO) on the global status of noncommunicable diseases. The candidate countries
Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Montenegro; as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia align themselves
with this declaration.
Non-communicable
diseases
represent
a
considerable and worsening burden on world health,
including in low- and medium-income countries. This
has been made unambiguously clear in the recent
report of WHO transmitted by the Secretary-General.
The European Union itself has a high incidence of
non-communicable diseases — such as cancer,
diabetes, cardiovascular disease and obesity — that can
be attributed to the convergence of a number of factors,
including smoking, alcohol abuse, unhealthy diets,
pollution and physical inactivity. We are convinced that
prevention is vital to easing the growing burden of
non-communicable diseases, and involves strategies
and mechanisms oriented towards the critical risk
factors for these diseases, such as lifestyle and
hygiene, as well as general environmental, commercial,
economic and social factors.

5

A/65/PV.52

Multisectoral integrated approaches are essential
if we wish to tackle these illnesses successfully, given
that many of them are issues that elude health-care
systems. We also believe that national health strategies
and strengthened health systems must take noncommunicable diseases into account within a broader
framework of efforts to improve health and conditions
generally. In this regard, we welcome the commitment
made at the recent High-level Meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals to improving the
efficiency of health-care systems and giving greater
support to interventions and initiatives that are clearly
effective in dealing with increased health challenges,
including the growing impact of non-communicable
diseases.
Next year, the high-level meeting on
non-communicable diseases will give us an excellent
opportunity to debate these subjects and to focus more
world public attention on the challenge of
non-communicable diseases. We are ready to
participate actively and constructively in both the
meeting and its preparation.
Ms. Millard-White (Trinidad and Tobago): The
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) is honoured to
take part in this joint debate under agenda item 115,
“Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”, and aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Yemen on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
The issue of global public health is of
fundamental importance to our subregion. CARICOM
continues to strive at the national, regional and
international levels to ensure the health and well-being
of our citizens. To this end, earlier this year CARICOM
heads of Government approved the establishment of
the Caribbean Regional Health Agency (CARPHA),
which will replace and build on the work of
CARICOM’s existing five regional health institutions.
CARPHA will facilitate a coordinated approach to
regional health issues and prevent duplication of effort
and resources.
One health issue, however, that presents
significant social, economic and development
challenges
for
our
subregion
is
that
of
non-communicable
diseases,
in
particular
cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes and chronic
respiratory diseases. In the Caribbean, the prevalence
and mortality rates of non-communicable diseases are

6

among the highest in the world, having accounted for
62 per cent of all deaths in the region in 2004, 40 per
cent of which could have been prevented. Even more
alarming is that deaths from these diseases in the
Caribbean are expected to increase to 68 per cent in
2015 if urgent action to address them is not taken.
Non-communicable diseases disproportionately
affect the poorest in our societies, due to their limited
ability to lead healthy lifestyles and access affordable
health care. There is also sufficient evidence to show
that non-communicable diseases further contribute to
poverty, due to loss of household income in many cases
and the overwhelming cost of health care associated
with the treatment of such diseases.
The Caribbean, however, is not alone in facing
these challenges. CARICOM welcomes the report of
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO), transmitted by the Secretary-General’s note
dated 13 September (A/65/362). The report indicates
that non-communicable diseases account for 60 per
cent of all deaths worldwide, more than 80 per cent of
which occur in developing countries, particularly lowand middle-income countries. WHO also estimates
that, globally, deaths from non-communicable diseases
are expected to increase by 17 per cent over the next 10
years, the greatest increase being expected in Africa.
The fact that a large percentage of all deaths
related to non-communicable diseases occur at the
highest rates in low- and middle-income countries, and
that they are all preventable, establishes the strong
connection between addressing these challenges and
the
global
development
agenda.
Further,
non-communicable diseases are emerging worldwide as
a serious macroeconomic and development challenge
due to loss of productivity, rapidly rising health-care
costs and links to poverty, as confirmed in the WHO
Director-General’s report.
No single institution, organization or country has
sufficient resources and capacity to reverse this
growing epidemic, which requires concerted global and
intersectoral responses. Consequently, there is a critical
need for increased political commitment and
international collaboration to, inter alia, promote
partnerships for the prevention and control of these
diseases; monitor them and their determinants at all
levels; and strengthen health care for persons with
non-communicable diseases by strengthening healthcare systems. This is in addition to influencing the

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

public policies of non-health sectors and implementing
effective mechanisms for intersectoral action in such
areas as agriculture, food production, education,
finance, trade and sport.
It is for these reasons that CARICOM members
brought the issue to the attention of the General
Assembly in 2009. We are further pleased to have
participated in the adoption of resolution 64/265 on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
on 13 May. The resolution called for the convening of
a high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
non-communicable diseases, with the participation of
heads of State and Government, to be held in
September 2011.
CARICOM would like to avail itself of this
opportunity to recognize the role of the WHO
throughout this process and to express its deep
appreciation for the continuous support and technical
assistance provided to Member States thus far, in
particular by the Organization’s Pan American Health
Organization office located here in New York.
In addition, we look forward to the positive and
successful outcomes of the regional meetings being
convened on the issue of non-communicable diseases
in preparation for the September 2011 high-level
meeting, and anticipate the release of the WHO report,
which will provide further valuable information to
guide the process leading up to the high-level meeting
in September 2011. CARICOM also supports the
development of indicators to monitor the way in which
Member States address this issue, the importance of
which has been underscored by WHO.
CARICOM will continue to be fully engaged in
negotiations currently taking place under the able
leadership of the Permanent Representatives of
Jamaica and Luxembourg to determine the scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting.
In conclusion, as agreed at the High-level Plenary
Meeting on the Millennium Development Goals in
September 2009, we reiterate our commitment to
undertaking concerted action and a coordinated
response at the national, regional and global levels in
order to adequately address the development and other
challenges caused by non-communicable diseases as
we work towards a successful high-level meeting of the
General Assembly in 2011.

10-64830

Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Despite attempts to gloss over current circumstances,
the global situation, especially since the devastating
effects of the world economic and financial crisis,
continues to be extremely complex. No one is surprised
that the measures adopted to boost growth and world
economic recovery have not always responded to the
needs of the poor and the most vulnerable. Quite the
opposite is true; despite the promises made, many
developed countries have resorted to protectionism as
part of their policies created in response to the crisis, to
the detriment of underdeveloped economies.
The billions of dollars in fiscal stimulus packages
applied hurriedly to rescue banks and other private
companies responsible for the crisis contrast with the
ever-decreasing amount of resources for development,
including official development assistance. The current
international economic order, plunged into financial
and fiscal chaos caused by years of neoliberal policies,
is deeply unfair and unsustainable and should be
replaced.
At the High-level Plenary Meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals that took place in
September, it was clearly demonstrated that the
majority of States will not be able to meet these modest
objectives. The requests for new and additional
financial resources to try to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals in the scant time remaining before
2015 were ignored by rich countries. They did not even
allow a single mention of this situation in the outcome
document of the High-level Meeting (resolution 65/1).
If we follow this path, not only will the
Millennium Development Goals go unmet, but other
internationally agreed development goals will also
elude us. We need radical changes in the patterns of
production and consumption of Northern societies and
the establishment of a new international economic
order on the basis of new development paradigms. That
is the only way to make real progress towards fulfilling
the targets and goals to which we have committed. In
this context, the establishment of a new international
financial architecture should be a priority of United
Nations deliberations.
The aforementioned scenario highlights the need
to strengthen the central role of the United Nations in
international affairs. So-called global governance
cannot marginalize the most democratic mechanisms of
the Organization, nor should certain groups of

7

A/65/PV.52

countries proclaim themselves the decision-making
nucleus for the majority. The General Assembly, the
body in which we all participate in equal conditions
and where there is no veto, should be strengthened. We
also advocate greater coherence in the actions of all
bodies of the United Nations system, in strict respect
for mandates and the principle of national leadership in
the field of development assistance.
With respect to the Secretariat and the staff of
funds and programmes, we need to take urgent
measures to end such harmful practices as the fact that
a small group of developed countries control the main
management positions in the system’s bodies.
Regarding the work of funds and programmes, we can
no longer postpone the reform of the resident
coordinator system through decentralization and a
fairer distribution of responsibilities among different
agencies in the field.
Cuba has carried out, before the agreed date, the
majority of the targets set under the Millennium
Development Goals, despite the unfair and criminal
economic and financial blockade imposed by the
Government of the United States. That blockade is the
main obstacle to greater development in Cuba and to
raising the standard of living of our population. The
results achieved by Cuba demonstrate its determination
to continue fostering the achievement of higher
standards of living and well-being for our population
and channelling our limited resources towards those
areas of greater socio-economic impact.
Achieving human development has always been a
priority for Cuba. In that context, it should be
emphasized that the Human Development Report,
published annually by the United Nations Development
Programme, should reflect the concepts and indicators
that have intergovernmental consensus and acceptance.
The Human Development Report should abstain from
using partial and politically biased sources. It should
also strictly respect resolution 57/264. As that
resolution states, consultations with Member States to
draw up the Human Development Report should be
broad, transparent and substantive and should not be
limited to mere information sessions on how the Report
was drawn up. If we aspire to maintaining the
credibility of the Human Development Report, the
criteria of Member States should be duly respected.

Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that only
with the participation of all, with genuine political will
to confront the current pressing problems and with a
strengthened United Nations, a firm defender of
international law, will we comply with our
responsibility to build a better world for future
generations.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): The
United States would like to commend Member States
for the success of the September High-level Plenary
Meeting on the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). Now is the time to work collectively,
bilaterally and at the national level to accelerate
progress towards achieving the MDGs and other
internationally agreed development goals.
During his address on 22 September at the MDG
summit (see A/65/PV.9), President Obama unveiled a
new United States development strategy that strongly
supports the full realization of the MDGs and reaffirms
the commitment of the United States to sustainable
development and poverty alleviation.
Our strategy is an outcome- and results-based
approach grounded in the fact that sustained and
inclusive economic growth is the surest path to poverty
alleviation and development. It stresses the need to
foster innovation and deploy new technologies to
confront
global
threats,
including
disease,
undernutrition, climate change and other environmental
challenges. Our strategy emphasizes country ownership
and national responsibility for development —
principles that require accountability both from donors
and partner countries. We are working with our
development partners, United Nations agencies,
international
institutions,
non-governmental
organizations and the private sector towards those
goals.
As tangible steps in that regard, the United States
has introduced major initiatives, including our
$63 billion Global Health Initiative and our
$3.5 billion Feed the Future Initiative. We were also
pleased to announce on 5 October a new $4 billion
multi-year pledge to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria — a 38 per cent increase in
the United States investment over the preceding three
years.
We were honoured to join the international
community as it demonstrated its support for maternal
and child health at the 22 September event led by the

8

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

Secretary-General, and we look forward to working
with our partners to implement the strategy.
Under agenda item 13, “Integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields”, we
support the further discussion of best practices and
lessons learned in the pursuit of sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth, as highlighted in the
MDG summit outcome document (resolution 65/2).
We look forward to the high-level meeting on
non-communicable diseases next fall and support a
strong preparatory process, including a development
and sector-wide approach with a socio-economic
impact; to tackle the prevention, mitigation and
treatment of non-communicable diseases. The United
States is committed to a successful event and focused,
tangible outcomes.
The United States continues to urge full
implementation of the outcomes of other major United
Nations development conferences and summits,
including
the
Millennium
Declaration,
the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, and the Monterrey Consensus and
the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development.
With appropriate and needed streamlining of its
agenda items, the Economic and Social Council has an
important role to play in the follow-up to the outcomes
to major United Nations conferences and summits. The
strengthening of the annual ministerial review and its
focus on key thematic issues related to the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals ensured that the
Council played a vital role in the MDG summit.

Switzerland welcomes this opportunity to go back
over the issues of the effectiveness, efficiency and
coherence of the United Nations development system.
Since the publication in 2006 of the report of the
High-level Panel on United Nations System-wide
Coherence (see A/61/583), great progress has been
achieved at both global and national levels in terms of
coordination and coherence of United Nations
development operations. For example, we can confirm
that thanks to the “delivering as one” initiative, United
Nations development assistance has become more
relevant. Indeed, it has been confirmed through the
recent evaluations conducted by the One United
Nations pilot countries that the “delivering as one”
approach is contributing to renewed Government
leadership in United Nations programmes as well as to
those programmes being better aligned to national
priorities.
That is encouraging. But is it enough? As
shareholders of the United Nations system, can we now
simply sit back and hope for the best?
Seeking better coherence and coordination is not
enough, nor is it in itself our final objective. We have
to continue to work together to optimize development
activities through a more efficient and effective United
Nations system. To do that, the United Nations
operational system needs to improve the way partner
capacities are assessed and strengthened, risks are
detected and managed, and results are monitored and
evaluated. That is why Switzerland will continue to
insist on the need to strengthen and harmonize
evidence-based
programming,
monitoring
and
evaluation systems within and across agencies.

While there has been important progress in the
follow-up to major conferences and summits, including
the Millennium Summit, much more needs to be done.
The United States looks forward to continuing the
dialogue with other Member States on how to achieve
the ambitious goals we have set for ourselves.

In that context, my country awaits with
impatience the upcoming review of the experiences of
countries that have voluntarily undertaken the reform
process. The findings will supplement the experience
of the United Nations operational system in the
national application of the reform, with a view to the
triennial comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system in 2012. That will contribute to informed
decision-making by Member States on how to keep
improving the United Nations system and the reform
agenda so as to achieve better development results.

Mr. Rossi (Switzerland) (spoke in French): My
statement will address agenda item 115, “Follow-up to
the outcome of the Millennium Summit”.

The sustained will of Member States is essential
to making this reform a success, but it has to go hand
in hand with complete commitment of United Nations

The United States is pleased to have joined others
this year in making our national voluntary presentation
on gender equality and women’s empowerment and to
have an opportunity to exchange views, valuable
information and experiences with other delegations.

10-64830

9

A/65/PV.52

agencies and strong national leadership. As Member
States, we must continue to encourage and guide the
system with coherent and action-oriented messages and
decisions.

sustainable development and its main pillars,
economic, social and environmental. That is our
common responsibility, on which the credibility of the
United Nations rests.

Switzerland, for its part, hopes that the individual
agencies and the United Nations Development Group
(UNDG) as a whole will continue to improve the
functioning of the United Nations country teams. We
believe that the role of the resident coordinators is
essential in that regard. Therefore we urge the UNDG
to put in place incentives and selection mechanisms to
ensure that the resident coordinators’ positions are
granted to the most committed and competent staff in
the United Nations agencies.

The Monterrey Consensus that we agreed upon in
2002 in Mexico and reaffirmed in 2008 at the Doha
Review Conference in Qatar points to certain principal
subjects that must be followed up and implemented.
We have to study the strategies and practical measures
that can help us to implement ongoing progress in this
vital sphere. We also have to accelerate progress
towards achieving the MDGs. We have to strengthen
sustainable growth to enable everyone, including the
poor, to participate in and benefit from economic
opportunities. That should provide job opportunities
and increase incomes. We have to accelerate our efforts
to fight poverty and to achieve the MDGs and enhance
sustainable development.

Finally, we are pleased that the system-wide
coherence process has shown impressive institutional
results, the most prominent of all being the
establishment of a new United Nations agency for
women. In our view, UN Women presents a real
opportunity for the advancement of gender equality
worldwide. We have a shared responsibility to provide
it with the means that enable it to act effectively. It will
fall to the Executive Board to provide it with
outstanding operational and technical guidance to
ensure that it is able to pursue its mission and
contribute to bettering women’s lives.
Mr. Al-Kuwari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Qatar
is grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate on
this agenda item.
At the outset, Qatar aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Yemen on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The challenge that we all face is how to
implement the resolutions adopted by the United
Nations and how to improve the lives of millions of
people in the world. We have to concentrate
fundamentally on those most vulnerable to danger and
poverty. We have to unite to fight increasing poverty,
especially in developing countries. We have to work
together to implement the world development
programme, including the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), making progress that we can review
and compare.
Therefore we have to work together to make
comprehensive economic growth a goal available to
all, especially to the poor, within the framework of the
United Nations. We need to concentrate especially on

10

We have to make use of the international and
national efforts already made towards international
partnership. That is vital for achieving the progress we
all aspire to in this sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly. Two months ago we held the High-level
Plenary Meeting on implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals, which made clear what we can
achieve globally through opportunities and prospects.
The Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2)
and other documents, including the Monterrey
Consensus, the 2005 Summit Outcome (resolution
60/1) and the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development (resolution 63/239, annex), have all
urged us to face the main global challenge, which is to
combat poverty and to make the benefits of
development available to all. In various parts of the
world some progress towards the MDGs has been
achieved, but developing countries, including those in
sub-Saharan Africa, have not been able to acquire the
means that would allow them to achieve the Goals by
2015.
We have marched two thirds of the way to 2015,
and the path forward to the MDGs has changed. We in
Qatar believe that the main engine for achieving the
MDGs will be finding international partnerships and a
new, innovative mechanism to help people in the fields
of health, education and appropriate and dignified
employment for all.
The challenges facing us are greater than what
was expected at the Monterrey Conference. On a daily

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

basis we find new, unexpected challenges that threaten
peace and security, especially in the economic field.
The most recent financial crisis happened too fast even
for those who are experienced in dealing with such
crises. The repercussions of what was called a financial
problem in the largest industrial country in the world
have affected all the other countries and led to lower
levels of productivity and to unemployment.
The progress that had been achieved has been
reversed. The least developed countries are now even
more vulnerable. The financial transfers to those
countries have been reduced by half or more in some
cases. Even the income of some of the oil-producing
developing countries has decreased. The fact is that,
besides the issue of debt alleviation, we can say that
the amount of real official development assistance
(ODA) has been reduced. The challenge is to respect
the pledges of the Group of Eight, which seeks to
increase ODA by $50 billion and to double assistance
to Africa by 2010.
I am pleased to mention that although the State of
Qatar is a developing country, it has exceeded 0.7 per
cent in terms of financial, developmental and
humanitarian assistance. We have established rules and
regulations to help people in the areas of health, the
economy, the environment and the diversity of income.
Finally, I would like to say that the State of Qatar
has joined the sponsors of draft resolution A/65/L.12.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on draft resolution A/65/L.12, entitled
“Sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
for poverty eradication and achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals”, tabled under agenda
item 13.
Singapore is pleased to align itself with the
statements delivered earlier by Viet Nam on behalf of
the 13 Member States that first proposed the draft
resolution, and that of the Republic of Korea, on behalf
of the draft resolution’s 88 sponsors.
Through
this
draft
resolution
and
its
implementation, we hope to encourage a greater
emphasis and attention and an exchange of experiences
and expertise on the role of economic growth strategies
in efforts to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Why?
First, there are direct and indirect connections
between the eight MDGs; progress in one area often

10-64830

has a positive effect on others. Similarly, we see a
basic correlation between sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth and each of the MDGs.
Growth is often an indispensable, though insufficient,
condition for development. It is what helps generate
the long-term national resources for achieving the
MDGs. Progress on the MDGs front would in turn help
to promote economic growth. For instance, gender
equality in all spheres, including in education and the
workforce, could help reduce poverty and drive
growth. It is therefore useful for countries, in pursuing
growth and the MDGs, to take into account that close,
complex and often positive relationship in their
national development plans and strategies.
That may sound like common sense to most.
However, in the real world of scarce resources,
compartmentalization in policy-making and stovepipe
bureaucracies, countries are sometimes presented with
a false choice between those goals. Countries should
not have to choose, for instance, between
environmental sustainability and economic growth. We
need to work smarter to find complementarities and
achieve both, because there will be no good long-term
prospects for one without the other.
Secondly, we see benefits in greater crossregional exchanges of views and expertise on this
issue. The United Nations, with its universal
membership and the deep expertise and wide reach of
its institutions, is well placed to facilitate this
exchange. And while the food, fuel and financial crises
of recent years have significantly slowed development
efforts, key regions have shown strong improvement in
niche areas. Africa and Latin America have made great
strides towards education and gender equality. Those
regions offer valuable lessons for Asia.
Countries in Asia would also be keen to
participate and offer some of their lessons learned. A
key message would be the critical need for national
efforts, including pro-growth strategies and supportive
social policies aimed at lifting millions out of poverty
and hunger. In Asia, national strategies and regional
cooperation often go hand in hand. Regional
integration has undoubtedly played an important role in
boosting trade, investment and development. One
example of that regional approach to collective growth
is the ASEAN Connectivity Initiative. It seeks to close
the gaps in road and rail links and aviation and
maritime services in order to allow people, goods and
services to flow more freely within the region. In then

11

A/65/PV.52

linking up with the broader East Asian region and
international markets, we bring more opportunities for
trade, investment, tourism and development to our
people.
Open markets and free trade are linchpins of
Asia’s growth. The region’s belief in the importance of
an open international trading system is undiminished
despite the fact that the Doha Development Round has
stalled. Countries in Asia have embarked on an
ambitious series of free trade negotiations, which will,
hopefully, bring impetus to global trade talks.
On the whole, regional cooperation in the
economic, social, political and security spheres have
provided a uniquely enabling environment. This
regional approach to development, particularly within
the context of South-South cooperation, is one that
other regions may find relevant.
Thirdly, Singapore has worked bilaterally within
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
with Japan and Korea and with others outside of Asia.
We have formed partnerships with various
organizations of the United Nations system, such as the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific, the United Nations Development Programme,
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
International Maritime Organization, the World Trade
Organization and the World Intellectual Property
Organization to provide technical assistance to other
developing countries in macroeconomic and financial
management, urban development, trade and tourism
promotion, port management, human resource
development, et cetera.
With the adoption of this draft resolution and its
implementation, Singapore hopes to do more, to learn
from other countries and work with them to contribute
towards the sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth of all countries.
Mr. Savostianov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The focused and effective action of healthcare systems was one of the major tasks of the Highlevel Plenary Meeting this year. Therefore, in my
statement, I want to deal with one of the important
aspects of this matter, and that is the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
In May 2009 the General Assembly adopted a
resolution on this issue (resolution 64/265) for the first
time. The increasing attention in the United Nations is

12

fully justified: NCDs are one of the most topical
problems of global development. Recently we have
seen a trend towards rising rates of sickness and
mortality from non-communicable diseases in the
populations of all countries. According to World Health
Organization (WHO) data, cardiovascular disease,
cancer, diabetes and chronic lung disease claim the
lives of 36 million people annually, and of those, 9
million are under the age of 60. The lack of effective
measures in that area could result in an increase of
almost 20 per cent in the incidence of those diseases in
developing countries by the year 2015. Also, a
decrease in life expectancy and a deterioration in the
quality of life goes along with a growing economic
burden on both States and households.
A direct link has now been proven between the
most widespread NCDs and living conditions and
lifestyles, in particular the four main risk factors:
smoking, alcohol consumption, unhealthy diet and lack
of exercise. The possibility of effectively preventing
non-communicable diseases by controlling those risk
factors has been clearly established. Therefore, bearing
in mind the entire range of economic, social, gender,
behavioural, environmental and political aspects of the
problem, non-communicable diseases can be
effectively fought only with a multisectoral approach.
A solid foundation for collective work in that area is
the WHO 2008-2013 Action Plan for the Global
Strategy for the Prevention and Control of NonCommunicable Diseases.
Resolution 64/265 on prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases, which calls for a highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the subject
in September 2011, is an important step forward. As
one of the sponsors of that resolution, Russia supports
the initiative for holding a summit and is prepared to
participate actively in its preparation. A critical
challenge is to agree on the thematic scope, the format
and the modalities for the conduct of that event. We
trust the capable leaders of the negotiating process, the
Permanent Representatives of Luxembourg and
Jamaica, to prepare the relevant General Assembly
draft resolution. The success of the summit in
September 2011 will largely depend on the quality of
the organization and the fleshing out of the preparatory
process. We believe that a leading role must be played
by WHO. We support holding regional consultations
under WHO auspices in preparation for the summit,
with the participation of the private sector and non-

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

governmental organizations, as well as the preparation
of informational and analytical materials and reports,
including the first global WHO report on noncommunicable diseases.
The first global conference on healthy lifestyles
and NCDs, to be held at the ministerial level in
Moscow from 28 to 30 April 2011, will make an
important contribution to advancing the international
dialogue on NCD issues, determining priorities for
cooperative efforts and achieving agreement on
principles. In resolution 64/265 the Assembly took note
with appreciation of that initiative by the Government
of the Russian Federation. The conference will be
organized by the Russian authorities in close
cooperation with WHO. Priority attention will be
focused on organizing an open, transparent and
inclusive preparatory process in very close
coordination with WHO and with the broad
participation of Member States and international
partners. To that end, preparations for the conference
will be coordinated by the Russian organizing
committee and by the international executive
committee, comprised of 22 experts from all regions of
the world. The regular meeting of that committee will
be held in Oslo tomorrow, 24 November, on the eve of
the
WHO
European
consultations
on
non-communicable diseases.
We will need to formulate the goals and issues for
the Moscow conference and to discuss its agenda,
programme of work, format, and the parameters of the
working and final documents. We anticipate that the
format of the conference will be a plenary meeting,
working meetings and a drafting group, with parallel
round tables. A partners forum with the participation of
all interested parties will be organized on the margins.
At the end of the conference a ministerial declaration
will be adopted.
Invitations to the Moscow conference on behalf
of the Government of the Russian Federation and the
Director General of WHO will be sent out at the end of
November, once agreed to by the executive committee.
The invitation will be accompanied by a concept paper,
a draft agenda and a draft programme of work for the
conference. We are convinced that the conference will
make a serious and substantive contribution towards
the preparation of the United Nations summit on noncommunicable diseases, and we invite all countries to
participate actively in the Moscow event.

10-64830

Mr. Wetland (Norway): I will be addressing
agenda item 115 this morning. We know that the global
burden of disease is changing. Non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) account for almost 90 per cent of the
disease burden in the European region and for about 60
per cent of all deaths worldwide. Part of the reason for
that is that we have been successful in combating
communicable diseases, as we have often heard in
recent years, and part of the reason is that we live
longer than we did a few decades ago. We have also
experienced an economic growth that allows more
people — regrettably — to pursue unhealthy lifestyles.
Tobacco consumption, obesity, unhealthy diet, physical
inactivity and alcohol are key contributing factors.
We have increasingly solid data on the situation
of NCDs in poor countries. According to the World
Health Organization (WHO), mortality from NCDs is
going to increase over the next 10 years, most rapidly
in low- and middle-income countries. It is therefore
timely to address NCDs as a global challenge.
The considerable progress that has been achieved
in global health over the past decade shows that
concerted efforts produce results. Child mortality is on
the decline, there is better access to vaccines and lifesaving antiretrovirals, and the health workforce has
been recognized as the most valuable asset of national
health systems, not simply an expenditure. However,
several of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), in particular those that concern women’s and
children’s health and well-being, are still far from
being reached and require sustained attention and
commitment. That will be particularly important in the
next few years as the world enters the final drive to
deliver on the MDGs by 2015.
In that regard it is important to note that
communicable diseases, such as HIV, tuberculosis and
malaria, and the conditions that cause maternal and
child mortality still constitute a greater share of the
burden of disease borne by the poorest segments of
populations. Common communicable diseases and
malnutrition are still the main causes of high child and
maternal mortality in the poorest countries. The MDGs
and their focus on poverty must therefore continue to
be given top priority by the global community, and the
Norwegian Government will certainly do so.
It is therefore essential that we move ahead in a
way that reinforces national and global public health
systems and that we avoid fragmentation and

13

A/65/PV.52

competition for scarce resources. In that regard, there
are useful lessons to be drawn from our experience
with MDG-related global health initiatives. I would
like to focus on a few of them in particular.
First, there is the importance of designing
international initiatives so that they are driven by
countries themselves: national Governments must take
the lead. That is particularly important for NCDs
because an effective response requires cross-sectoral
action, including national legislation and regulation.
Secondly, we wish to draw attention to the
importance of strengthening national health systems to
address infectious and non-communicable diseases
holistically: external support should contribute
systematically to strengthening national health systems
and avoid the fragmentation that we see too often in
the health sector.
Thirdly, global health initiatives have to a large
extent focused on service delivery and individual
interventions, and much less on prevention. By forcing
us to prioritize health promotion and cross-sectoral
action, action to combat NCDs can add significant
value through the resulting strengthening of public
health functions and the stewardship role of health
ministries.
Fourthly, from the start, Governments must
establish inclusive partnerships with civil society and
the private sector. That has been key to success in the
AIDS response and has also been our experience in
Norway regarding NCDs.
Fifthly, it is more true than ever before that
money matters — but money alone is not sufficient.
Many countries are in constrained economic situations,
with public budgets, including those for official
development assistance, under severe pressure. The
emerging NCD movement is well placed to produce
integrated plans, with realistic resource needs, that
emphasize value for money and focus on actions that
are needed in that phase. In the years leading up to
2015 we must expand the evidence base needed for
decision makers; support national leadership and crosssectoral capacity; and document what works in
different contexts.
We fully support the WHO Global Strategy for
the Prevention and Control of NCDs. It provides an
excellent framework for the work ahead. We encourage
WHO to continue providing evidence and data in

14

preparation for the High-level Meeting on NCDs in
September next year. Later this week, as part of the
preparations for the meeting, the Norwegian
Government is hosting the United Nations Department
of Economic and Social Affairs-WHO regional highlevel consultation on NCDs in Oslo. The 53 member
States of WHO’s European region have been invited to
attend.
Next year’s High-level Meeting offers a key
opportunity to galvanize Member States into action to
reduce premature mortality from NCDs, with particular
focus on the developmental challenges faced by
developing countries. We look forward to an inclusive
meeting involving many partners, where we can agree
on near-term actions and on a way to ensure that NCDs
in the longer term are aligned with the health MDGs
and can support the strengthening of national health
systems in an effective and sustained way.
Mr. AlMehaini (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
are pleased to be participating in the debate on the
follow-up to the outcomes of major United Nations
conferences and the High-level Plenary meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) at the sixtyfifth session of the General Assembly. We would also
like to express our support for draft resolution
A/65/L.12 on the follow-up to commitments for the
MDGs, which ratifies the outcome document (A/65/1)
of the High-level Conference held in September on the
MDGs.
We also reiterate our support for the outcome
document of the thirty-fourth Annual Meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77 and
China, held here at the United Nations in New York, on
addressing the development challenges facing
developing countries. My delegation would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive report dealing with both the challenges
and the progress made in keeping promises and the
agreed programme of work for the MDGs in 2015.
At the High-level Summit in September in New
York, the world’s leaders discussed the implementation
of the MDGs and concluded that progress towards
achieving Goal 1, namely, eliminating poverty and
hunger, is lagging, given that in 2009 there were more
than one billion people in the world living in poverty
and hunger. We must also step up our efforts to achieve
the other two MDGs regarding maternal and child
health and work together to make the expected

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

progress. The world leaders also identified the
challenges that the international community has been
facing during the past few years, such as rises in food
prices, the world financial and economic crisis, and the
fluctuations in energy prices, as well as other problems
that require all States, especially developed countries,
to honour their commitments to allocate 0.7 per cent of
gross domestic product (GDP) for official development
assistance (ODA). In this context, we would like to pay
tribute to the donor countries that have committed to
0.7 per cent of their GDP for ODA.
Kuwait understands that sustainable development
requires national development, and, as such, has
drafted a comprehensive national development
programme for the period 2010-2014. The plan aims at
improving the areas of education, health, human
resources, institutions and infrastructure, among others.
Nor have we failed in our international commitments
ever since we pledged to cooperate with the
international community to achieve the lofty MDGs by
the deadline, Kuwait has increased its contribution, as
well as increasing its assistance to developing
countries to 1.31 per cent of our GDP.
In regard to Africa and efforts to combat the
scourges that affect it, particularly increasing disease
and poverty, we have allotted $300 million to the
Islamic Development Bank, as well as another
$100 million for Kuwait’s decent living fund, aimed at
providing rapid food supplies for the needy and
increasing harvests and agricultural products, in
cooperation with other similar initiatives.
Aware of the need to diversify and expand
assistance to developing countries, the Emir of Kuwait
has implemented a support fund for small and mediumsized enterprises with a capital endowment worth
$2 billion. Five hundred million dollars of its capital
will be used to create employment opportunities for
Arab youth and the fight against poverty. It will also
underpin the Kuwait Development Fund by focusing
on supporting and financing development and
infrastructure projects in more than 100 countries to
the tune of some $15 billion.
With regard to reviewing the progress towards
reaching the Millennium Development Goals, we
believe that it is still possible to attain the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 despite the global
challenges for the international community. Everyone
was unanimous in stating that political will, joint

10-64830

action and respect for the commitments were needed to
achieve the Goals.
Despite the difficulties hampering the efforts of
States to achieve the Millennium Development Goals,
we agree with the Secretary-General when he says that
the Millennium Development Goals are still possible
and achievable, with a view to creating a better world
where the gaps resulting from differences and divisions
are narrowed and the prospects for cooperation and
partnership are widened and where peace and security
prevail.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): My delegation is
honoured to be a sponsor of the draft resolution in
document A/65/L.12 on sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth, and we look forward to its
adoption.
This morning, however, I want to comment on the
vital issue of non-communicable diseases. As the
report transmitted in the Secretary-General’s note
(A/65/362) highlights, the global burden of
non-communicable diseases constitutes one of the
major challenges for development in the twenty-first
century, impacting particularly developing countries.
Cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic lung diseases
and diabetes have emerged as major public health
problems,
and
the
increasing
incidence
of
non-communicable diseases among poor and
vulnerable groups is widening health inequalities
within and among countries. In Australia’s own
immediate region, non-communicable diseases are the
leading cause of death in the Pacific island countries,
where they account for over 75 per cent of the deaths
every year. The rate of diabetes, in particular in the
counties of the Pacific, is among the highest in the
world. We should all be warned of the dangers of those
diseases, including diabetes. I should say that I wish I
had listened to my own doctor. I am a diabetic, and, if I
had listened to his warnings at a much earlier stage in
my life, I would not face the prospects that I now face.
The Australian Agency for International
Development is working closely with partner countries
in our region to lower the incidence and impact of noncommunicable
disease,
including
through
strengthening national health systems, scaling up
preventative health and health promotion programmes
and improving access to health services. In Nauru, for
example, Australia has supported the development of
legislation to address the risk factors for

15

A/65/PV.52

non-communicable diseases, including, in particular,
through a new tobacco bill; in Samoa, we support a
programme of health promotion and disease prevention
at the community and institutional levels; and in
Tonga, we are working to reduce the prevalence of
non-communicable disease risk factors, in particular,
obesity and tobacco use.
Australia is very encouraged that health issues
are being given an increasingly high priority on the
United Nations agenda. At the launch of the SecretaryGeneral’s Global Strategy on Women’s and Children’s
Health during the Millennium Development Goals
summit in September, we committed to scaling up our
efforts to tackle maternal and child health
internationally (see A/65/PV.9), and we will, in fact,
spend an additional $1.6 billion over the next five
years to contribute to that project.
In June 2011, 10 years after the United Nations
first special session of the General Assembly on
HIV/AIDS, we will gather to review progress and
reaffirm our commitment to achieving universal access
to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support. The
high-level meeting on non-communicable diseases in
September will provide a timely opportunity to
consider how to scale up our actions to prevent and
control non-communicable diseases.
There are many steps that we can take to reduce
the risk factors and improve access to health care for
those affected by non-communicable diseases, and it is
crucial that the challenge be given greater attention in
national health plans and development strategies. We
must also recognize the chronic nature of such
diseases, and that multisectoral efforts will be required
over many years before we see a change in the
incidence of non-communicable diseases.
Australia, for its part, will do what it can to help
reduce the global burden of non-communicable
diseases. We very much welcome the initiative to hold
the high-level meeting in September next year, and we
will continue to play a constructive role in the
preparations for that meeting.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I wonder if I might
crave the President’s indulgence for a moment and
express thanks to the many delegations that have
conveyed sympathy and concern to New Zealand at the
plight of the 29 trapped miners. We are grateful for the
thoughts and prayers conveyed to us by many
delegations at this very difficult time.

16

On 19 October 2010, this General Assembly
adopted a resolution endorsing the outcome of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixty-fifth session of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) (resolution 65/1).
Today, we debate the follow-up to that resolution.
In its statement on 20 September 2010 at that Highlevel Plenary Meeting, New Zealand expressed the
view that better, faster progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals is achievable (see
A/65/PV.4). We stressed the need to place a higher
premium on outcomes and cooperation. We noted that
more money alone would not solve all the problems
and that a much greater focus on aid effectiveness was
required. We also highlighted the connection between
the MDGs and sustainable economic development,
which is a priority for New Zealand’s own aid
programme.
Those points have been well captured within the
MDG outcome document, which was endorsed by the
General Assembly last month. They are critical to
advancing our commitment to achieving the MDGs
and, as such, I suggest that outcomes, cooperation and
aid effectiveness should be central to our debate today.
We are acutely aware that, of the eight MDGs,
MDG 4 and MDG 5 on health and MDG 3 on gender
are the most challenging. I come from the South
Pacific — a region that is second only to sub-Saharan
Africa in terms of the lack of progress towards
achieving the MDGs. While infant and child mortality
rates have improved in most Pacific island countries,
maternal deaths have increased in Papua New Guinea,
for instance, and achieving universal access to
reproductive health and gender equality continues to
elude many Pacific island countries.
The MDG High-level Plenary outcome document
sets out very clear steps to guide us in keeping the
promise to achieve the MDGs. For its part, New
Zealand intends to work harder on donor coordination,
for example, through our Cairns Compact engagement,
in order to focus more on results and practical
interventions that improve economic and social wellbeing.
Without detracting from any other MDG-related
issues, I should highlight a relevant health and
development concern that is exercising New Zealand
and our Pacific neighbours, that is, the growing burden
of non-communicable diseases, referred to in two

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

paragraphs of the outcome document, namely,
paragraph 73 (k), which calls for strengthening the
effectiveness of health systems and proven
interventions to address evolving health challenges
such as the increased incidence of non-communicable
diseases; and paragraph 76 (i), which calls for
concerted action and a coordinated response at the
national, regional and global levels to adequately
address the developmental and other challenges posed
by non-communicable diseases, namely, cardiovascular
diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and
diabetes. In New Zealand, cancer and heart disease are
the main causes of death, and disparities between
ethnic groups are particularly worrying — notably
among our Maori and Pasifika populations.
In the Pacific, more than 70 per cent of deaths are
due to non-communicable diseases, and rates of
non-communicable disease-related blindness, disability
and renal failure are also increasing.
In response to the growing burden of noncommunicable diseases globally, the New Zealand Aid
Programme and New Zealand researchers and scientists
have been working collaboratively with partners to find
solutions to stem that epidemic and avoid the dire
social and economic consequences that can ensue.
Earlier this year, New Zealand co-sponsored the
resolution in which the General Assembly decided to
hold a high-level meeting on the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases in September
2011. New Zealand is committed to engaging actively
and productively in all the processes relating to that
meeting, including negotiations on the resolution on
modalities that are currently under way.
New Zealand stands committed and ready to play
its part in assisting the global community in addressing
the challenge presented by chronic, non-communicable
diseases, in addressing the equally chronic and
associated cycles of debt and illness, and thus, in
achieving more equitable human development.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to add my voice to the others in extending
our sympathies to New Zealand for the situation of the
trapped miners.
In addition, our heartfelt condolences go to the
Government and people of Cambodia for the
significant number of tragic deaths in the stampede that
has been reported in today’s media.

10-64830

My delegation wishes to thank the President for
organizing today’s joint debate on agenda items 13,
115 and 120. The issues they deal with are central to
our collective efforts to strengthen the United Nations
system and even more relevant for the theme that the
President has chosen for the current session of the
General Assembly, namely, “Reaffirming the central
role of the United Nations in global governance”.
India has all along emphasized that sustaining
economic growth is key for poverty eradication. It is
also imperative that the fruits of development reach
across the board and result in inclusive growth and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
We are, therefore, happy to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/65/L.12, entitled “Sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth for poverty eradication and
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals”,
for adoption by the General Assembly later today.
In that regard, we recognize the crucial role of the
Economic and Social Council in pushing for a
comprehensive development agenda at the United
Nations through an integrated and coordinated
approach.
We align ourselves with the statement by the
Chairperson of the Group of 77 and China on the 2010
Human Development report of the World Health
Organization (WHO), which I will now address. Like
many other countries, India is also undergoing
epidemiologic transition with the initial high burden of
disease and mortality owing to infectious diseases
gradually giving way to non-communicable diseases,
injuries and geriatric problems as the main burden of
disease.
It is estimated that 42 per cent of all deaths in
India today are due to non-communicable diseases, and
we have lost millions of potentially productive years of
life, owing to premature deaths caused by
cardiovascular disease in the 35 to 64 year-old age
group. That also illustrates the enormity of the
challenge we face. There is also emerging evidence
that poor people are particularly vulnerable to
non-communicable diseases, owing to high rates of
smoking and tobacco use, occupational risks, and
living conditions.
The Government of India has accorded very high
priority to health care in our country. Our flagship
National Rural Health Mission is using innovative and

17

A/65/PV.52

decentralized approaches to public health with strong
involvement of local communities. The Indian Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare has also formulated
various national programmes for non-communicable
diseases, including national programmes for the
prevention and control of diabetes, cardiovascular
disease and cerebral vascular diseases, as well as the
National Cancer Control Programme and the National
Mental Health Programme. While obviously much is
being invested in the prevention and health promotion
side, we need, of course, to tackle the need for
affordable treatment. With non-communicable diseases
becoming a major issue globally, it is imperative that
policies with regard to access to safe drugs also ensure
their affordability for all. We look forward to the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly in September
2011, as it will give us an opportunity to bring global
attention to this important and growing developmental
challenge.
My delegation also welcomes the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) on the selection and
conditions of service of executive heads in the United
Nations system organizations. It is a long overdue
evaluation of the legal and institutional framework and
practices followed in the selection and appointment of
such senior officials. We are firmly of the view that the
relevant legislative bodies, whether it be the General
Assembly, in the case of the Secretary-General, or the
governing bodies, as in the case of the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, should have a
greater role in such appointments. My delegation has
repeatedly voiced our strong support for a greater say
on the part of the General Assembly in the process of
selection of the Secretary-General, most recently in the
context of our discussion on the revitalization of the
General Assembly.
The report of the JIU should give an impetus to
the discussion among Member States to enhance the
role of the General Assembly in selection of the
Secretary-General.
The situation is not much different in the case of
executive heads of the funds and programmes. The
process of consulting the governing bodies must
involve real engagement with Member States. We
would not like to see it reduced to a mere pro forma
exercise, which is, regretfully, the case at present, with
Member States given unrealistically tight time frames
to react to the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
My delegation believes the JIU has offered useful

18

recommendations on the selection and conditions of
service of executive heads in the United Nations
system. It supports the objective of making the process
and system more transparent, effective, and
accountable by involving its principal stakeholders. We
urge Member States to give it careful consideration.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 57/32 of 19 November
2002, I now call on the observer of the InterParliamentary Union.
Ms. Filip (Inter-Parliamentary Union): The
subject of today’s joint debate is too vast to be covered
satisfactorily in a single statement. At the same time,
this may not be the time and place to recount in any
great detail the actual, concrete work that the InterParliamentary Union (IPU) is doing in follow-up to
major United Nations conferences, much of which we
have covered in other recent statements or is reflected
in the biennial report of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral on cooperation between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the IPU. I will thus focus my
remarks on one issue that, by and large, remains
critical to the follow-up and implementation of global
commitments emanating from major United Nations
conferences, namely the issue of national ownership.
Global commitments by definition are binding
primarily on Governments, but they become tangible
only when all stakeholders are made to feel involved
and empowered to play their role. That in turn requires
that national actors comprehend what is at stake, the
various ramifications of the commitments taken, the
policy prescriptions that are embedded in those
commitments, and the specific actions that must be
undertaken to help Governments make good on their
promises here at the United Nations. Our experience
over the last few years tells us that there must be more
buy-in at the national level for global commitments to
take hold. Parliaments provide a case in point on how
necessary that is and how it can be achieved.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
which originated with the Millennium Declaration
(resolution 55/2), are, of course, very high on our
agenda, but the action of the IPU extends to other
issues as well, from HIV and AIDS to the least
developed countries (LDCs), climate change and trade,
to mention a few. To support parliamentary
engagement on those issues, the IPU employs several
modalities — some well tried and consecrated, others

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

more innovative, which we hope to put to the test in
the coming years.
There is a growing practice on the part of
Member States to include legislators in national
delegations to major United Nations conferences and
reviews. On such occasions, we find that there is value
in bringing those members of parliament (MPs)
together to exchange ideas and experiences and
identify avenues for follow-up action within their
parliaments back home. A recent illustration of that
was a parliamentary meeting at the MDG Summit,
where some 70 members of parliament from relevant
select committees met to examine the Summit outcome
document and to compare notes on their own work in
relation to the MDGs. Similarly, the IPU will be
holding a one-day parliamentary meeting on climate
change on 6 December in Cancún, building on the
positive and substantive exercise last year in
Copenhagen on the occasion of the fifteenth
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Within the IPU’s regular programme of work,
briefings and panel discussions are held at IPU
conferences and assemblies, where members engage
with United Nations officials and among themselves in
preparation for or in follow-up to major United Nations
processes. A recent example of that is a thematic
session held last month at the 123rd IPU Assembly in
Geneva within the Committee on United Nations
Affairs and with the participation of the United Nations
High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, which sought to elicit the views of
parliamentarians on their concerns and priorities with
respect to a new programme of action for the LDCs.
The outcome of that debate, also circulated here among
United Nations Member States, will help inform the
IPU contribution to the process leading up to the
Istanbul Summit next year.
Another modality whereby the IPU seeks to
advance the implementation of major global
commitments is directed at enhancing the capacity and
institutional mechanisms for parliaments to mainstream
the outcomes of international conferences and related
commitments. Earlier this year, for example, the IPU
conducted a comparative study on how parliaments as
institutions deal with the MDGs. The results varied
greatly, from parliaments that have no particular
follow-up mechanism to parliaments that have set up
specialized MDG committees or caucuses. One of the

10-64830

findings of the study is that huge global agendas, such
as the MDGs, which cut across many policy areas, are
best pursued through established committees of
parliaments, such as health, education or the
environment, and that those committees must be
provided with the necessary information and expertise.
The parliamentary committees are a home for the
MDGs, provided that they do not work in isolation
from one another. If a specialized committee or caucus
for the MDGs needs to be established, one of its main
functions is precisely to help ensure coherence and
coordination throughout the parliamentary system
when developing an integrated approach to the MDGs.
Another area of particular importance for the IPU
has to do with the type of role that parliaments can and
should play in the review of implementation of existing
international commitments. When dealing with
national reviews of progress towards meeting the
MDGs or international commitments in the area of the
LDCs or HIV and AIDS, it is helpful when progress
reports are also placed on the agendas of parliaments.
Perhaps one of the most successful mechanisms
that we have been able to develop thus far involves the
United Nations human rights treaty body system, and
in particular the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). In
that case, the IPU works with the parliaments of the
countries under review, so that they can take part in the
review process at the national level, provide input to
the national report, attend the session of the CEDAW
Committee and receive the United Nations findings for
further consideration and action by the parliament
concerned. We feel that that exercise is one that can be
replicated in other areas as well.
In conclusion, from our perspective, another way
to look at the question of follow-up to United Nations
conferences is through the larger prism of how the
United Nations as a system engages with national
parliaments and with the IPU. What we have described
now is just one dimension of a much larger debate that
we can expect to have in this Hall in just a few weeks’
time. Please allow me to take this opportunity to
remind delegations that a draft resolution on
cooperation between the two organizations has been
tabled on the basis of a very substantive report of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. We invite all
delegations to consider that report for a more
comprehensive overview of how we are working to

19

A/65/PV.52

support the implementation of global commitments at
both the policy and the operational levels.

stampede on a bridge during the water festival
yesterday.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.

It is now my privilege to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.8, entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace”, dated 29 October 2010, at this year’s session
on behalf of the sponsors. Since the drafting of the
draft resolution, the following countries have joined
the list of sponsors: Afghanistan, Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Belarus,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, China, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, El Salvador,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Nepal, Peru, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Turkey and Viet Nam.

The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/65/L.12, entitled “Sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth for poverty eradication and
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat to
announce the additional co-sponsors.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, in addition to the sponsors listed in
draft resolution A/65/L.12 and those announced by the
representative of the Republic of Korea when he
introduced the draft resolution, the following countries
have also become sponsors of A/65/L.12: Guyana,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino and
Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.12?
Draft resolution
(resolution 65/10).

A/65/L.12

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 13, 115 and 120.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution A/65/L.8
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 32nd and 33rd meetings on 18 October 2010, the
Assembly considered in a joint debate agenda item 14,
entitled “Global agenda for dialogue among
civilizations”, and agenda item 15, and that at its
34th meeting on 20 October 2010 the General
Assembly adopted resolution 65/5.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahmood Ali,
Member of Parliament and Chairman of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.8.
Mr. Ali (Bangladesh): I take this opportunity to
express our sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Cambodia for the tragic loss of life in the

20

Since 2001, this draft resolution has been
submitted and adopted each year by consensus. That
shows the commitment of the entire global community
to making the world safe for future generations. Here,
let me quote from the statement delivered by our Prime
Minister, Sheikh Hasina, at this year’s general debate
of the United Nations:
“Our unflinching commitment to peace finds
expression in our annual flagship Assembly
resolution on the culture of peace. Recent years
have shown an extraordinary record of
sponsorships because of the reference to
International Mother Language Day. Ever since
the Day was adopted by UNESCO in recognition
of the language martyrs who gave their lives in
1952 for Bangla, their mother tongue, it has been
celebrated throughout the world with growing
fervour every year.” (A/65/PV.17, p. 17)
Given that backdrop, it is important to continue
dialogue among civilizations and to create a mindset
and environment of tolerance, respect for diversity and
cultural values, since most conflicts and wars begin at
the level of the heart. It is therefore necessary to
solidify and strengthen a sense of tolerance and
sensitivity, and a strong relationship between different
cultures, ethnicities, languages and civilizations for the
betterment of all. In that regard, I would like to
mention
Bangladesh’s
modest
initiative,
the
International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-violence for the Children of the World (20012010) (resolution 53/25). Bangladesh will continue to
play a constructive role in that area.

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

The culture of peace is a set of values, attitudes,
modes of behaviour and ways of life that reject
violence and prevent conflicts through dialogue among
individuals, groups and nations. We firmly believe that
a world order informed by a culture of peace is
conducive to the attainment of our development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals. We see
great value in the principles of tolerance, respect for
diversity, democracy and understanding. Those ideals
were endorsed by Member States in the 1999
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace (resolution 53/243). Bangladesh had the
privilege of steering that process.

carrying out programmes promoting the idea all over
the world. Our sincere thanks also go to the nongovernmental organizations and members of civil
society who are taking the idea of a culture of peace
around the world. We commend the submission of the
Civil Society Report on the Decade for a Culture of
Peace, in particular the role of the Working Group on
the Culture of Peace at the United Nations. In that
quest, academics and the media also have an important
role to play. We need to involve young people and
children in the process. We should first listen to them
and then take appropriate measures for the betterment
of their lives.

As we come to the end of the International
Decade for a Culture of Peace, we should start taking
stock of what we have achieved since it began. I
believe that that 10-year exercise has had some impact
on our psyche in making a peaceful world for all,
especially for the children of the future, and that in the
days ahead we should focus on implementation. The
Programme of Action enjoys universal support. I
sincerely believe that the draft resolution before us will
advance a culture of peace in eight areas of
cooperation.

There have been some changes in this year’s draft
resolution on the implementation of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. We
have added three new preambular paragraphs and one
new paragraph, as well as amending five other
paragraphs. In the new fourteenth preambular
paragraph, we welcome the summary report of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization High Panel on Peace and Dialogue among
Cultures, convened by UNESCO’s Director-General on
18 February, as contained in document A/65/299. In the
new seventeenth preambular paragraph, we encourage
the continued and increasing efforts and activities on
the part of civil society organizations throughout the
world aimed at advancing the culture of peace as
envisaged in the Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace.

One of the areas that should be stressed is that of
raising public awareness and disseminating public
information about a culture of peace. The Department
of Public Information should launch a special
information strategy for its promotion. For that
purpose, we believe that the Department needs
adequate resources at its disposal. At the national level,
individual Governments can work to promote a culture
of peace, using both the print and electronic media, in
collaboration with the relevant ministries.
Proper coordination among the various United
Nations agencies is vital. In particular, we welcome the
fact that the UNESCO Executive Board will provide a
specific budget to that end. We call on the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to reflect a culture
of peace strategy through relevant programmes of
action at the country level. As the coordinator of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus (NAM) on the
Commission, we have raised the subject repeatedly, all
the more so since the NAM Summits have endorsed it.
We wish to express our profound gratitude to all
the stakeholders who have contributed, and are
contributing, to the promotion of a culture of peace.
Special thanks go to UNESCO, the lead agency in

10-64830

Of the five amended paragraphs, paragraph 1
states that the objective of the effective implementation
of the Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace is to
strengthen further the global movement for a culture of
peace following the observance of the International
Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-violence for
the Children of the World (2001-2010), and calls on all
concerned to give renewed attention to that objective.
Amended paragraph 11 welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue to
enhance communication and outreach, including
through its culture of peace website, along with its
efforts to coordinate and implement its activities to
promote the objectives of the International Decade at
the regional and global levels.
Immediately
after
the
independence
of
Bangladesh in 1971, the father of our nation,

21

A/65/PV.52

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, pursued a
policy of friendship towards all and malice towards
none in the conduct of the country’s international
relations. That principle has always guided us in our
relations with countries around the globe, especially
our neighbours. Our peacekeepers are assisting United
Nations peacekeeping operations, even at the cost of
their lives in difficult terrain in various parts of the
world in the simple pursuit of peace. They also carry
the idea of the culture of peace in their hearts and are
putting the idea into action.
As a member of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission, we are discharging our
responsibilities there with those same ideas in mind.
We believe that a culture of peace holds the key to
sustainable peace in post-conflict societies. Even in
societies that are enjoying peace or apparent peace, we
have to nurture that idea, so that no one can even
consider violating the peace.
In conclusion, I would like to extend our
profound gratitude to all the Member States that have
shown their solidarity by co-sponsoring this annual
draft resolution over the last 10 years. Last year, we
had as many as 118 sponsors, and I hope this year the
number of sponsors will be even higher. The increase
in the number of sponsors in each successive year has
been a matter of great encouragement to the delegation
of Bangladesh.
In view of the time constraints, the current draft
resolution was not able to enjoy the endorsement of
more sponsors. I would request my colleagues from
other Missions to co-sponsor the draft resolution by
providing their valuable endorsement to it now.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/65/L.8, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.8?
Draft resolution A/65/L.8 was adopted (resolution
65/11).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.

22

Agenda item 73 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution A/65/L.13
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly heard the debate on this agenda item at
its 39th and 41st meetings on 28 and 29 October 2010,
respectively. In connection with this item, the
Assembly now has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/65/L.13.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.13.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour to
introduce under agenda item 73 draft resolution
A/65/L.13, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. Let me begin by saying that, in
addition to the 85 countries mentioned in document
A/65/L.13, which contains the text of the draft
resolution, the following countries have indicated their
wish to be included as its sponsors: Bangladesh,
Barbados, Botswana, Central African Republic,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Georgia,
Japan, Mauritius, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal and
Uruguay, which brings the total number of sponsors to
exactly 100.
On 28 October 2010, the President of the
International Criminal Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song,
presented the sixth annual report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to this body. Subsequently, we
had a very constructive and in-depth debate, a few
elements of which I would like to mention here.
First, in order to ensure the Court’s success,
universal adherence to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court remains crucial. We are
therefore pleased to welcome the countries that have
recently become a party to the Rome Statute —
Bangladesh, Seychelles, Saint Lucia and the Republic
of Moldova. The addition of those new parties brings
the total number of States that have ratified or acceded
to the Rome Statute to 114. It is our sincere hope that
others will join soon.
Secondly, the debate on 28 and 29 October made
it clear once again that the establishment of the Court
was the most significant development of the last
decade in our long and ongoing struggle to eradicate
impunity, a struggle that still continues. Considerable

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

attention was given to the landmark event of this year,
the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, which
was held from 31 May to 11 June in Kampala. The
main outcome of the Conference was the adoption of
amendments to the Rome Statute that sought to define
the crime of aggression and establish conditions under
which the Court could exercise jurisdiction with
respect to that crime. The participation of the
Secretary-General, who convened and opened the
Conference, and several high-level United Nations
officials served as a powerful reminder of the strong
connection between the United Nations and the Court.
Thirdly, the International Criminal Court’s annual
report and the debate in the General Assembly
underlined the role of the Court in our common efforts
to build an international community characterized, not
only by the rule of law and respect for human rights,
but also by peace and security. Sustainable peace
cannot be achieved if perpetrators of the most serious
crimes are not brought to justice. Peace and justice are
complementary and both are necessary.
The fourth element I would like to highlight is a
fact that the President of the ICC drew attention to,
namely, that, despite the recent successful arrest of an
accused, the situation with respect to the outstanding
arrest warrants is deeply troubling. The Court is
completely reliant on State cooperation in the
enforcement of its orders and decisions. If States do
not provide the cooperation necessary for the Court’s
functioning in accordance with their legal obligations,
it will not be able to fulfil its mandate, and impunity
will continue to flourish.
The cooperation of States, international
organizations and civil society is essential to the
Court’s functioning, not only in relation to the arrest
and surrender of accused persons, but also in relation
to the provision of evidence, the protection and
relocation of victims and witnesses, and the
enforcement of sentences. We are therefore pleased
that the United Nations has continued over the past
year to assist the Court in its endeavours through
implementation of the Relationship Agreement. We
also welcome the assistance provided so far by States
parties and non-States parties and call on all States to
continue to support the Court’s efforts in that respect.
Last but not least, it was stressed during the
debate that the hallmark of the Court is its
independence and its judicial nature. At the same time,

10-64830

that judicial institution operates within a political
world, and it needs States to cooperate with it while
also respecting, protecting and enhancing its judicial
independence.
The draft resolution before us serves three main
objectives. First, the draft resolution serves to provide
political support for the International Criminal Court as
an organization, for its mandate and aims, and for the
work it is carrying out. Secondly, it serves to underline
the importance of the relationship between the Court
and the United Nations on the basis of the Relationship
Agreement, as both the United Nations and the Court
have a central role in enhancing the system of
international criminal justice. Finally, the draft
resolution serves to remind States and international and
regional organizations of the need to cooperate with
the Court in carrying out its tasks.
The Netherlands hopes that the draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus and that it will lead to
even greater support for the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity and in its attempts
to hold perpetrators of very serious crimes accountable
for their actions.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/65/L.13, entitled “Report of
the International Criminal Court”. Before giving the
floor to speakers in explanation of vote before the vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ajawin (Sudan): My delegation would like
to take this opportunity to dissociate itself from draft
resolution A/65/L.13 on the report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for the following reasons.
Principally, the Sudan is not a member of the
Rome Statute and I would therefore like to remind this
body of the provisions of the 1969 Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, which clearly exempts States
that are not party to an international treaty from being
bound by legal obligations under that treaty. Having
carefully studied the sixth annual report of the
International Criminal Court, which covers the period
from 1 August 2009 to 31 July 2010 (A/65/313) and on
which the proposed draft resolution is based, my
delegation was greatly disappointed at the distorted
information regarding my country contained in that
report.

23

A/65/PV.52

We believe those unfounded allegations are
baseless, lack strong legal justification and must
therefore be seen as politically motivated. However, it
is precisely the International Criminal Court’s
partiality and its politicization and double standards
under the guise of administering international justice
that have made my country adamant in refusing to
cooperate with the Court.
The referral of the case of Darfur by the Security
Council to the Court was heavily influenced by
political considerations on the part of some countries
and not based on legal reasoning. The Security Council
is a political organ, and it will be fit to refer cases to
any relevant international legal institutions only when
it has been reformed and its composition is truly
reflective of the four corners of the world, based on
equitable geographical representation, which include
granting Africa two permanent seats with all the
privileges that come with being a permanent member.
The Sudan played an instrumental role in the
initial drafting of the Rome Statute, which eventually
led to the formation of the International Criminal
Court, and the adoption of the Rome Statute in 1998.
The behaviour and practices of the International
Criminal Court to date are contrary to the principles,
objectives and spirit on which the Court was founded.
It is to be recalled that, during the early stages of
establishment of the Court, my country sounded the
alarm about the possible politicization of legal issues
by the Court and voiced concern that the relationship
between the Court and the Security Council, in
accordance with article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute,
could be used and monopolized by some countries as a
Trojan horse in order to advance their own political
interests, with the possibility of violating the norms
and customs of international law.
Today, our predictions, made after the initial
drafting of what became the Rome Statute, have come
true. The selectivity of justice and the double standards
shown by the Court in respect of Africa have generated
condemnation from the highest political organ of a
leading regional organization. The Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Arab League and the African
union have issued statements and resolutions
condemning the Court and its Pre-Trial Chamber for
issuing the so-called arrest warrant. Decision
245 (XIII) of the Assembly of the African Union
explicitly and unequivocally states in paragraph 10 that
African Union member States

24

“shall not cooperate pursuant to the provisions of
Article 98 of the Rome Statute of the ICC relating
to immunities, for the arrest and surrender of
President Omar El Bashir of the Sudan”.
It has created the perception that the Court is not a
neutral institution legally speaking, but is indeed
heavily politicized, which therefore politicizes the
concept of justice as well. Without a shadow of a
doubt, that politicization of the concept of justice will
eventually lead to the militarization of international
relations and disregard for multilateralism, along with
the erosion of the commitment to the United Nations
Charter and the cardinal principles of international law.
The targeting of some African heads of State and
other African officials entitled to jurisdictional
immunity is an affront to the sovereign equality of
African States. That affront will lead to injustice and
undue harassment of African dignitaries and will
constrain the capability and competence of African
States to act as subjects of international law with
international legal personalities that enable them to
conduct foreign affairs and participate in international
affairs.
It is of imperative importance to note that the
International Court of Justice has, in some instances,
reaffirmed the rights of diplomatic immunity as a
cardinal principle of customary international law.
Nevertheless, the Court is of the contrary view with
regard to the immunity of heads of State, which is
evident in last year’s report of the International
Criminal Court (A/64/356), in which the Court stated
that the status of the President of the Republic of the
Sudan, His Excellency Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir,
“as Head of a State not party to the Rome Statute had
no effect on the Court’s exercise of jurisdiction”
(para. 15). That statement contradicts the provisions of
article 98, paragraph 1, of the Rome Statute, which
states that
“The Court may not proceed with a request for
surrender or assistance which would require the
requested State to act inconsistently with its
obligations under international law with respect
to the State or diplomatic immunity of a person or
property of a third State, unless the Court can
first obtain the cooperation of that third State for
the waiver of the immunity.”
The Court has also blatantly ignored the sovereignty of
the Sudanese State by acting unilaterally to waive the

10-64830

A/65/PV.52

President’s immunity before seeking the consent of that
State, as required under article 98 of the Rome Statute.
The statement by the Court regarding the exercise
of its jurisdiction upon an acting head of State without
obtaining cooperation from the State concerned clearly
demonstrates the excessive and abusive powers vested
in the Prosecutor of the Court. The ICC Prosecutor has
become a law unto himself and even an interpreter of
the provisions of the Rome Statute according to his
own wishes, without due consideration for the norms
and practices of international law, peace and security.
It is precisely because of that unchecked power of
the Prosecutor that the ICC is in danger of substituting
the tyranny of Government for the rule of judges.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote. The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.13. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/65/L.13?
Draft resolution
(resolution 65/12).

A/65/L.13

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to consult
members regarding an extension for the work of the
Second Committee. Members will recall that, at its 2nd

10-64830

plenary meeting on 17 September 2010, the General
Assembly approved the recommendation of the
General Committee that the Second Committee would
complete its work by Tuesday, 23 November 2010.
However, the President of the General Assembly has
been informed by the Chairperson of the Second
Committee that the Committee will not be able to
finish its work by today, 23 November 2010. It is my
understanding that the Committee will need to meet
until Wednesday, 1 December 2010. May I therefore
take it that the General Assembly agrees to extend the
work of the Second Committee until Wednesday, 1
December 2010?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I would also like to
inform members that the consideration of agenda
item 117, “Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations”, and agenda item 118, “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, scheduled for
Thursday, 2 December 2010, has been postponed to
Monday, 6 December 2010.
I also wish to remind delegations that they are
invited to complete the survey of conference services
in order to improve the quality of services provided by
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management. The survey may be accessed until
Monday, 13 December 2010 from a number of United
Nations websites, including the General Assembly
website. More information in this regard can be found
in the United Nations Journal.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

25
