UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/20
25 April 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3658th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the interim report of the
Secretary-General concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of
15 April 1996 (S/1996/284). It has also read with appreciation the letter
of the Government of Georgia (S/1996/165) and the proposals on the
political status of Abkhazia contained therein.
"The Security Council notes with deep concern the continued failure of
the parties to achieve a comprehensive political settlement. It also notes
the adverse impact that this failure has on the humanitarian situation and
economic development in the region. It calls upon the parties, in
particular the Abkhaz side, to achieve substantive progress without further
delay.
"The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and of the Russian Federation as
facilitator aimed at achieving a comprehensive political settlement of the
conflict, including on the political status of Abkhazia, respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia. The Council stresses
that the primary responsibility for achieving a comprehensive political
settlement rests upon the parties themselves.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts undertaken by the members
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) as set out in S/1996/74,
annex IV, in support of such a comprehensive political settlement.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continued
obstruction of the return of the refugees and displaced persons by the
Abkhaz authorities, which is totally unacceptable.
"The Security Council expresses its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to find ways of improving the observance of human rights

96-10526 (E)

250496

/...

S/PRST/1996/20
English
Page 2

in the region, as an integral part of the work towards a comprehensive
political settlement.
"The Security Council notes the important contribution made by the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the CIS Collective
Peace-keeping Forces to stabilization of the situation in the zone of
conflict. The Council recalls its encouragement to Member States to make
contributions, in cash or kind, to the voluntary fund in support of the
implementation of the Agreement on a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces
and/or humanitarian aspects including demining. It welcomes the
contributions mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General.
"The Security Council is, however, deeply concerned at the
deterioration in security conditions in the Gali region, which has a
negative effect on the ability of UNOMIG to meet its mandated tasks. The
Council condemns mine laying in the Gali region, which has resulted in loss
of life, including of a UNOMIG military observer. Such mine-laying should
cease. The Council calls on the parties to take all measures in their
power to prevent it. The Council stresses that the international
community’s ability to assist depends on the full cooperation of the
parties, especially the fulfilment of their obligations regarding the
safety and freedom of movement of international personnel.
"The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it informed of the situation."

-----
