United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9079th meeting

Tuesday, 28 June 2022, 5.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Long Qi
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Nanga
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Vinito
Ms. Miley
Ms. Mbabu
Ms. Curzio Vila
Ms. Holbach
Mrs. Gilmutdinova
Ms. Alshamsi
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Simcock

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 21 June 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/499)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40463 (E)
*2240463*

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1) Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) 28/06/2022

The meeting resumed at 5.10 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Security Council to carry out its
work as expeditiously as possible. Flashing lights on
the collars of the microphone will prompt all speakers
to bring their remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): A more transparent and
functional Security Council is vital to gaining public
opinion’s trust in the ability of the United Nations
to ensure international peace and security. That is
why we welcome this open debate and very much
appreciate the presentations by the briefers. We also
commend your efforts, Mr. President, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
The Council is a collective organ whose members,
permanent and non-permanent, should operate on an
equal footing as much as possible. The distribution of
duties among Council members should therefore be
fairer and more balanced where both the chairships of
subsidiary bodies and the practice of penholderships
and co-penholderships are concerned. More generally,
the 10 non-permanent members should be allowed a
greater role in contributing to the work of the Council
and promoting better working methods. Among other
things, we deem it particularly important to ensure
closer cooperation between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and we
look forward to seeing the Council regularly request,
deliberate and draw on the PBC’s specific, strategic and
targeted advice. We are also in favour of consolidating
and further expanding the practice of inviting briefers
from civil society, especially women, to Council
meetings in order to enable Council members to hear
different voices and points of view before deliberating.
Furthermore, we believe that it is important to hold
Security Council meetings in an open format as often
as possible, while closed meetings should be kept to a
minimum, based on the rule of exception according to
which they were intended to be held.
The improvement of working methods is also part
of the broader discussion on comprehensive reform
of the Security Council, which should aim to be a
more transparent, accountable, efficient and, in our
view, democratic body. Improved accessibility to the
Council should be an essential element of the reform,
2/10

as we believe that a greater number of countries should
shoulder the responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Special attention
should be devoted to the regions of the world that are
currently underrepresented. In our view, the expansion
of the Security Council should contemplate a drastically
reinforced presence of the African continent and Arab,
Asian, and Latin American countries, as well as the
possibility for small States and small island developing
States to be regularly represented.
The issue of the use of the veto, regardless of whether
it is actually used or its use is simply threatened, is also
key, as it represents the root cause of the Council’s
inaction. The use of the veto in the Council over the
past month with regard to the Russian aggression in
Ukraine, and more recently the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, further confirmed the paralysing
effect that the power of the veto can have on the
Council’s ability to act.
That is why Italy supports all initiatives aimed at
encouraging self-restraint in the exercise of right of
the veto, such as the French-Mexican initiative and
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, and why we were among the
sponsors of resolution 76/262. That is also the reason
why we are unable to support any reform of the Security
Council that would consider the expansion of the
category of permanent members, as that would generate
additional veto powers and further discrimination with
regard to the roles of the members of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks Albania for convening this open
debate on a topic that has always been of particular
interest to us.
My delegation reiterates that presidential note
S/2017/507 is a valuable tool for increasing the
transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency of the
Security Council, as well as a balanced text that can
serve as a useful guide on agreed measures and best
practices related to the Council’s working methods.
My country has historically advocated the need for
constant efforts to improve transparency, inclusiveness,
openness, democratization and efficiency in the work of
the Security Council. In that regard, we firmly believe
that it is possible and imperative for the Council to be
more transparent and democratic in its relationship
22-40463

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1)

with the wider membership without affecting the
effectiveness of its decision-making.

during the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform.

Undeniably, the working methods of this organ have
seen improvements in recent years, which, of course,
has been as a consequence of the efforts of the elected
members, who, through their patience and commitment,
have successfully engineered such results. We recall
that, in February 2000, during its presidency of the
Security Council, Argentina urged for the adoption of a
note by the President of the Council calling for recently
elected members to be invited as observers at informal
consultations during the month prior to the beginning
of their terms on the Council.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

During Argentina’s previous chairmanship of the
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, for the two-year period from 2013 to 2014,
numerous notes introduced by the Chair on topics such
as consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries, dialogue with non-Council members, the
participation of Council members in the drafting
of Council products and their broader drafting
responsibility and others were adopted.
Argentina values the regular review of the
implementation of presidential note S/2017/507 and
subsequent notes, the identification of best practices
and possible shortcomings, as well as the consideration
of necessary adjustments. In that regard, we urge the
Informal Working Group to continue its work with a
view to creating a single comprehensive document
that can consolidate and streamline all decisions on
working methods. Dialogue between the Council
and other bodies, whether within the United Nations
system or not, is essential to enabling the Security
Council to carry out its functions. The organizations
that we consider crucial to fulfilling the mandate of
the Council include the Peacebuilding Commission,
the International Criminal Court and humanitarian
assistance organizations. The Security Council has
many responsibilities, and fulfilling them demands
effective coordination with other stakeholders. The
Council’s job is to maintain international peace and
security and Argentina does not want to see it absorbing
the functions of other bodies.
In conclusion, we know that the goal here is to
improve the working methods of the Security Council
and its culture with regard to making decisions and
ensuring its effectiveness. That is why Argentina
welcomes the constructive discussions on the issue

Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation supports efforts to ensure
efficiency and transparency in the work of the Security
Council and to improve its working methods in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We would like to focus on the following points.
First, membership of the Security Council requires
all its members, and especially the President, to
communicate professionally with non-member States
that are being discussed as items on the Council’s
agenda. They should conduct a constructive dialogue
with them and take their concerns into consideration
when drafting resolutions and issuing presidential and
press statements, without attempting to antagonize,
exclude or alienate them.
Secondly, it is important to streamline the Council’s
efforts, time and resources by limiting the number of
intense and recurring meetings held in a short space
of time about the situation in a specific country. Such
meetings should not be used as a platform to put
pressure on the country concerned or to offend it, but
should be used for objective and constructive debate
aimed at finding solutions to crises.
Thirdly, the working methods and practices of the
Security Council must be respected. They should not
be used selectively, based on the whims and interests
of certain States.
Fourthly, it is important to respect individual
mandates. The Security Council should work within
its own mandate and not encroach on those of other
United Nations bodies such as the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council or others. Neither should
the General Assembly violate Article 12 of the Charter,
which states that the Assembly should not make any
recommendations with regard to a situation being
discussed by the Council.
Fifthly, it is important to mitigate the impact
of Security Council sanctions on the humanitarian
situation of the populations of targeted countries and to
rationalize their use. Sanctions should not be considered
an end in themselves. When they are implemented, we
have seen that they primarily affect ordinary citizens,
making them suffer and depriving them of their right

22-404633/10

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1) Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) 28/06/2022

to a dignified life, food, health care, development and
other basic human rights.
Sixthly, it is essential to limit the length of
statements during open debates with the participation
of many delegations, in order to ensure that all Member
States have an equal opportunity to speak. However,
restricting the right of States concerned in an agenda
item to express their position in meetings in which
their countries’ situations are being discussed thwarts
their ability to present their national perspectives and
respond to the concerns raised.
Lastly, we welcome the participation of
representatives of civil society and non-governmental
organizations in open briefings, but they should bring
added value to the Council’s work. Briefers should
benefit the Council with their experience of the subject
under discussion, and their participation should in no
way constitute an attack on or offend any Member
State, promote biased points of view or convey a false or
non-objective picture of the situation under discussion.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the efforts
that were made to enable the Security Council to
continue its work during the unprecedented emergency
circumstances resulting from the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Due to the time
limitations, I will read an abbreviated version of our
statement. At the outset, I would like to thank Albania
for organizing today’s debate and the briefers for
their insights.
The coronavirus disease pandemic posed an
unprecedented challenge to the working methods
of every organ of the United Nations. In retrospect,
we believe that the Council has shown remarkable
resilience. As we reflect on the working arrangements
devised since March 2020, we believe that some have
demonstrated their value and should be given proper
consideration even after the restrictions are lifted.
First, we encourage continuing the practice
whereby briefers join meetings of the Security Council
via video link. It enables the Council to consider the
participation of a larger pool of potential briefers and
therefore benefit from a wider range of information
sources and views informing its deliberations.
4/10

Secondly, Slovakia has consistently supported
efforts aimed at enhancing the openness of the work of
the Security Council. In that regard, open debates have
always played a central role. My delegation endorses
the practice of enabling the submission of written
statements from non-members of the Council during
open debates.
As the concept note (see S/2022/499, annex) points
out, the Council implemented successful innovations
in its working methods in the context of progressively
deepening divisions. The decrease in unanimity on
Council decisions and an overall increase in the number
of vetoes cast have prevented the Council from acting
on matters that continue to represent fundamental
challenges to international peace and security. It is only
very recently that we have seen Russia, in the position
of aggressor, make shocking use of the power of the
veto. That flagrant abuse of the veto and the Charter
of the United Nations should become a much-needed
impetus to reform of the Council. In the meantime,
we would like to recall the importance of the General
Assembly’s recent adoption of resolution 76/262, along
with the Accountability, Coherency and Transparency
group’s code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, and the French-Mexican initiative on veto
restraint in cases of mass atrocities.
My delegation would like to underline the
need to fully implement the existing measures and
commitments set out in the updated note of the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) of 2017
and the subsequent 13 notes. In the interests of time, I
will mention only four points.
First, we encourage further strengthening
the
Council’s
substantive
engagement
and
sharing
of
information
with
troopand
police-contributing countries.
Secondly, the Council should consider further
developing a more active and meaningful relationship
with the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council and other relevant bodies, as well as the
International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, the working methods of the Council’s
subsidiary organs should be further improved,
especially in instances that can affect the human rights
of the people concerned and their right to due process.
Lastly, interaction and dialogue between the
Council and other Member States, particularly those
22-40463

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

directly concerned and affected by a specific situation,
should be further enhanced and widened. We appreciate
the recent thorough application of rule 37 and encourage
its continuation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Ms. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation once again welcomes Albania’s presidency of
the Security Council for this month and commends the
way it has led the work of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We listened to the valuable briefings by Ms. Sievers
and Ms. Landgren and appreciate today’s open debate
between the Council and the wider membership, which
is a practical way of improving the Council’s working
methods. Egypt also values presidential note S/2017/507
and other proposals that can contribute to improving
the work of the Council and making it more effective.
In that context, we would like to share the following
points with a view to improving the working methods
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.
First, there should be more Council briefings to all
Member States. Their views regarding the programme
of work must be heard, and they should be kept informed
about the Council’s visits and various activities. The
Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and their committees
should also brief Member States periodically.
Secondly, the number of various public meetings,
whether of the Security Council itself or its subsidiary
bodies and Sanctions Committees, should also be
increased. We would like to point out that the Security
Council represents all Member States and acts on their
behalf, and its meetings should therefore be public,
with the exception of those that address issues relating
to the national security of States and are kept closed at
their request.
Thirdly, in order to ensure genuine and serious
discussions between the Council and the wider
membership, Member States must be informed about
draft resolutions and presidential statements before
the Council and the consultations about them. Member
States must be given every possible opportunity to
provide the Council with their views and proposals about
those draft resolutions and presidential statements.
Fourthly, it is important to strengthen coordination
between the Security Council and the neighbours of
States in conflict situations, as well as with regional

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1)

organizations, especially the League of Arab States and
the African Union.
Fifthly, the Security Council should strengthen
its consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries pertaining to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, as provided for in paragraph 91 of presidential
note S/2017/507.
Sixthly, it is crucial that the subsidiary bodies of
the Council, especially their Sanctions Committees and
panels of experts, hold consultations with the countries
concerned when preparing the related reports.
Lastly, the countries concerned must be invited to
participate in the meetings of the relevant subsidiary
bodies and committees, as stipulated in paragraphs 101
to 110 of presidential note S/2017/507.
In conclusion, it must be acknowledged that
while numerous proposals have been made regarding
improving the working methods of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies and Sanctions Committees, what is
essential is ensuring that there is sufficient political
will to implement them and a belief that developing
those methods will constitute added value, which
will lend them greater credibility in the eyes of the
wider membership. The opposite is obviously true as
well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Nzessioue (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): At the outset, the Central African Republic
would like to congratulate Albania on its presidency
of the Security Council. I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the initiative to convene this
open debate, which enables us to hold an exchange of
views on the Security Council’s working methods.
It has now been almost 10 not-so-glorious years
since the Central African Republic first found itself on
the Security Council’s agenda. From our experience,
we have observed a negative trend whereby the
penholdership has been held by either one or a very
limited number of countries. As a result, the decisions
that are imposed are often unilateral and serve the
penholders’ national agendas rather than addressing
the reality on the ground and helping to find solutions.
Penholders often steer the drafting of Council documents
without holding the appropriate consultations with the
countries on the Council’s agenda or, worse still, while
ignoring their main points of view and concerns. For

22-404635/10

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1) Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) 28/06/2022

example, the concerns of the Central African Republic
were not taken into account during the latest negotiations
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, which obliged us to make
sure that we shared them with Council members. Such
an approach can only have a negative impact on efforts
to resolve crises and implement the mandates of United
Nations missions.
All members of the Council should have the same
opportunities to participate fully and meaningfully
in the drafting of Council documents, including
resolutions, presidential statements and press releases,
in line with paragraphs 78 and 79 of presidential note
S/2017/507. The Security Council should extend that
opportunity to all of its members, permanent and
non-permanent alike, on an equal and equitable footing.
When it comes to African affairs, special attention
must be paid to the views of the three African members
of the Council, which have the necessary capacity and
expertise to take on that difficult task. For example,
when the crisis broke out in my country in 2013, it
was Africa that first came to our aid. The same was
true when it came to negotiating a peace agreement,
where Africa assumed a leadership role that led to the
signing on 6 February 2019 of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Today Africa continues to lead the process for
the revitalization of the peace agreement in the Central
African Republic. For us it is therefore self-evident that
Africa’s voice must be reflected within the Security
Council and that reforming the Council in order to
grant Africa a permanent seat is essential. That would
make the Council’s work more effective and ensure
that its documents are drafted in an inclusive way that
enables the full participation of all members. Texts
must be drafted by penholders and co-penholders in an
impartial and responsible manner and based on credible
sources of information, in order to help the Council to
take appropriate, effective and timely decisions.
Finally, with regard to sanctions regimes, the
Central African Republic believes it is crucial to
implement a mechanism for their regular evaluation,
based on well-defined criteria, in order to objectively
judge the consistency, coherence, appropriateness and
effectiveness of sanctions with regard to their objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
6/10

Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): We thank Albania for
organizing this debate, as we believe that the Council
should continue to improve its working methods and
the ways in which it relates to the wider membership.
We propose the following concrete steps within the
scope of the guiding questions included in the concept
note (S/2022/499, annex).
First, where exceptional circumstances prohibit the
Council from functioning as intended, we acknowledge
that presidential note S/2021/1074 reflects the
importance of ensuring that it can function without
interruption. However, we need to add some content to
that minimal acknowledgement, because in our view
that general statement might not be sufficient for the
Council to deal effectively with a serious crisis, such
as that in Ukraine, if it is unable to function fully
and properly. While a serious crisis may be less likely
to occur in conditions of pandemic lockdowns, for
example, the Council needs to have contingency plans
for all eventualities. These plans need not be overly
prescriptive, given that the nature of every single crisis
cannot be foreseen, but they do need to include the
ability to physically gather a representative from each
Council member for decisions to be made, and they
do need to designate, for example, a location beyond
the Council Chamber for meetings to take place if the
United Nations headquarters is affected by a disaster.
In further codifying its functioning under unforeseen
circumstances, the Council must ensure that it can take
all necessary action without delay, that it can enforce its
decisions, that its work is transparent and accessible to
non-members of the Council, and that it can effectively
interact with those Member States that are directly
affected by its work.
Secondly, as we have stated many times before, the
Council needs to do better vis-à-vis the Member States
that are directly affected by its work. Establishing an
informal channel through the presidency might help the
Council to account for the perspective of the conflict
State under discussion, especially prior to consideration
of the situation in that State. We reiterate our suggestion
that the Member State primarily involved in the situation
under discussion be invited to offer its perspective
in closed consultations, before the Council begins
its closed deliberations. Increased interaction and
transparency are even more warranted in cases where
the Council has deployed a peacekeeping operation in
a Member State, not only because good cooperation
between the host Government and the peacekeeping
operation is crucial for the latter’s success, but because
22-40463

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

host-country consent and cooperation have been central
to peacekeeping since its inception.
Thirdly, we see room for improvement in terms of
the availability of information on the Council’s work
to all its non-members. While we welcome wrap-up
sessions and monthly reports, we see the need for more
frequent debriefings on the work of the Council and
more open channels of communication with respect
to changes to its programme of work. Over and above
this, of course, we would like to see an effort to directly
provide affected States with information relating to the
work of the Council that specifically affects them. We
believe that affected States should not have to rely on
the goodwill of individual members of the Council or
the penholder for this information.
Lastly, let me say a word on how technology
might advance the functioning of the Council in the
wake of the coronavirus disease experience. While
technology can add value in cases where, for example,
briefers cannot attend a meeting physically, the use of
technology should be measured by its contribution to
the core function of the Council. Technology cannot
substitute for the knowledge of local circumstances
that the Council needs to have to deal with a situation
effectively; this knowledge is best gained through visits
on the ground. And while high-level participation is
facilitated by technology and can help draw attention to
certain issues, our priority should remain the Council’s
ability to take action and implement its decisions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya): I thank the President for
arranging today’s meeting and giving us the opportunity
to speak on this important topic. I also want to thank
the briefers today.
My statement will be brief. I intend to make on
a few precise points on the topic before the Council
today, specifically as it relates to countries affected
or countries on the agenda of the Security Council. I
would start by referring to the rights of countries on the
Council’s agenda or of countries under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter. There are four main issues
of concern, and we think that they are related to the
Council’s working methods.
Most of the speakers today spoke about the 15
members of the Security Council, but we did not hear
much about the rights of countries on the Security
Council’s agenda. For example, when we talk about the

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1)

drafting of and consultations on Council resolutions,
what is the norm? The norm is that the penholder will
produce a draft, circulate it among the members of the
Council, and then, depending on the goodwill of some
representatives in the Council, the country affected
will be notified. However, Council members are not
mandated to do so. Bilateral relations therefore play a
part, which puts countries affected at the mercy of such
relations, which is not fair. What we are requesting
is to be properly consulted. The point of view of the
country should be reflected in the draft resolution
related to it. The country concerned should at least be
officially heard.
The same thing goes with presidential statements
and press releases that come out of the Council. Drafts
are circulated, Council members share comments with
each other, and we are lucky if our good friends tell us
what is going on. And our comments, when we provide
them, are not necessarily quoted as those of the State
concerned, as if the matter does not belong to us. That
is neither right nor proper.
Thirdly, there is a similar situation in terms of
the work of the sanctions committees. For example,
whenever the Panel of Experts produces a report, it is
presented to Council members. We get a chance to read
it in a closed office, but our views and comments on
the findings are not taken into consideration. We do
not have the slightest bit of room to question some of
the errors that reports contain, which could be simple
human mistakes and not necessarily something to do
with the substance. Yet, the report comes out, and then
we have to argue about the avoidable inaccuracies in it.
The exemptions to sanctions-related matters as
well as embargo issues are also a concern. We hear
about them, and we know about them, but through our
own channels. We are not officially informed that there
is an exemption request that has been sent with respect
to the country concerned.
Everything that I am saying has happened with
my country, Libya, for the past 11 years. I am sure that
there are many other countries that are facing the same
situation. This is something related to working methods.
The affected country has the right to be notified and
to give comments. The Council can then take the
comments or leave them, but that is a separate issue.
Fourthly, and finally, there have been difficulties
in terms of appointing special representatives of the
Secretary-General. The Council has been facing this

22-404637/10

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1) Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) 28/06/2022

issue frequently, including with regard to my country.
Whenever the Secretary-General tries to appoint a
special representative, he must deal with the dynamics
of the Council to get its members’ approval. But the
country concerned itself is only notified, not consulted,
and its point of view is not necessarily taken seriously.
The proper way should be that whenever a special
representative is proposed, there is a consultation
with the country concerned and with political players
in that country, to reach consensus on the proposed
special representative. After that, the proposed
appointment can be presented to the Security Council
so it can reach its own consensus, if needed. But it
is not fair to appoint a special representative without
the country — or the political parties, or whoever is
involved in the country — not having the right to say
yes or no; we should have a say in the matter. We could
cite many examples on this point.
To summarize, the issue before us is not one of
negotiations among Council members. It is a question
of the right of the countries affected, specifically those
under Chapter VII, which have the right to provide their
input and should be taken seriously. It should not be
just a favour done to the country in question to notify
it of what drafts are in process or resolutions being
discussed, and so on.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Geisler (Germany): Germany welcomes
Albania’s initiative to discuss working methods and
thanks the briefers for their insightful briefings.
During its last tenure in the Security Council, in
2019-2020, Germany attached great importance to
fostering the transparency and accountability of the
Council. We therefore welcome the increased number
of open and public debates. We encourage future
presidencies to continue along these lines, and we call
on Council members to stop blocking certain topics
from being discussed publicly, as a matter of principle.
Time and again non-members of the Security
Council are directly affected by the situation in
countries that the Council discusses. These States
have a legitimate interest in making their voice heard.
In line with paragraph 74 of note of the President
S/2017/507, which stipulates that the Security Council’s
work is a collective endeavour, we believe that
presidencies should, to the greatest extent possible,
give these countries the opportunity to participate in
8/10

accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. Artificially limiting the number of
participants would seriously undermine the Council’s
inclusivity and legitimacy.
During its most recent Security Council tenure,
Germany actively fostered the participation of civilsociety briefers in Council debates. We welcome the
fact that this has become a best practice. Germany
is very concerned that in some recent cases civilsociety briefers have had to face threats after making
statements in the Council. That is utterly unacceptable.
We call on each States Member of the United Nations
to allow civil-society briefers to speak openly in the
Council and to counter all forms of pressure on them.
We also wish to increase the Council’s effectiveness
and legitimacy by strengthening its cooperation with
other United Nations bodies. We currently see a need to
discuss threats to international peace and security and to
agree on preventive measures and peace consolidation.
For that reason, a clear and complementary division
of labour between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) will be key. For quite
a while now Germany has pushed for closer coordination
and greater complementarity between both forums. We
are happy to see that Kenya, as the current coordinator
between the Security Council and the PBC, is actively
working towards greater coherence. We will continue
to support those efforts.
Finally but most importantly, the use of the veto
remains the main reason why the Security Council is
not currently living up to its tasks as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. The blatant abuse of the
veto on a draft resolution on Ukraine in February (see
S/PV.8979) once again brought that to the fore. Such
action has to stop. We were a proud co-sponsor of
resolution 76/262, and we support initiatives to limit the
use of the veto such as the one by France and Mexico
in cases where the Security Council faces situations of
mass atrocities or genocide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Koudri (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express the congratulations of my country’s delegation
to the Republic of Albania on its wise leadership of the
work of the Security Council this month. I also wish to
thank the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.
22-40463

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

In recent years the Council has made tireless
efforts to strengthen its working methods and increase
transparency, in particular through the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Presidential note S/2017/507 was
also an important milestone in improving the Council’s
working methods.
Improving the Council’s working methods is
an ongoing process. It is a collective endeavour
undertaken by the members of the Council as well as
all Member States. Advising on best practices is not an
end in itself; rather, best practices constitute a means
to strengthen the effectiveness of the Council and
guarantee implementation, given their impact on the
Council’s ability to effectively and efficiently carry out
its mandate.
Today’s meeting on the working methods of the
Security Council is taking place at a time when the
world is recovering to various degrees from the effects
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We must
draw lessons and move forward towards becoming a
United Nations that carries out its responsibilities with
maximum efficiency and reflects our commitment to
the values and objectives of multilateral action.
In the context of today’s debate, I would like to
underscore the following points that we consider key in
terms of building upon the practices that were adopted
during the pandemic and to ensure that the Council is
ready to face such circumstances in future.
First, the Council must be flexible. That flexibility
was of great importance during the pandemic and a
decisive factor in the Council’s effectiveness.
Secondly, the use of modern technologies has
become a new reality. Ensuring the continuity of the
Council’s work was the greatest challenge during the
pandemic, and that challenge was addressed thanks to
the technological capacity of the Secretariat and the
political will of Member States. However, there are
shortcomings that must be addressed, in particular
ensuring that public debates held in a virtual format
allow for the broadest possible participation of States
Members of the United Nations.
However, the measures adopted during that
period should not become rules for working methods
under ordinary circumstances. Rather, they should be
exclusively employed in similar circumstances.

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, it is important to maintain interaction
with States that are not members of the Council,
in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which states that the Council acts
on their behalf. That requires full transparency in
dealing between the Council and Member States.
In that context, as a candidate for the membership
of the Security Council for the period 2024-2025,
Algeria calls for strengthening interaction between the
Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
States that are preparing to join the Council so that
they are better prepared and able to participate more
effectively in the Council’s work.
Fourthly, it is essential for the Council to remain
united. Its unity is what allowed it to face the
challenges brought by the pandemic. We underscore
the importance of the Council’s unity, in particular
during decision-taking amid a complex world and
increased challenges. It is imperative to overcome
differences between Member States through dialogue
and finding solutions that meet our common interests
and strengthen genuine multilateralism.
Fifthly, a comprehensive approach should be
taken to understand the nature of conflicts. Broad,
transparent and open communication, in particular
with the involvement of regional organizations, should
be the norm in order to allow the Council to develop
a more comprehensive global vision that allows its
members to take better decisions.
Improving the Council’s working methods is a
long-term task. Algeria stands ready to contribute to
it. We are fully convinced that by constantly improving
its working methods, the Council will be able to better
carry out its tasks pursuant to the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to representative
of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): At the outset, may I
express my appreciation to the Albanian presidency of
the Security Council for having convened this meeting
and inviting non-Council members to participate in the
debate on the working methods of the Council.
The Security Council is entrusted by the Charter
of the United Nations with the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. To
carry out that task effectively, the Council’s work must
be transparent, objective and resilient for the benefit of

22-404639/10

S/PV.9079 (Resumption 1) Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) 28/06/2022

the greater international community as a whole rather
than of a specific group of elite countries, with a view
to improving the efficiency of the Council’s working
methods. That being said, I should like to highlight the
following points.

effectiveness and specific capacities of the purported
delinquent State in order to maximize its exposure,
with multilateral oversight equipped with those best
vestiges of statehood to help the State under the holding
regime to become involved in a positive engagement.

There has been a debate in recent years about
the Security Council’s encroachment on the powers
of other organs of the Organization, particularly
the General Assembly. The reform of the Council’s
working methods under Article 24 requires the Council
to adhere to its Charter-mandated functions. A quick
glance at the Council’s agenda reveals that it is rapidly
expanding, necessitating a pause for reflection and
meaningful review.

Penholdership therefore seems to lack transparency.
It is nothing more than a self-mandated authoritarian
guardianship that holds the State in a post-modern box,
managed by a one-dimensional patronship.

It is critical that the Security Council’s tasks
and responsibilities be distributed democratically,
transparently and objectively among its members. The
so-called penholdership is a particular source of concern
in that regard. For instance, on what grounds does one
country become a penholder while another does not?
What are the limits of the penholder’s responsibilities?
How can we ensure that the penholder does not turn
into a stick-holder?
Penholdership reform is but an actualization of
the principle of the sovereign equality of all States
Members of the United Nations. It was also possible
to bring about, especially compared with the reform
debated at length on the veto power and the permanent
membership of the Council. Moreover, penholding was
based more or less on the past colonial relationship
between the penholding Member State and the
Member State against which the pen is being held.
That is a bizarre contradiction, which runs counter to
the principal objective of the United Nations Charter
regarding decolonization.
Penholdership, per se, has manifested itself as
a robust one-dimensional power of overseeing the
national self-interest of the penholding State to the
detriment of the State under quasi-trusteeship. One
can hardly equate it with a system of governance or
an advisory task relating to the swift navigation of the
State, which was put on hold from its status quo to an
experimental correctness of its situation.
One would think that it would enshrine an equitable
and positive sharing of expertise, wisdom and political
experience, with a view to improving the dire condition
of the target State by the strange paroxysm of perpetual
holding. One would aspire that it would engender

10/10

Penholdership is in need of restructuring, reviewing
and reinventing, if it is not outdated. If it continues, it
must respect the multilateral interests of the State under
the penholdership and the fact that it enjoys equitable
sovereignty and has dignity and pride.
As it tends to be an absolute directorship — a facility,
not a blatant subduing or overlordship — it should be
freed from politicization, whereby a State under a
regime of sanctions is not stripped of its statehood and
membership rights.
Penholding is procedural. It is never meant to be
substantive, perpetual or manipulative to undermine
one’s State national interests, in particular its
multilateral rights to enjoy membership of all United
Nations institutions and committees.
It does not consider positively the balance of
interests that encompass the State for whose oversight
the pen was held. It should not be a mandatory vehicle
for maximizing the overseeing State’s national selfinterests to the total detriment of the State that was put
on hold.
We adhere to the stand that the sanctions
mechanism must be reviewed in order to take into
consideration the following remarks. There should be
an assessment of the potential impact of the sanctions
on the target State. The States under sanctions regimes
should be involved in the assessment process. Sanctions
should be fine-tuned to reverse the resultant suffering.
Claims of impacted States should be given priority in
humanitarian assistance.
Improving the Security Council’s working methods
is a long-term endeavour. We are confident that the
Security Council will be better able to carry out the
mandate given to it by the States Members of the United
Nations if it continually and persistently improves its
working methods and practices.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

22-40463
