57

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commhtee

the Cook Islands 13 and the information on subsequent
developments, 14
H aving heard the statements made by the United
Nations Representative for the Supervision oí the
Elections in the Cook Islands and the representative oí
N ew Zealand,
N oting that, under the Constitution which came into
force on 4 August 1965, the people of the Cook Islands
have reserved their right to move to a status oí complete
independence,
l. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Comrnittec on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countrics and Peoples relating to the Cook Islands;
2. No tes the finclings and conclusions of the United
Nations Representative for the Supervision of the Elections in the Cook Islands and expresses its high appreciation to the Representative and bis staff;
3. E.xpresses íts appreciation of the co-operation extended to the United Nations by the Government of
N ew Zealand in the study of the question of the Cook
Islands;
4. No tes that the Constitution of the Cook Islands
carne into force on 4 August 1965, from which date
the people of the Cook Islands have had control of
their interna! affairs and of their future;
5. Considers that since the Cook Islands have attained full interna! self-government, the transmission
of information in respect of the Cook Islands under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations is
no longer necessary ;
6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United
Nations, under General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), to assist the people oí the Cook Is!ands in the
eventual achievement of full independence, if they so
wish, at a future date ;
7. E.xpresses the hope that the United Nations Development Programme and the specialized agencies will
endeavour to contribute in every way possible to the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Cook Islands.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2065 (XX}. Question of the Falkland lslands
(Malvinas)
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas),
Taking ínto account the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), 1 ~ and in particular the conclusions and recommendations adopted
by the Committee with reference to that Territory,
Considering that its resolution 1514 (XV) oí 14
December 1960 was prompted by the cherished aim of
bringing to an end everywhere colonialism in all its
13 !bid., Twentieth Session, Antie.res, agenda itcms 23 and
24, document A/5962.
14 !bid., document A/5961.
15 /bid., Nineteenth Session, Anne.res, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter XXIII; ibid., Twentieth Session Anne.res, addendum to agenda ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter

XXII.

forms, one of which covers the case of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas),
N oting the existence of a dispute between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning sovereignty over the said Islands,
I. Invites the Governments of Argentina and the
Unitecl Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to proceed without delay with the negotiations recommended by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples with a view to finding a peaceful solution
to the problem, bearing in rnind the provisions and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests of the population of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas):
2. R('quests thc two Governments to report to the
Spccial Committce and to the General Assembly at its
twcnty-first session on the results of the negotiations.
1398th plcnary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2066 (XX). Question of Mauritius
The General Assembly,
H a-zn·ng considercd the question of Mauritius and
other islands composing the Territory oí Mauritius,
lI aving examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Mauritius, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Regretting that the administering Power has not
fully implemented resolution 1514 (XV) with regard
to that Territory,
N oting with deep concern that any step taken by
the administering Power to detach certain islands from
the Territory of Mauritius for the purpose of establishing a military base would be in contravention of the
Declarat.ion, and in particular of paragraph 6 thereoí,
l. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Cornmittee on the Situation with regard to the
Irnplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Mauritius, and endorses the
conclusions and recornmendations of the Special Committee contained therein ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory of Mauritius to freedorn and independence
in accord:mce with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Invites the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland to take effective
measures with a view to the immediate and full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to take no action
which would dismember the Territory of Mauritius
and violate its territorial integrity;
16 lbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter XIV: ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1) chapter

XIII.

'
