S/PV.7171

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7171st meeting

Monday, 12 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Kazragienė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2014/319)

14-33072 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1433072*

S/PV.7171

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Governments of Uganda and South Sudan to withdraw
some of their troops from the African Union’s regional
intervention force responsible for the struggle against
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2014/319)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/319, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moussa.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): I have the honour
and privilege to introduce today the sixth report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas (S/2014/319).
The report before the Council stresses that the
political and security situation in Central Africa
remains fragile. Since the previous report published
in November 2013 (S/2013/671), armed violence has
undermined efforts to promote and ensure stability
in the subregion. Moreover, new cross-border
challenges have emerged. In particular, the outbreak
of communal violence in the Central African Republic
since December 2013 has had considerable regional
impact, given the serious consequences of the crisis
on the security, economic and humanitarian fields for
neighbouring countries.
At the same time, the violence that has broken out
in South Sudan since December 2013 has jeopardized
the implementation of the African Union’s Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army. The crisis in South Sudan has led the

2/19

12/05/2014

The Boko Haram group, based in Nigeria, is another
cause of serious concern for Central Africa. That
Islamist group continues to exploit the porous borders
between north-eastern Nigeria and neighbouring States,
and the recent intensification of its violent activities
have grave security and humanitarian consequences
for Cameroon and Chad. Last month, the kidnapping
by Boko Haram of more than 200 school girls near the
border of Cameroon and Chad and the statements by its
leaders that the girls would be sold resulted, rightly, in
a strong condemnation by the international community.
(spoke in English)
The report before the Council also details the
initiatives of UNOCA to promote stability in the
subregion during the reporting period. Of note, my
missions to Chad, Cameroon, the Congo and the
Democratic Republic of Congo highlighted the regional
consequences of the crisis in the Central African
Republic, including humanitarian challenges faced
by Governments and United Nations agencies. Those
States also expressed concern that flows of weapons,
activities by armed groups and sectarian violence may
spread across the Central African Republic’s borders
and threaten their own stability.
UNOCA continued its collaboration with the
African Union to coordinate international efforts
within the framework of the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threat and impact of the Lord’s
Resistance Army. I am pleased to inform the Council
that the number of LRA-related deaths, abductions and
displaced persons have continued to decline, while
military operations and the defection campaign have
further weakened the LRA. During the fourth ministerial
meeting of the Joint Coordinating Mechanism of the
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the Lord’s Resistance Army, participating countries
renewed their political commitment to the initiative by
endorsing my proposal to convene a high-level summit
on the Lord’s Resistance Army, as mandated by this
body, and agreeing to review progress on a quarterly
basis.
UNOCA also supported initiatives to promote
cooperation among Central African States on critical
security challenges, notably piracy and armed robbery

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

in the Gulf of Guinea. The recent convening of the first
Interregional Working Group on the establishment
of the Interregional Coordination Centre reaffirmed
the commitment of Gulf of Guinea States to combat
maritime insecurity coherently. The elaboration of the
2014-2016 road map and action plan for operationalizing
the Interregional Coordination Centre, starting in June
2014, is a welcome development.
While those are some of UNOCA’s efforts for
the latest reporting period, I would like to take the
opportunity to highlight some of the overarching
achievements during my three-year tenure as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa and Head of UNOCA.
First, UNOCA organized five ministerial meetings
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), upon
assuming secretariat functions in 2011. UNOCA has
ensured that this forum has a real impact on addressing
security threats in Central Africa. Poaching and
transnational crime are now standing agenda items at
UNSAC meetings, and UNSAC decisions have resulted
in a series of initiatives to support States in developing
an integrated counter-terrorism strategy for Central
Africa.
Secondly, UNOCA signed and elaborated
a framework of cooperation with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) in
2012 in the area of peace and security. UNOCA has
supported the enhancement of ECCAS capacity in the
area of mediation, and has systematically encouraged
and facilitated the inclusion of ECCAS in joint
missions within the subregion. UNOCA has forged a
solid partnership with ECCAS, which has proven to be
mutually beneficial. Close cooperation takes place at
the strategic and operational levels.
Thirdly, UNOCA, together with the United Nations
Office for West Africa, supported three subregional
organizations — ECCAS, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission — in organizing a successful regional
Heads of State Summit in June 2013 in Yaoundé
on piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.
Mandated by the Council through resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012), the initiative established the
framework to combat maritime insecurity in the Gulf
of Guinea through a comprehensive global approach.
UNOCA continues to work with those subregional

S/PV.7171

organizations to operationalize the decisions adopted
at the Summit.
Fourthly, UNOCA, together with the Department
of Political Affairs, spearheaded the development
of the United Nations regional strategy to address
the threat and impact of the LRA, which the Council
endorsed in June 2012. That was followed, in 2013,
by the development of an implementation plan of
activities. Routine joint diplomatic missions with the
African Union Special Envoy for the Lord’s Resistance
Army Issue and the convening of the biannual meeting
of LRA focal points have ensured the integration of
political, military and civilian efforts. Significant gains
have been made over the past three years. Overall, we
have overseen a period of forward momentum, which
must be maintained well into the post-Kony phase.
Central Africa lies at the heart of the continent.
It is rich in resources, yet remains one of the most
underdeveloped and volatile subregions in Africa. Its
potential, however, is unlimited. I have observed firsthand the political commitment of ECCAS member
States to address critical challenges such as the crisis
in the Central African Republic and piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. However, despite the efforts made by
leaders of Central African countries and their peoples,
the subregion remains fragile and continues to require
ongoing support from the international community,
particularly the United Nations. I am confident that,
with the Council’s continuing support and guidance,
UNOCA will continue to play an instrumental role in
supporting the States of the subregion in confronting
the pressing challenges that threaten peace, stability
and development in Central Africa.
As I depart, I am honoured to have been given the
opportunity to shepherd UNOCA since its establishment
in 2011. I would like to take this opportunity to
wish Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, the incoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and Head of UNOCA, success in carrying out
his mandate.
I would like to recognize the Heads of State and
Government of Central Africa for their cooperation.
I wish to express my gratitude to the subregional and
regional organizations, notably the African Union,
ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. On the
LRA, I have particularly enjoyed the constructive
partnerships with the Special Envoy of the African
Union on the LRA issue, Francisco Madeira, and

14-330723/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

numerous non-governmental organizations. My thanks
go to the United Nations Resident Coordinators in
Central Africa and the Heads of United Nations
missions and entities in and around the subregion for
their collaboration. I want to acknowledge the guidance
and support provided by the Department of Political
Affairs and to thank all the colleagues in my office.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to
the Secretary-General for the opportunity to serve as
his Special Representative for Central Africa and to the
members of the Council for their steadfast support to
UNOCA during my tenure.
The President: I thank Mr. Moussa for his briefing.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa for his statement this morning. I pay tribute to
him for his contribution to peace and security in the
Central African region during his tenure at the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The United Kingdom looks forward to working closely
with his successor, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bathily, on the broad range of issues
that UNOCA is working to address.
The Central African region is beset by a wide range
of security challenges: armed groups, which exploit
local populations and natural resources to sustain
their way of life; piracy, which damages regional
prosperity and security; terrorism, which strikes fear
into communities; and internal conflict, which results
in human rights abuses and threats to democracy. What
those challenges have in common is that they cross
borders. Overcoming them requires the support and
cooperation of neighbouring countries. That is why the
work of UNOCA is central to consolidating peace and
preventing conflict in the region.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has struck
fear into the lives of civilians in the heart of Africa
for almost 30 years. It remains an abhorrent menace
to peace and security across the region. The concerted
efforts of Uganda, the other affected countries, the
African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners have substantially weakened the LRA.
Our goal now must be the permanent eradication of
the threat it poses. Countries of the region and the
international community must further their efforts to
achieve security and stability in the affected countries.
That means all regional Governments fulfilling their
commitments under the African Union’s Regional

4/19

12/05/2014

Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army and ensuring that the AU Regional
Task Force is fully operational in conducting patrols
in their territory. Until that happens, the LRA will
continue to evade capture by moving across the porous
borders of affected countries, continuing to carry out
their reprehensible acts of criminality with impunity.
Cross-border coordination between the United
Nations missions and the LRA-affected countries must
also be enhanced. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) should ensure that they
coordinate closely with the AU Regional Task Force,
sharing information rapidly and harmonizing troop
deployments. That will help to ensure that the LRA no
longer has safe havens in areas of the Central African
Republic currently out of reach of the Regional Task
Force. The United Kingdom also calls on the Sudanese
Government to ensure that the Kafia Kingi enclave
does not become a safe haven for the LRA.
Turning to another aspect of UNOCA’s broader
role, UNOCA coordinates activity to combat the illegal
wildlife trade. Central Africa has displayed the highest
levels of poaching on the African continent and has
lost two thirds of its elephant population since 2004.
Poaching and the illegal wildlife trade not only threaten
individual species, but also strike at the heart of our
goals for good governance, the protection of national
and regional security and sustainable economic
development. The United Kingdom welcomes steps
taken by regional partners to address those issues. Chad
recently burned over a ton of its ivory stockpile, thereby
showing that it will not tolerate the trade in elephants,
and Ethiopia has committed to similar action.
There are a number of alarming developments
in the wider region. The United Kingdom remains
extremely concerned about the situation in the Central
African Republic. The humanitarian situation is dire,
and armed groups continue to commit human rights
abuses and to terrorize communities across the country.
The United Kingdom welcomes the decision to deploy
MINUSCA from 15 September 2014, which will help
to improve security in the country with the goal of
promoting reconciliation and recovery.
The United Kingdom also continues to be concerned
by rising political tensions and the closing of political
space in Burundi ahead of elections in May 2015. The
international community has a responsibility to ensure

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

that Burundi does not deteriorate further. A continued
international presence in Burundi is vital.
We have all been appalled by the kidnapping of
over 200 schoolgirls in northern Nigeria last month.
Boko Haram is a morally repugnant organization that is
committing vile acts of terrorism. The United Kingdom
is providing assistance to the Nigerian Government
with their response to that incident. We sent a team of
experts to Nigeria to assist them in finding the missing
schoolgirls and to help develop Nigeria’s capacity to
prevent similar incidents in the future.
However, any effective response to the threat posed
by Boko Haram must be carried out in coordination with
Nigeria’s neighbours. We are increasingly concerned
about reports that indicate that Boko Haram’s influence
outside Nigeria’s borders is growing. It is likely that
they may now be operating in southern Niger, parts of
northern Cameroon and around Lake Chad. We call on
Governments in the region to increase cooperation on
the issue and to clearly demonstrate a joint commitment
to tackling the problem. We also call on the international
community to address Boko Haram’s activities before
its position as a regional threat is consolidated.
UNOCA plays a vital role in helping the region
overcome those challenges. The efforts of incoming
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bathily will be of critical importance in identifying
and pushing forward regional solutions to those crossborder problems.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Abou Moussa for his briefing and the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2014/319). The report of the
Secretary-General on Central Africa is illustration of
an alarming deterioration of the political, security and
humanitarian situation in the region.
At the previous Council meeting on this subject,
in November 2013 (see S/PV.7065), I sounded the
alarm on the Central African Republic in order to
mobilize our partners to address that crisis, which
had been ignored for too long. Six months later, the
regional consequences that we predicted have become a
reality, and the humanitarian crisis in that country is a
tragedy. Fortunately, the international community and
the Council have rallied. We hope that the concerted
commitment of the countries of the region, the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union,
the United States and France will finally stop this
downward spiral.

S/PV.7171

As can be seen in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) is taking
advantage of the security vacuum in certain remote
areas of the vast country of the Central African
Republic and, it is likely, the complicity of armed
groups, including the ex-Séléka. While the threat is
diminishing in other regions, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we must continue our efforts to
ensure that LRA members cannot thrive in those areas
such as the Kafia Kingi enclave, on the border of the
Central African Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan,
where Joseph Kony and his entourage have again found
refuge.
We welcome the work of the African Union
Regional Task Force of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, and the commitment of its constituent
countries and the partners that support it. The Task
Force’s operations were successful, and we hope that
the commitment of the main countries concerned will
not falter until the threat is eradicated. Such robust
military action must also be undertaken alongside
continued humanitarian efforts for the victims of
that insecure situation. We are happy to read that the
number of displaced persons has decreased. We urge
the Governments of the region to take interest in the
fate of those who have returned home, who are often
impoverished and have lost everything.
Finally, we must not forget the need for justice, and
thus bring to justice the senior leaders of the Lord’s
Resistance Army. Joseph Kony is the subject of an
international arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on 8 July 2005 that has still not
been implemented. We encourage the States concerned
that are parties to the Rome Statute to strengthen their
cooperation and collaboration with the Court so that
Kony can be arrested, delivered and held to account for
his heinous acts.
While the threat of the LRA is diminishing, we are
now witnessing the emergence of another movement on
the regional scene, the Boko Haram and Ansaru terrorist
groups. In that connection, the abduction of hundreds of
young girls and the increasing attacks claimed by Boko
Haram in Nigeria are disgusting. We condemn them
firmly and reiterate our support and our sympathies for
the Nigerian authorities. The Secretary-General’s report
on Central Africa highlights the regional consequences
of the group’s activities in Cameroon, and we cannot
completely exclude their potential to affect the Central

14-330725/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

African Republic and Chad. We welcome the initiatives
undertaken by States of the region to combat this
threat and offer them our full support, including, as the
President of France just announced, through a summit
for the countries bordering Nigeria to be held in Paris
on Saturday 17 May, in order to discuss the security
problems linked to Boko Haram. We encourage the
United Nations Regional Office to continue supporting
the authorities in the region.
There are numerous transnational threats in the
region, including not just terrorism but also trafficking
in endangered species and drugs, as well as piracy. With
South Sudan’s collapse into civil war on 15 December,
there is little room for optimism. In this difficult
atmosphere, we encourage States and subregional
organizations in the region to continue to cooperate,
and we call on every State to help them. The support
of the United Nations Regional Office is essential and
we are grateful for its efforts to conduct preventive
diplomacy and dialogue in this area.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his commitment as Head of
the United Nations Regional Office in Central Africa
for the past three years, and to welcome his successor,
Mr. Bathily, who has the difficult task of continuing
to mobilize the countries of the region to combat these
threats and destabilizing factors together.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the Special Representative and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office in Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, and to express our
appreciation for his staff’s excellent work in supporting
and coordinating the Organization’s initiatives and
the regional efforts aimed at preventing conflicts and
building peace in Central Africa and at promoting
preventive diplomacy and mediation in the subregion.
We hope that Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily and UNOCA
will be able to count on the support needed for the
continued implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy designed to address the threat and
consequences of the activities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA), and to support the Regional Task Force of
the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
for the Elimination of the LRA, working with the
countries affected to that end.
Chile supports the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/319), so we will

6/19

12/05/2014

mention just a few aspects that deserve particular
attention.
While the report notes a decrease in the activities
of the LRA in the subregion, the crises in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, and the withdrawal
of troops provided by Uganda and South Sudan from the
Regional Task Force, has created security vulnerabilities
that the LRA could exploit. We therefore recommend
redoubling the efforts to eliminate the LRA and prevent
its association with members of other armed groups,
such as the ex-Séléka. Moreover, the threat of that
group has led many humanitarian non-governmental
organizations to restrict their activities. We should
therefore urge donors to support recuperative activities
without delay in order to restore basic livelihoods and
essential services in the affected communities.
We should step up efforts to implement the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
against Joseph Kony and other LRA commanders on
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including murder, rape and child recruitment through
kidnapping. The news of the capture by the African
Union’s Task Force of LRA commander Charles Okello
and rescue of three women and seven children on
21 April is a positive sign.
The international community should continue to
actively support the countries of Central Africa in their
efforts to achieve peace and stability and to promote
the normalization of the humanitarian and human
rights situations, the protection of civilians, dialogue,
reconciliation, transitional justice, national capacitybuilding and integration. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General’s recent visits to the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. We cannot remain
indifferent to the deepening humanitarian crisis and
its growing impact on those countries’ neighbours, the
inter-and intra-community violence, including sexual
violence — which has reached alarming proportions in
the Central African Republic — the threat of terrorism,
the continuing maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea, the illegal trade in wildlife and transnational
organized crime.
One of the significant challenges to peacebuilding
and sustainable development in Central Africa is
widespread unemployment among young people,
which leaves them vulnerable to recruitment and
re-recruitment. Young refugees and internally displaced
persons deserve special attention, due to their double

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

vulnerability to recruitment by terrorists and armed
groups. While we are aware of the limitations on the
staff of UNOCA, which has had to resort to financing
outside the regular budget, we urge it to focus its
initiatives in this area in partnership with the Economic
Community of Central African States, the African
Development Bank, the World Bank, the International
Labour Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Peacebuilding Commission and other
key regional and international stakeholders.
We commend the leadership and coordinating
role played by relevant regional organizations. We
urge UNOCA to support their initiatives, such as
the subregional commitments to implementing the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and combatting the
illegal trade in forest flora and fauna that finances
armed groups; the agreement of the six member States
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to establish the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat the threats
posed by the militants of Boko Haram; the African
Union’s 2050 Integrated Maritime Strategy; and the
implementation of a road map and action plan for
working towards the establishment of an inter-regional
centre for coordination. In that regard , we hope
UNOCA will continue to support the work of the expert
groups of the related Sanctions Committees.
We also hope that the establishment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
will contribute to peace and stability in the subregion.
We encourage coordination between the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and the Regional Task Force
until the transfer of responsibility from MISCA to
MINUSCA on 15 September, and we support the efforts
of the AU Commission’s technical assessment mission
to that end. Similarly, we should promote coordination
and the exchange of information between the Task
Force, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the recently
created MINUSCA.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank Special
Representative Abou Moussa for his briefing and for
his dedication to pursuing the importance mandate of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). As Mr. Moussa has said, Central Africa
faces critical challenges to its peace and security and

S/PV.7171

requires ongoing support from the United Nations.
Today’s meeting provides an important opportunity for
the Council to look holistically at the issues and the role
that UNOCA and the broader United Nations presence
in the subregion can play in addressing them.
Most prominent among these challenges, perhaps,
is the situation in the Central African Republic, one
of the most dire human rights and humanitarian crises
confronting the Council and the world. Communities
in the Central African Republic that have previously
coexisted in peace have been decimated by cycles of
violence and revenge. The country is being torn apart,
with severe consequences for the region. We pay tribute
to the African and French forces that deployed quickly
to the Central African Republic and took military action
that has literally saved many lives. The adoption of
resolution 2149 (2014), authorizing the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) should
mark a turning point in the international response to
the crisis.
We have also seen the growing threat of terrorism in
Central Africa, including the expansion of Boko Haram
into the region. We have all condemned Boko Haram’s
recent attacks against civilians and its abduction of
more than 200 schoolgirls in Nigeria, an act that has
shocked the global conscience. Like others, Australia
has offered its support to the Government of Nigeria.
The abhorrent targeting of schoolchildren brings
to mind the tactics of another group that has wreaked
havoc on the region — the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA). That group’s killing, raping, pillaging and
maiming has terrorized civilians for more than 20
years. The International Criminal Court arrest warrants
for the LRA’s leaders — the first arrest warrants issued
by the Court — have now been outstanding for close
to nine years. It is essential that Joseph Kony and the
other surviving senior LRA leaders be held to account
for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We have made significant progress towards
achieving the goal of putting an end once and for all
to the LRA. The recent trends are promising. Overall
LRA attacks and resulting deaths are down, despite
a seasonal spike; the number of displaced in LRAaffected areas has been halved; and defections are on
the rise. Australia commends the African Union (AU)
Regional Task Force for its significant impact in the
fight against the LRA and the critical support being

14-330727/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

provided by the United States and European Union.
We welcome the recent capture of LRA commander
Charles Okello in an operation that also rescued three
women and seven children. My first central message is
this — we must maintain the momentum and support
for current efforts to put an end to the LRA.
We are concerned, however, that the crises in the
Central African Republic and in South Sudan risk
undermining the progress achieved to date by diverting
attention, resources and regional security forces away
from anti-LRA efforts. We are also concerned by
reports that senior LRA leaders may be based in northeastern Central African Republic and that some exSéléka combatants are suspected to be colluding with
the LRA. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/319)
also cites credible sources suggesting that LRA leader
Joseph Kony and senior LRA commanders have recently
returned to seek safe haven in the Kafia Kingi enclave
between the Sudan, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. We know that the LRA will exploit
any security vacuum and seize the opportunity to
regroup. That is its modus operandi. Since the collapse
of State authority in the Central African Republic, LRA
attacks in the country’s east have risen sharply, and the
group has targeted prefectures outside the AU Regional
Task Force’s principal area of operations.
That brings me to my second point. It is imperative
that the United Nations and African Union missions
in the region — the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic, MINUSCA and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur — continue to deepen their information-sharing,
coordination and cooperation in efforts to combat the
LRA. The various sanctions committees and groups of
experts active in the region are an important component
of that effort and can provide further information and
options to address the LRA’s financing, weapons and
operations.
By leveraging the resources deployed in the
region and increasing coordination among them, we
can better protect civilians in LRA-affected areas and
keep ahead of the LRA. Otherwise, gains made in
increasing stability in one area risk being offset by the
re-emergence of the LRA elsewhere. Indeed, that has
been the case following security gains made around
the Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic

8/19

12/05/2014

of the Congo, which has been followed by a rise in
attacks further west — hence the logical conclusion
is that UNOCA has an important overarching role, in
particular to enhance the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy.
Finally, we must support UNOCA and regional-led
efforts to address other, often related challenges to
Central Africa’s peace and security, including the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
poaching and trafficking of wildlife. The development
of a road map for counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small and light weapons in Central
Africa, and the pledge by regional leaders to honour the
10-year moratorium on the sale of ivory stockpiles to
protect elephants, are all important initiatives. Those
types of initiatives will help to restrict and reduce the
illicit means by which the LRA and other groups are
able to arm themselves, and are fundamental to longterm peace and stability in the region.
Let me conclude by thanking Special Representative
Moussa again for his commitment and leadership since
UNOCA’s inception. We look forward to working with
his successor, Mr. Bathily.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Moussa for his briefing and for
all his efforts on behalf of peace in the Central African
region.
Today marks a pivotal moment to reflect
strategically on the myriad of growing concerns
surrounding the Central African region, which risks
full implosion. Flanked by conflict from the Great
Lakes to its immediate south, a struggling new nation
to its east, burgeoning terror threats to its west and an
explosive religious conflict at its core, the region is one
that we must prioritize. We ignore those trend lines and
their ability to handicap the region’s trajectory towards
growth to our peril.
We view with horror and outrage the ongoing
campaign of destruction perpetrated by Boko Haram,
which is migrating east and knocking on Central Africa’s
door. Boko Haram has primarily chosen targets who
cannot fight back: students, hospital patients, teachers
and other unarmed civilians. The abduction last month
of more 200 Nigerian schoolgirls and subsequent public
threats to sell the girls into slavery have shocked us to
the core, not only as diplomats and policy leaders but
also as parents and human beings.

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

S/PV.7171

Boko Haram has no agenda other than cowardice,
sadism, ignorance and death. As such, it has made itself
the adversary of people everywhere. My Government
has pledged its support to the Nigerian Government in
helping to return the girls to their homes. We are prepared
to assist the region in developing a comprehensive
strategy to defeat Boko Haram, including by pursuing
United Nations sanctions against that group, and to hold
its murderous leaders accountable for their actions. My
Government has been in close communication with
Nigerian officials, including Ambassador Ogwu here
in New York, and we will do all we can to support
their efforts to ensure that the missing schoolgirls are
returned safely to their homes.

Because of this progress, the LRA is becoming less
relevant. As the threat recedes further, we should place
greater emphasis on working with local leaders to help
affected communities to recover. We urge the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to coordinate with the AU, the World Bank, national
Governments and other stakeholders to advance a plan
for the long-term stabilization of those areas. Over
the past five years, the United States Government
has provided more than $87 million to enhance food
security, health, development and other priorities in
communities harmed by LRA violence. Collectively,
we must ensure that areas ravaged by the LRA are able
at long last to enjoy the benefits of peace.

Of course, in stealing children, Boko Haram is
mimicking tactics first used in the region by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). For more than two decades,
the LRA has ravaged the lives of tens of thousands of
men, women and children, who have been displaced,
maimed, abducted or killed across four countries. In
the process, the LRA has compelled countless young
people to serve as underage soldiers and sex slaves. Our
goal has been, and remains to bring that scourge to a
complete and decisive end. My Government commends
the African Union (AU) Regional Task Force and its
partners for making important progress. If defector
reports are accurate, the LRA’s second-in-command,
Okot Odhiambo — one of several prominent LRA
leaders who have been indicted by the International
Criminal Court for crimes against humanity — was
killed late last year. That represents a substantial blow
to what little remains of the LRA’s command structure.

Despite some progress, we remain concerned about
reports of unfettered LRA activity in the north-eastern
parts of the Central African Republic, a country that is
beset simultaneously by brutal religious violence and
immense and growing humanitarian needs. We find the
reports of possible LRA collusion with former Séléka
fighters to be particularly disturbing, and we have no
doubt that Boko Haram would like nothing more than to
exploit the despair of displaced Muslims in the northern
part of the Central African Republic.

In the past few years, military and political efforts,
combined with strong civil society advocacy, have
reduced LRA combatants from more than 1,000 to a
small fraction of that number. Between 2011 and 2013,
the number of people killed by LRA attacks dropped by
75 per cent, and the level of abductions by 50 per cent.
Since 2012, more than 180 men, women and children
have defected or been released. The decline in LRA
terror has made it possible for hundreds of thousands
to return to their homes, reducing the population
displaced by the LRA from more than 320,000 at the
end of last year to less than 160,000 today. This still
huge and unacceptable number marks the lowest level
in over a decade. Credit for these gains belongs to the
AU Regional Task Force, international peacekeepers,
non-governmental organizations and leaders of local
civil society.

My Government also shares the Secretary-General’s
concern about the possibility that LRA leaders have
again sought a safe haven in Sudanese-controlled areas
of the Kafia Kindi enclave. We call on the Government
in Khartoum to work cooperatively with the AU to
investigate these reports and to deny the LRA any
form of rest or support. Any Government should be
embarrassed to be sheltering the Lord’s Resistance
Army. After a quarter-century of merciless brutality,
the LRA should not be tolerated, let alone helped, by
anyone — not to mention a State Member of the United
Nations.
I can assure the Council that the United States
will remain steadfast in providing tangible and
wide-ranging assistance to anti-LRA efforts, including
military advisers, air-lift support, humanitarian aid,
civilian protection and measures aimed at encouraging
defections. We look forward to the day, which we hope
will come soon, when all LRA combatants are removed
from the battlefield.
Mindful that the LRA is but one of many significant
threats to peace and security in Central Africa,
my Government applauds the Council’s decision to
authorize a United Nations peacekeeping mission

14-330729/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

in the Central African Republic. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) must do the
critical work of protecting civilians, facilitating urgently
needed humanitarian access, and supporting the State
in that country, which is of course in a weakened
position. We call on MINUSCA to coordinate closely
with the many actors — the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
(MISCA), French and European Union forces, and the
AU Regional Task Force — that are currently deployed
and will remain in the Central African Republic. But
above all, we urge Member States to support MISCA
and the African Union, which is still trying to protect
civilians alongside France and the European Union, and
to contribute to MINUSCA, as timely force-generation
for both MISCA and MINUSCA is critically needed
and needed now.
We also express our alarm, as others have done, at
the deteriorating political situation in Burundi, where
the Government has harrassed and arrested members
of opposition parties, pushed for the end of the United
Nations political mission in advance of a very fragile
election period, and is imposing growing restrictions
on civil society, and where we have all seen alarming
reports of youth militia being armed, to which the
Government has responded only by expelling the United
Nations mission’s security adviser. We urge UNOCA to
spare no effort at preventive diplomacy.
We remain at a difficult time in Central Africa.
International cooperation has been encouraging, but we
must do far more to confront Boko Haram, to complete
the destruction of the LRA, to counter religious
strife and prevent ethnic cleansing, and to disrupt the
activities of criminals who seek to prey on the innocent
and the weak. The next months will be critical in each
of these areas, and we must take advantage of every
opportunity to turn the tide on all fronts.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. I also thank Mr. Abou Moussa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, for his briefing.
The situation in the Central African region
has deteriorated in the past month, mainly due to
the conflicts in the Central African Republic and
in South Sudan. This has put the whole region at
risk, with unprecedented security and humanitarian

10/19

12/05/2014

consequences, which could have a negative impact on
the progress achieved so far, such as in the fight against
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and other negative
forces. Despite those crises and the threat of instability,
several countries in the Central African region have
registered tremendous economic growth. This shows
that the Central African region has the potential to
escape the current negative spiral and should therefore
be further supported.
We welcome the progress achieved in weakening
the LRA, including through the success registered on
the ground by the African Union (AU) Regional Task
Force, supported by the United States. The reported
number of LRA attacks, abductions and killings
during the first quarter of 2014 in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has decreased as compared to previous years, not to
mention that the LRA has been further weakened due
to defection and military pressure, leading it to operate
in survival mode and in small groups. Nevertheless,
that terrorist organization still possesses the capacity to
destabilize the subregion. It is therefore important that
the international community maintain this momentum
so as to ensure that the LRA is eradicated once and for
all.
As we commend the fruitful cooperation between
the AU, the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), the United States and the European
Union in the fight against the LRA, we believe that
coordination and information-sharing between the AU
Regional Task Force and the United Nations missions
deployed in countries of the region — mainly the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the African-led
International Support Mission for the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur — are critical to ending the threat
posed by the LRA.
In addition to military operations, it is also
important to sustain the progress achieved so far by
stepping up support to peacebuilding activities and
by improving national capacities. This would include
financial support to the United Nations regional
strategy, which provides a comprehensive anti-LRA
strategy for the LRA-affected areas. In the same vein,

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

financial support for the AU Regional Task Force is
very critical to ending the threat posed by the LRA.
Last month, the world was shocked by the abduction
of more than 200 schoolgirls in Chibok, Nigeria, by
Boko Haram. This terrorist organization also kidnapped
eight girls last week in Warabe, Nigeria. We strongly
condemn these abductions, and we extend our solidarity
to the affected families and to the Government and the
people of Nigeria. We shall all remain committed to
supporting Nigeria in its efforts to bring back our girls.
In that context, as Boko Haram expands its
activities into several Central African countries, it is
important to further strengthen regional cooperation in
security and cross-border issues. We welcome in this
regard the meeting of the six members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission — Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Libya, Niger and Nigeria — that
took place in Cameroon in March to establish the
Multinational Joint Task Force, aimed at addressing
the security threat posed by terrorism in the region.
We also commend the invitation extended by President
Hollande to a meeting to be held on 17 May in Paris.
Terrorist piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well as
organized crime, constitute critical security challenges
in the region, with a negative impact on the economy,
as these threats deprive the region of investment,
viable economic activities and related fiscal revenue.
We commend the efforts of the region and the progress
achieved since the holding of the Yaoundé summit
in June 2013, which yielded the establishment of the
Interregional Coordination Centre and the elaboration
of a concrete 2014-2016 action plan.
The efforts of UNOCA in preventing conflicts in
the Central African region should be commended and
supported. With six countries of the region holding
elections in 2015, and more in 2016, we believe that
UNOCA should be given proper and adequate resources
to ensure that those elections are held smoothly. In
addition, given the security situation in the Central
African Republic and the rise of terrorism in some
countries of the region, UNOCA needs to be allocated
the necessary resources to fulfil its mandate.
In conclusion, Rwanda wishes to express its
appreciation to UNOCA for the work done since 2011
under the remarkable leadership of outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa.
We pay tribute to him on his achievements and wish
him all the best in his future endeavours. We also take

S/PV.7171

this opportunity to welcome the incoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily. We assure him of our full support.
Lastly, Rwanda supports the draft presidential
statement that the Council will adopt later today.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abou Moussa for his briefing on the latest
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on the implementation
of the regional strategy on the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA). I want to express my delegation’s appreciation
for his leadership and dedicated service in implementing
the challenging mandate, which brought about tangible
results in promoting peace and security in the Central
African region. I also welcome the appointment of
Abdoulaye Bathily as the incoming Head of UNOCA.
The results of the activities of the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA and of
the African Union Regional Task Force, as well as those
of other regional and international actors, are obvious.
We see a sharp decrease in the number of LRA fighters
and in the overall number of attacks attributable to that
terrorist group. We understand that the LRA is now
primarily involved in survival-mode activities and that
its command structure is weakened.
However, the threat posed by the group has not
passed. One hundred and sixty thousand civilians
remain under constant threat. We should not remain
complacent. UNOCA’s role is vital, especially as the
deteriorating security situation in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan threatens to undermine
the progress made thus far. We note with concern
the increased LRA activities in the Central African
Republic, where the leaders of the LRA are reported to
be based now. We urge all concerned countries in the
region to fulfil their commitments to fighting the LRA,
including by contributing troops to the African Union
Regional Task Force. We note that it is crucial to ensure
close cross-border cooperation and information-sharing
among actors in the region. We also note the importance
of enhancing collaboration between the Regional
Task Force and the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic, as well as
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
UNOCA will continue to play a leading role in
fostering the development of long-term programmes

14-3307211/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

to address humanitarian problems in LRA-affected
areas. Many civilians will depend on humanitarian
assistance. We also stress the importance of developing
and promoting disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in LRA-affected areas
as one of the means of addressing the threat posed
by that terrorist group and encouraging further
defections. Former combatants must be provided with
an opportunity for reintegration into society and the
possibility of different life to avoid their return to rebel
life.
The challenge remains how to successfully
reintegrate children abducted by the LRA. In that
regard, we welcome Chad’s intention to sign a protocol
on the release of 46 children who were associated with
ex-Séléka in Koro-Toro, as well as the plan to develop a
reintegration plan. We commend UNICEF for its work
on child protection and the prevention of sexual and
gender-based violence in LRA-affected countries. It is
important to put an end to those crimes and to ensure
accountability for the perpetrators.
Let me express our concern over the Boko Haram
terrorist group, whose activities across the borders of
Nigeria pose a threat to security in the broader region.
We strongly condemn Taliban-style acts of violence
against schoolgirls in Chibok, in the Borno state of
Nigeria. That is a grave violation of international and
national laws. Education is a human right, and girls
throughout the entire world should be able to pursue
it free from violence, fear and intimidation. The girls
must be released immediately and unconditionally.
Abduction, sexual violence and exploitation constitute
grave violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, and may amount to crimes against
humanity as defined in the Rome Statute. Therefore,
the crimes by Boko Haram should be addressed by the
International Criminal Court.
The violent acts of Boko Haram remind us that
women’s rights are constantly under assault, thereby
undermining gender rights, equality and development.
We are deeply concerned that the activities of Boko
Haram force thousands of people to flee their homes,
schools and fields. We commend and encourage regional
initiatives to strengthen cooperation in addressing the
security threats posed by terrorist groups, as well to
tackle the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
As noted by Mr. Moussa, the humanitarian effect
of the Central African Republic crisis on countries in

12/19

12/05/2014

the region is yet another issue to address. Neighbouring
countries continue to receive high numbers of refugees,
many of whom are women and children. We welcome
the advancement in the inter-agency Regional Response
Plan, which is aimed at addressing the growing
humanitarian needs. We urge its implementation and
encourage strong engagement by international actors.
Rising maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea,
poaching and the illegal trade in resources in the region
remain of great concern. That has to be addressed, in
particular as transnational rebel and terrorist groups
in the Central African region, including the LRA,
are financed through such activities. We welcome
the regional and international activities to tackle the
challenge and we commend UNOCA’s engagement in
mobilizing a cooperative approach to the issue among
the countries of the region.
Finally, Lithuania encourages an enhanced,
comprehensive and more regional approach to address
the threats faced by Central African States. Let me
conclude by expressing our full support for the activities
of UNOCA.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, for his briefing.
The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and South Sudan, as well
as the presence of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
on the borders of those countries, makes Central Africa
a breeding ground for very worrying insecurity. The
seriousness of that threat has led the United Nations,
the African Union, the international community and
subregional organizations to mobilize in order to find
appropriate solutions. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the outcome of that joint effort has led to
a relative improvement in the situation following the
defeat last December of the main armed group, the
Mouvement du 23 mars. Nevertheless, the security
situation remains volatile and huge efforts must still be
made to consolidate peace and stability in the country.
The Boko Haram terrorist group, whose activities
span the borders of neighbouring Nigeria, poses a real
threat today, both for Central Africa and for the entire
Sahel region. Chad condemns the kidnapping in Nigeria
of more than 200 young high school girls by Boko
Haram and expresses its solidarity with Nigeria. In that
regard, Chad welcomes the international community’s

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

strong mobilization in the fight against such terrorist
groups.
The violence in the Central African Republic
recently reached unimaginable levels. More than
6,000 children aged between 8 and 14 years old have
been torn from their families by rival armed groups,
who force them to torture, kill and carry out sexual
violence in public to demoralize and humiliate the rival
community. Humanitarian personnel of the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
are working in a climate of insecurity and are under
threat daily. The Central African Republic today is a
country half-emptied of its population. Armed gangs
have divided the capital, as they have the entire country,
into areas of influence, and attacks against the civilian
population continue.
It is against that backdrop of a total lack of security
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) is preparing to deploy on 15 September,
in accordance with resolution 2149 (2014). But in the
immediate term, Chad believes it would be important
for the United Nations, in coordination with the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the countries of the region, undertake
urgent efforts, among other things, go consolidate the
authority of the State and its ability to perform all of
its functions, ensure the safety of civilian populations
and humanitarian personnel, guarantee access for
humanitarian aid to populations in need, pay the
salaries of State employees and put basic services on
a stronger footing so as to reduce tensions. Putting
those conditions in place, in our humble opinion, would
allow for the return of refugees and displaced persons
as well as facilitate preparations for the deployment of
MINUSCA.
The fight against the LRA continues because
the armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
create positive conditions for them, undermining the
efforts of the international community. Chad welcomes
the coordination efforts carried out by UNOCA to
implement the regional strategy of the United Nations
against the threat and impact of the LRA and the African
Union’s anti-LRA Regional Cooperation Initiative.
Furthermore, we welcome the determination of
the United States of America in the fight against the
LRA. Their human resources, financial, material and

S/PV.7171

logistical support are crucial for intelligence-gathering
and aerial surveillance of elements of the LRA. We also
welcome the valuable support of the European Union
as well as the role played by United Nations agencies,
donors and NGOs to assist civilians in the areas affected
by the activities of the LRA.
The reported death of in 2013 of Okot Odhiambo,
the LRA’s second-in-command, who was subject to an
arrest warrant of the International Criminal Court, the
capture of Commander Charles Okello in April, and the
defection of a large number of LRA fighters, saving
dozens of women and children, are further encouraging
results of the joint efforts.
Despite such encouraging achievements, the
reported presence of LRA leaders in the north-east
of the Central African Republic and its increased
activities in the east of the country, on one hand, and
its intensified activities in the west of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the other, remain cause for
concern. In that regard, the international community
must keep up the pressure on the remaining scattered
elements, which are a small, highly mobile group, in
order to eradicate them.
The threats to security in Central Africa require
robust efforts from the international community and
close cooperation among the countries involved in the
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, as well as in the coordination
of joint border-control mechanisms. UNOCA has a key
role to play in such joint efforts. Chad therefore calls
for the strengthening of the necessary resources, for
the smooth functioning of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in the light of the evergrowing threats imperilling that region. The multiple
security challenges facing the subregion, which I
have addressed, require decisive involvement by the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
continuous follow-up.
In conclusion, I would like to pay sincere tribute
to Mr. Abou Moussa for his excellent work as the Head
of UNOCA, and for all of the service he has given to
the United Nations in the 34 years of his career in the
Organization. I wish him well on his return to Chad and
the greatest of success in his future endeavours.
I would also like to welcome the appointment
of Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily as the new the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of

14-3307213/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

UNOCA, and to wish him the greatest of success in his
new role.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Moussa, for his briefing.
The general situation in the Central African region
has recently been mixed. While China welcomes the
clear improvement in the Great Lakes region and
the progress in regional integration, the situation in
the Central African Republic remains volatile, with
increasing regional terrorist activities and transnational
organized crime. Central Africa continues to face
multiple challenges, some of which are common, to
a certain extent, throughout Africa. This requires
continued concerted efforts on the part of countries
of the region and the international community. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize the following three
points.
First, in settling the issues in Central Africa, the
imperative must be to stabilize the regional situation
as soon as possible. Stability is a precondition for
development. The deterioration of the situation in the
Central African Republic and the troubles created
by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) have had a
disastrous effect on the countries in the region and their
population. China expresses its concern in that regard.
We call on the international community to expedite its
support to the Central African Republic so as to help
the country promptly restore its normal security and
social order. We also hope that the United Nations
and the African Union will further strengthen their
cooperation and work in synergy so as to eradicate the
threat posed by the LRA.
Secondly, economic development is key to
solving the issues in Central Africa in the long term.
It is fundamental for long-term security and stability.
The lack of development is one of the root causes of
conflicts in Africa. A few days ago, Chinese Premier Li
Keqiang visited Africa and announced that the Chinese
Government would provide an additional $10 billion
in loans to African countries, to be used in such
projects as infrastructure development, agriculture and
poverty eradication. China hopes that the international
community will fulfil its assistance commitments
to African countries to help them accelerate
socioeconomic development and create employment
opportunities, which would in turn eradicate the root
causes of conflicts.

14/19

12/05/2014

Thirdly, in tackling the issues in Central Africa,
the ownership of the countries concerned should be
rigorously respected. In recent years, regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
(AU) and the Economic Community of Central African
States, have come together to promote prosperity
through self-reliance, while seeking African solutions
to African problems. They have made tremendous
efforts to promote peace and development in the
region. The international community, in supporting the
search for solutions for Central African issues, should
fully take into account the opinions of the countries
concerned, and maintain close communication the AU
and subregional organizations, as well as help them
build their capacity to take the lead in solving their own
problems.
In its three years of existence, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) has done
a great deal of work in coordinating and promoting
the maintenance of peace and security in the region,
and Mr. Moussa has made a tremendous personal
contribution to that effort. China appreciates those
endeavours. We also welcome Mr. Bathily as the
incoming Special Representative for Central Africa
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and expect that he will guide the Office
in continuing to proactively implement its mandate. As
always, China will continue to support UNOCA’s work.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Regional United Nations Office for Central
Africa, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing. Since this
is his last statement before the Council in that capacity,
I would like to take this opportunity to commend his
work to promote peace and security in Central Africa
over the past three years. I want to wish every success
to his successor, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily.
Over the past three years, significant progress has
been made in operations against the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA). The pressure, military operations and
many defections have weakened the group’s combat
capability. However, the LRA continues to pose a
serious threat to the region, in particular to civilians.
As a result of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
LRA leaders based in the north-east of the Central
African Republic have been able to rebuild their
forces. We have also noted with concern the credible
information suggesting the presence of senior LRA
leaders, including Joseph Kony, in the Kafia Kingi

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

enclave on the border of the Sudan, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic.
In that context, we must redouble our efforts to
support the African Union’s Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance
Army. While the crisis in South Sudan caused the
temporary redeployment of troops, we hope that the
agreement signed in Addis Ababa on 9 May to resolve
the South Sudanese crisis will allow all countries
participating in the regional intervention force
against the LRA to provide the necessary troops. It
is also necessary to mobilize the vital resources and
equipment for the effective functioning of that regional
force. In that respect, we commend the significant
support of the United States and the European Union,
which has just provided a new contribution of almost
€2 million to the African Union. For its part, in late
2013Luxembourg provided additional financial support
for the operation of the regional headquarters of the
regional intervention force located in Yambio, South
Sudan. Coordination between the United Nations, the
African Union and the States affected by the LRA is
essential, as is knowledge sharing and cooperation
between the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic (MISCA), which will
be rehatted as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) on 15 September. Pending the
implementation of MINUSCA, it is imperative that
effective coordination is established as soon as possible
between the two African Union operations active in the
Central African Republic — the regional intervention
force against the LRA and MISCA.
Besides military operations, the international
community must continue its efforts to promote
the stabilization and development of LRA-affected
regions. We also encourage all States to cooperate
in implementing the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court almost nine years ago
against LRA leaders, including Joseph Kony. Accused
of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
murder, rape and the recruitment of children, the main
LRA leaders must be brought to justice.
Women and children are the main victims of the
LRA. In that context, allow me to underscore the need

S/PV.7171

to fully integrate child protection in the activities of
the African Union’s regional intervention force and
highlight the importance of programmes, such as
those of UNICEF, to help with the release, return and
reintegration of women and children abducted by the
LRA.
Finally, we remain concerned about the linkages
between the illicit trade in wild fauna and armed groups
operating in Central Africa, in particular the LRA. We
therefore encourage UNOCA to continue to support the
struggle against poaching and against ivory smuggling
in the region.
The situation in Central Africa continues to be
severely affected by the crisis in the Central African
Republic. Following her visit to Chad on 5 and 6 May,
Ms. Valerie Amos highlighted the humanitarian impact
of the crisis in the Central African Republic on
neighbouring countries, who are hosting a considerable
number of refugees. The absence of the rule of law and
the security vacuum in the Central African Republic
have made it a haven for armed groups.
On 10 April, the Security Council took the
important decision to establish the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. Until the deployment
of the first Blue Helmets in September, we are
supporting MISCA on a bilateral level and through
our participation in the European Union military
operation in the Central African Republic. Similarly,
we commend the vital action of France’s Operation
Sangaris. Given the persistent serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, the
international community must remain vigilant and
active. The sanctions adopted on 9 May by the Security
Council against three key figures behind the crisis in
the Central African Republic are an important measure
to help end the climate of impunity prevailing in the
country.
In his report (S/2014/319), the Secretary-General
notes with concern the activities of Boko Нaram, which
are not only a threat to the people in Nigeria, but have
spread to other countries in the region. We want to
reiterate our strongest condemnation of the kidnapping
last month of more than 200 schoolgirls in north-eastern
Nigeria. Those girls must be released immediately.
We strongly condemn the sexual and gender-based
violence, kidnappings and attacks against schools.
Some of those acts committed by Boko Нaram could

14-3307215/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, which Nigeria has ratified. All those responsible
must be brought to justice.
In conclusion, on a positive note I would like to
commend the work done by UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa in combatting piracy
off the coast of the Gulf of Guinea States, which is
now the African region most affected by piracy. We
welcome the progress achieved in the establishment
of the Interregional Coordination Centre with the
establishment, in April in Yaoundé, of an interregional
action plan for 2014-2016.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for the
information he presented to us this morning on the work
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), as well as for his efforts during the most
recent reporting period. We look forward to working
with his successor. We express our appreciation to the
UNOCA staff, given their considerable responsibilities
in dealing with the various issues in the region.
Undoubtedly, the volume of challenges facing the
Central African region greatly exceeds the ability of
its States to deal with them. Despite the international
involvement in addressing the region’s multiple
and interconnected problems, the lack of sufficient
international efforts to address their root causes leads
us to continuously seek tentative and partial solutions,
instead of achieving sustainable solutions.
My delegation agrees with the contents of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/319) on the impact
of the crisis, which has ravaged the Central African
Republic, on the sociopolitical and security situation of
the region. While we hope that the general situation in
the Central African Republic will subside, particularly
after the entrenchment of the troops of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and the imminent deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, addressing the
consequences of the crisis, such as regional displacement,
the growing menace posed by extremist groups and the
persistent illicit trade in natural resources, will require
cooperation and coordination among international and
regional efforts and a full commitment by States of the
region to fulfil their responsibilities and carry out their
work to achieve security and stability.
16/19

12/05/2014

My delegation would like to emphasize that
successfully dealing with the threat of terrorist groups
revolves around three cardinal points, that is, depriving
them of a supportive environment and the ability to
recruit; drying up their sources of financial support;
and conducting targeted operations against such
groups in order to weaken their structural capacities
and institutional coherence. Concerted regional efforts
must continue with a view to preventing those groups
from utilizing the deteriorating situation in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan and focusing on
border control and full coordination among the States of
the region and regional and international organizations.
With regard to terrorist groups, we condemn the
abduction of schoolgirls by Boko Haram, and we extend
our sympathy to the Government and the people of
Nigeria and the families of the girls.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
there has been a remarkable decline in the operations of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), with an attendant
decline in murders and abductions. Yet the LRA has
reorganized into small groups that are capable of
moving swiftly. That shows the continued ability by the
LRA’s command and control to adapt to the situation on
the ground in order to launch isolated border attacks.
The Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army must be
fully launched, and the composition of the Regional
Task Force should be finalized so that it amounts to
5,000 troops. That will enhance the ability to pursue
and track LRA remnants and its leadership in the
various areas. There must be logistical and material
support for the Regional Task Force so that it is able
to fill the preparedness gaps suffered by some troops.
In conclusion, in the framework of this discussion
on the LRA, the report of the Secretary-General refers
to certain cases of defection by LRA members. We
request further information about those cases. We want
to know whether the reasons for defection have been
studied in a manner that gives a clearer picture of the
LRA’s organizational situation.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I, too, thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Moussa for his
briefing. My comments will focus on the fight against
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/319)
indicates that, while some successes have been recorded
in that regard, considerable challenges remain. In terms
14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

of successes, we take positive note of the fact that there
have been no reports of recent premeditated mass
atrocities by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). Also
significant are the decrease in the number of reported
deaths in the first quarter of 2014 relative to 2012 and
2013; the decline in the number of abductions compared
to the fourth quarter of 2013; and the decrease in the
number of displaced persons in the LRA-affected
areas of the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. That success
in reducing the number of displaced persons has
been attributed, in part, to the improved security
being enjoyed by communities around the Garamba
National Park following operations against LRA bases
in the Park by the African Union (AU) Regional Task
Force. We commend the Force for its achievements
and acknowledge with appreciation the support of the
United States and other international partners in that
regard.
Another success story is the lack of LRA attacks in
South Sudan during the period under review.
Challenges nevertheless remain in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the Central African Republic, there was
an upward trend in LRA activity in the first quarter
of 2014, with more attacks and abductions. That is
reported to be concentrated in communities in eastern
Central African Republic. While the attention of the
international community has been focused on the
sectarian conflict in other parts of the country, we are
concerned that the LRA leadership is taking advantage
of the current instability and lack of State control over
the national territory to regroup in the north-eastern
part of the Central African Republic. The suspected
collusion of some ex-Séléka fighters with the LRA is
also a matter of concern to us, as they may be providing
the LRA with information about the operations of the
Regional Task Force. That represents a grave threat to
the conduct of anti-LRA operations, and we would hope
that the Regional Task Force is taking the necessary
measures against that threat.
We take positive note of the biannual meeting
of the LRA focal points that took place in Entebbe,
Uganda, on 13 and 14 February, and the fact that
it was co-chaired by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Moussa and the African Union’s
Special Envoy for the Lord’s Resistance Army issue,
Francisco Madeira. That kind of coordination between
the AU and the United Nations is crucial in forging a

S/PV.7171

common understanding on the way forward in the fight
against the LRA. We look forward to the planned AU
consultative workshop on the long-term stability of the
LRA-affected countries, which is expected to build on a
preliminary assessment conducted by the World Bank.
The full implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the LRA is crucial if the threat posed
by the group is to be neutralized. That would depend
on providing resources in a timely and adequate
manner and on building the requisite capacities of
judicial and Government systems and the military
capabilities of the countries affected by the LRA. The
international community is required to provide the
necessary political, technical and financial support for
the successful implementation of that initiative, in line
with the priorities identified by the African Union and
the principle of national ownership.
Political stability and strong national security
institutions in the region will help to consolidate the
gains made in the fight against the LRA. The plight of
persons displaced by LRA attacks and the long-term
development needs of LRA-affected areas must be
addressed in tandem and remain an integral part of the
comprehensive approach.
We express our support for the draft presidential
statement to be adopted after this meeting. We also
pay tribute to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Moussa for his achievements as Special
Representative. We wish him well in his future
endeavours and look forward to working with his
successor.
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to join others in thanking
Mr. Abou Moussa for the work he has carried out at
the Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and his leadership in support
of regional efforts in conflict prevention.
The crisis in the Central African Republic is
an issue of great concern. We are confident that the
renewed efforts by the international community and the
Organization, including the deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, will be up
to the task of dealing with the many challenges faced
by the Central African Republic. We call on UNOCA
to continue to work with the transition Government
in order to establish and strengthen coordination with

14-3307217/19

S/PV.7171

Central African region

neighbouring countries and key players in addressing
the humanitarian consequences of the crisis.
Regarding security, we also call on UNOCA
to continue to work on ensuring cooperation in
strengthening cross-border controls and to confront the
growing threats posed by terrorism and trafficking in
arms and natural resources. The trafficking and illegal
trade in natural resources are worrying not only because
of their environmental and economic consequences
but because of their links to armed groups and their
financing. We urge UNOCA to continue to promote
regional efforts to deal with this challenge.
Regarding the Boko Haram armed group, we share
in the condemnation of its activities and the concern
that those activities are increasing and the group’s area
of influence is expanding. The establishment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force was an important step
forward in dealing with the group and with illegal and
terrorist activities in the subregion. With regard to the
Gulf of Guinea, we are sorry to see that the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/319) emphasizes the fact that
the region is now the area of the world most seriously
affected by piracy, robbery at sea, organized crime
and illegal fishing. We urge UNOCA to strengthen
coordination in dealing with these issues, which pose a
particular threat to peace and security.
It is positive news that the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) has not been able to carry out large-scale
violations of human rights and is to some degree on the
defensive. In that regard, we commend the efforts of
the African Union’s Regional Task Force to fight the
group and those aimed at promoting the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation of LRA
members. However, the attacks referred to in the
Secretary-General’s report indicate that the group is
still active and that we should not halt our efforts. The
withdrawal of Uganda’s troops from the African Union
Task Force fighting the LRA is significant, and we call
on countries in the region to take the steps necessary
to avoid a security vacuum that the LRA might exploit.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing
today.
We agree with the worrying assessments voiced
here of the negative effects of the armed conflict in the
Central African Republic on the situation in Central
Africa in general. Among other destabilizing factors,

18/19

12/05/2014

we would single out the increase in Boko Haram’s
activities, the risks of terrorism and threats to marine
security in the Gulf of Guinea. The porous borders and
weak State institutions in the Sahel-Sahara zone merit
special mention, compounded as they are by specific
challenges emanating from Mali and Libya, many of
which have their origins in the events in Libya of three
years ago.
We support the efforts of countries in Central and
West Africa to combat these challenges and threats.
We take note of the work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in promoting peace
and security, preventing conflicts and combating
the terrorist threats of piracy and armed robbery at
sea, which it carries out in cooperation with regional
players and United Nations bodies. We commend the
great personal contribution to collective efforts in these
areas by the Head of the Regional Office, Mr. Moussa,
and we wish his successor, Mr. Bathily, success in this
vital post.
We note with satisfaction the significant decline in
the threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
This formerly large and menacing organized gang is
now reduced to a few small groups numbering no more
than 350 people, including women and children. We
note the drastic drop in the number of attacks, killings
and kidnappings, as well as in the numbers of those
fleeing the bandits or afraid to return to their homes.
Essentially, a handful of militants are now operating
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in survival mode, living mainly
off petty thievery. As a result of the joint efforts of
the countries of Africa themselves and of the African
Union’s Regional Cooperative Initiative, with the
support of the international community, it seems that
this group’s activities no longer pose a threat to peace
and security in the region.
Of course, the effectiveness of the operations
against the LRA is bound to be affected by the current
crises in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan and by the ongoing problems with contingents’
resources. Nevertheless, we firmly believe that in the
not-too-distant future we will see the day when the last
bandit will be neutralized, captured or handed over,
and that this criminal armed group will cease to exist.
The regional players themselves must play a decisive
role in this. Among the challenges they have to deal
with, priorities are strengthening the coordination
of efforts to combat the group, including between

14-33072

12/05/2014

Central African region

the African Union Regional Task Force and the
African Union peacekeeping contingent in the Central
African Republic. The problem cannot be solved by
military means alone, however. What is needed is a
comprehensive approach that includes security sector
reform, finding solutions to pressing socioeconomic and
humanitarian problems and strengthening government
institutions in the countries of the subregion.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
We thank Special Representative Abou Moussa for
his final briefing. The Republic of Korea appreciates
his leadership and the contribution he has made during
the past three years since the launch of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), one of the
most persistent and brutal armed groups in Africa,
has been substantially weakened. The joint strategy
of the African Union and the United Nations has
been instrumental in countering the LRA. In order
to eliminate the LRA’s lifeline, however, further
cooperation and enhanced coordination among all
stakeholders are crucial. We are concerned that the
worsening situation in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan could provide the LRA with a breathing
space. We call on all relevant countries to fully support
the efforts of the African Union (AU) Regional Task
Force to combat the LRA. The missions of the United
Nations and national Governments should enhance
their information-sharing and cross-border cooperation
in order to effectively implement the AU’s Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA.
Through its unanimous adoption of resolution
2149 (2014), the Security Council made clear its strong
commitment to multidimensional engagement in the
Central African Republic. It is important that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic maximize
its cooperation with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization

S/PV.7171

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur on a common approach in support
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement efforts across the area
affected by the LRA.
Other subregional threats, unfortunately, remain
unabated. We are particularly concerned about the
unacceptable criminal activities of Boko Haram. The
Republic of Korea strongly condemns its terrorist attacks
and abductions of schoolgirls. We call for a concerted
effort on the part of the international community to deal
with the threat posed by this terrorist group. We should
seek accountability for gross human rights violations,
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by any armed groups in the Central African region and
beyond.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/8.
It is so decided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. Given that this was his final briefing to the
Council as Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Moussa
for his exceptional service.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

14-3307219/19
