S/2007/223

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 April 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 19 April 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union at its 40th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005. I also refer to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005), of 21 October 2005,
pursuant to which an International Working Group was established to assist the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and to
consolidate and strengthen the existing follow-up mechanisms.
In this regard, I am forwarding the text of the communiqué issued by the
International Working Group at the conclusion of its 14th ministerial meeting, held
in Abidjan on 13 April 2007 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-31672 (E) 240407

*0731672*

S/2007/223

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Final communiqué of the 14th ministerial meeting of the
International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
Abidjan, 13 April 2007
1.
The 14th ministerial meeting of the International Working Group on Côte
d’Ivoire was held in Abidjan on 13 April 2007, under the co-chairmanship of
Mr. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, and
Mr. Abou Moussa, Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI). In attendance were the High Representative for the elections in
Côte d’Ivoire, and the representatives of Benin, Burkina Faso, France, Ghana,
Guinea, Nigeria, South Africa, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union, the International Organization of the Francophonie, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.
2.
The Group heard a briefing by the Prime Minister, Mr. Guillaume Soro,
focusing on the new philosophy of compromise that allowed the successful
conclusion of the direct dialogue and the signing of the Ouagadougou Political
Accord. The Prime Minister also highlighted the initial measures taken and
envisaged by the signatories to the Accord, including the forming of a new
Government, in accordance with the schedule of implementation. The Prime
Minister expressed his satisfaction at the measures put in place to ensure the
successful implementation of the key issues of the Accord, namely, identification,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the preparations for elections,
and the integration of the armed forces. The Prime Minister invited the international
community to fully support the process for resolving the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. The
Group congratulated the Prime Minister on his appointment and encouraged the
Government to pursue its action with a view to creating the necessary conditions for
the holding of credible elections.
3.
The Group also heard a statement by the United Nations Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peace-keeping Operations, Hédi Annabi, on the purpose of the technical
assessment mission in Côte d’Ivoire led by him. Furthermore, the Group heard
statements by the High Representative for the elections on the electoral process, as
well as by the Commanders of the impartial forces, who highlighted the measures
taken with a view to supporting the implementation of the military and security
provisions of the Ouagadougou Political Accord, including the signing of the
quadripartite agreement abolishing the Zone of Confidence. The Commanders of the
impartial forces also reaffirmed their readiness to continue their peace and security
mission in Côte d’Ivoire and to contribute to the strengthening of confidence among
all concerned Ivorian parties.
4.
The Group welcomes the determination of the Ivorian parties to take full
ownership of the peace process, and urges them to fulfil their commitments in good
faith. Moreover, the Group reaffirms the readiness of the international community to
accompany and support efforts to implement the Ouagadougou Political Accord.

2

07-31672

S/2007/223

5.
In the light of the Ouagadougou Accord and in order to ensure a smooth
coordination of efforts by national actors and their international partners, in
particular the United Nations, the Group has requested its two co-chairs to
undertake consultations with the relevant authorities of ECOWAS and the African
Union on the role of the International Working Group, and to make
recommendations thereon to the Security Council.

07-31672

3
