A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/165
24 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.2)]
54/165. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and expressing in particular
the need to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 as well as the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,2
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights3 and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,3
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, and that
the international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing
and with the same emphasis,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

00 26566

/...

A/RES/54/165
Page 2

Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them more susceptible to external
developments, positive as well as negative, including in the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process, but also has social, political,
environmental, cultural and legal dimensions which have an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Recognizing that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in meeting the challenges and
taking the opportunities presented by globalization,
Noting that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of cultures, identities and human rights
and that, in that regard, they work to ensure that all activities, including those affected by globalization, are
consistent with those aims,
1. Recognizes that while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role of the State, may affect
human rights, the promotion and protection of all human rights is, first and foremost, the responsibility of
the State;
2. Underlines, therefore, the need to analyse the consequences of globalization for the full enjoyment
of all human rights;
3. Takes note of the request by the Commission on Human Rights to the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights4 to undertake a study, based on the reports of the treaty bodies,
special rapporteurs, independent experts and working groups of the Commission, on the issue of
globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights, for the consideration of the
Commission at its fifty-seventh session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the different views of Member States, to submit
a comprehensive report on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights to the
General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

4

Formerly known as the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
