General AHembly-Twenty-fonrth Session

62

specialized agencies and other members of the United
Nations system, a speedy and satisfactory solution to
the refugee problems;
3. Urges Governments to continue to lend their
support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian task,
particularly by providing the necessary means to enable
the financial targets, established with the approval of
the Executive Committee, to be reached.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

l. Decides to give priority to the consideration of
this item at its twenty-fifth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session with all
the relevant information available concerning the draft
Declaration on Freedom of Information and the draft
Convention on Freedom of Information.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2597 (XXIV).

2595 (XXIV). Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights
c

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2062 (XX) ·'of 16 December 1965, 2333 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and
2437 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 relating to the
creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
·
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1237
(XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the establishment of a
United Nations High Commissioner's Office for Human
Rights and the amendments submitted thereto by the
United Republic of Tanzania, 42 and Council resolution 1238 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the question
concerning the implementation of human rights through
a United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
or some other appropriate international machinery,
Noting also the views expressed in the current general debate on that question,
Considering that there has not been sufficient time
at its twenty-fourth session to complete the consideration of this matter,
1. Decides to give the highest priority to the consideration of this item with a view to the possibility
of concluding such consideration at its twenty-fifth
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session with an
analytical study relating to Economic and Social Council
resolution 1237 (XLII) and the amendments thereto,
and Council resolution 1238 (XLII) on this subject.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2596 (XXIV).

Freedom of information

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 in which, inter alia, it decided to hasten the conclusion, among other instruments, of a convention on
freedom of information,
Recalling further its resolution 2448 (XXIII) of 19
December 1968 by which it decided, pending completion .of the draft Convention on Freedom of Information, to give priority at its twenty-fourth session to
the consideration and adoption of the draft Declaration
on Freedom of Information,
Regretting that, despite this decision, it has not been
possible to do so owing to the heavy programme of
,;,,-1,rK :J the t venty-fourth session,
42 Jbid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 61,
document A/6699, annex Ill.

Respect for human rights in
armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 2444 ( XXIII) of 19
December 1968 by which it recognized, inter alia, the
necessity of applying the basic humanitarian principles
in all armed conflicts,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General, 43
Noting also the relevant resolutions concerning human
rights in armed conflicts adopted at the XXIst International Conference of the Red Cross,
Considering that there has not been time at its
twenty-fourth session for consideration of the item
entitled "Respect for human rights in armed conflicts",
Recognizing that the study requested in resolution
2444 (XXIII) should be continued with a view to
~ncluding further _data and developments, thus facilitatmg the presentation of concrete recommendations for
the full protection of civilians, prisoners and combatants
in all armed conflicts and for the prohibition and limitation of the use of certain methods and means of
warfare,

I. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study initiated under General Assembly resolution 2444
(X~l11), giving special attention to the need for protection of the rights of civilians and combatants in
confli~ts which arise from the struggles of peoples under
colorual and foreign rule for liberation and self-determin~tio? a~d to t~e better application of existing
humarutanan international conventions and rules to
such conflicts;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult and
co-operate closely with the International Committee
of the Red Cross in regard to the studies being undertaken by the Committee on this question;
~- Requests Member Stat~s to extend all possible
assistance to the Secretary-General in the continuation
of the study requested in paragraph l above;
4. Decides to transmit the report of the SecretaryGeneral to t_he Commission on Human Rights and to
the Economic and Social Council for their comments
to be submitted to the General Assembly at its twentyfifth session;
. 5. pecides to give the highest priority to this quest10n at its twenty-fifth session;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit a further
report on this subject to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session.
1835 th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
43 A/7720.
