III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the First Committee

5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-seventh session the item entitled "Science and
technology for disarmament".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990

75

4. Calls upon all States to support the objectives of
the Decade and to pursue the activities elaborated in
the Declaration of the Third Disarmament Decade;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report as and
when necessary to the General Assembly on progress
made in the implementation of the Declaration of the
1990s as the Third Disarmament Decade.

45/62. Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session
A
DECLARATION OF THE 1990s AS THE
THIRD DISARMAMENT DECADE

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, in
which it declared the 1980s as the Second Disarmament
Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 34/75 of 11 December
1979, in which it directed the Disarmament Commission to prepare elements of a draft resolution entitled
"Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament
Decade" for submission to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session for consideration and adoption,
Bearing in mind that the Second Disarmament Decade declared by its resolution 35/46 has come to an
end,
Reaffirming its resolution 43/78 L of 7 December
1988, in which it decided to declare the decade of the
1990s as the Third Disarmament Decade,
Recalling further its resolution 44/119 Hof 15 December 1989, in which it directed the Disarmament Commission, at its 1990 substantive session, to finalize the
preparation of elements of a draft resolution to be entitled "Declaration of the 1990s as the Third Disarmament Decade" and to submit them to the General
Assembly at its forty-fifth session for consideration and
adoption,
Reaffirming also the responsibility of the United Nations in the attainment of disarmament,
Noting the progress in the arms limitation and disarmament talks between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, as well as
other general recent positive developments in international relations and their positive impact on the attainment of global peace and security,
Desirous of maintaining the current momentum in
the disarmament process,
Convinced that a third disarmament decade will accelerate the disarmament process,
1. Welcomes with satisfaction the work of the Disarmament Commission at its 1990 session, at which it successfully concluded a draft Declaration of the 1990s as
the Third Disarmament Decade; 71
2. Adopts the text of the Declaration of the 1990s as
the Third Disarmament Decade adopted by the Disarmament Commission, as set forth in the annex to the
present .resolution;
3. Declares the 1990s as the Third Disarmament
Decade;
71
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 42 (N45/42), para. 35.

54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990
ANNEX
Declaration or the 1990s as the Third
Disarmament Decade
1. The present Declaration of the 1990s as the Third Disarmament Decade is addressed to the global community and deals with
the hopes and aspirations of people for lasting peace and security.

2. After a period of heightened tensions, the latter part of the decade of the 1980s saw a noticeable improvement in the way many
States conducted their relations with one another. Despite this favourable trend, the specific goals of the Second Disarmament Decade were
not fully realized.
3. In a world of growing interdependence, it is essential for the
international community to stimulate and deepen awareness of the
common interests of the global society and of the universal interest in
achieving disarmament and strengthening international peace and security. The challenges facing the international community today are
enormous. Accordingly, the solution of these difficult and complex issues will require the political will of States in conducting dialogue and
negotiations and in promoting international co-operation, including
confidence-building measures aimed at reducing tensions and the risk
of military confrontation among States, bearing in mind specific conditions prevailing in the region concerned. It will also require acknowledgement of the profound interrelationship of questions relating to
disarmament, social and economic development and environmental
protection.
4. The international community stands on common ground in determining to make progress in the 1990s by resolutely pursuing disarmament along with other efforts necessary for attaining genuine peace
and security. As members of the international community, we have
identified the following common goals. In the nuclear field, we must
continue urgently to seek early reductions in, and the eventual elimination of, nuclear weapons and work towards a comprehensive nuclear-test ban. To achieve the objective of non-proliferation in all its
aspects, all States are encouraged to make every effort further to
strengthen the non-proliferation rfgime and other measures to halt
and prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The aim of the international community should be to promote co-operation in the
peaceful use of nuclear energy on a non-discriminatory basis and
under agreed and appropriate international safeguards. The prevention of an arms race in outer space remains an important area to be
further addressed. Many States also see the need to address naval confidence-building measures and disarmament issues. In the conventional field, we must seek reductions in arms and armed forces in all
areas of the world and, in particular, where levels of concentrations
of armaments are highest. In this regard, we urgently seek the successful conclusion of the negotiations on conventional forces in Europe.
We aim for continued consideration of arms transfers in all their aspects. In the chemical field, we must work for the earliest conclusion
of a convention on the prohibition of the development, production,
stockpiling and use of all chemical weapons and on their destruction.
The international community also calls for strict compliance with the
Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925.3-4 As further steps forward, openness and transparency on all appropriate military matters should be
developed, the scope and techniques of verification advanced, the use
of science and technology for peaceful purposes promoted and nonmilitary threats to security addressed. All other initiatives to halt and
reverse the arms race, in particular the nuclear-arms race, in both its
qualitative and quantitative aspects deserve careful consideration.
Such initiatives include the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among States of
the region concerned and the creation of zones of peace under appro-

Genenl Assembly-Forty-fifth Session

76

priate conditions defined and determined freely by the States concerned in the wne. In the pursuit of the foregoing goals, the international community acknowledges the particular responsibility of
countries with the largest military arsenals. Resources freed through
disarmament could be used for the benefit of a balanced world development. These goals should be included in a comprehensive programme of disarmament, which should be concluded at an appropriate
time.
5. The United Nations will continue to foster multilateral co-operation for disarmament, wherein bilateral and regional efforts can be
complementary and mutually supportive in attaining the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. The international community can
further promote disarmament through the United Nations by building
upon its achievements in this field, including the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 15 which was
adopted by consensus.
6. The international community affirms the positive role that an
informed public can play in the process of disarmament by promoting
a constructive and realistic dialogue on issues related to disarmament.
In this regard, the pursuit of the World Disarmament Campaign and
the observance of Disarmament Week will continue to play a useful
role. Reflecting a growing understanding and commitment in dealing
with the global problems of peace and security, it recognizes that nongovernmental organizations play an invaluable role. It also supports
an enhanced role for women in developing the conditions for enduring
peac.e.
7. As the world moves towards the twenty-first century, it is evident that future generations will need increasing knowledge and understanding of the interd.ependent nature of life on the planet.
Education on international peace and security issues will play a fundamental part in allowing every individual to realize his or her role as
a responsible member of the world community.

B
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembly,
Having considered the annual report of the Disarmament Commission, 28
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective follow-up to the relevant recommendations and decisions
contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 15 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
Taking into account the relevant sections of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 63 the second special session devoted
to disarmament,
Also taking into account widespread views expressed
during the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly, the third special session devoted to disarmament,
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called upon to play and the contribution
that it should make in examining and submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and in the promotion of the implementation of
the relevant decisions of the tenth special session,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 H of 14 December
1978, 34/83 Hof 11 December 1979, 35/152 F of 12 December 1980, 36/92 B of 9 December 1981, 37/78 Hof
9 December 1982, 38/183 E of 20 December 1983,
39/148 R of 17 December 1984, 40/152 F of 16 December 1985, 41/86 E of 4 December 1986, 42/42 G of 30
November 1987, 43/78 A of 7 December 1988 and
44/119 C of 15 December 1989,
1. Takes note of the annual report of the Disarmament Commission;

2. Notes with apprecwtwn that the Disarmament
Commission has concluded its consideration of all substantive items on its agenda, except the item on objective information on military matters;
3. Commends the Disarmament Commission for its
adoption by consensus of the specific recommendations
on the following subjects on its agenda: (a) South
Africa's nuclear capability, (b) the role of the United
Nations in the field of disarmament, (c) conventional
disarmament and (d) the draft Declaration of the 1990s
as the Third Disarmament Decade;
4. Notes that the findings and recommendations
contained in the report of the Chairman of the Disarmament Commission on the item regarding naval armaments and disarmament 72 are endorsed by all participants in his consultations;

5. Also notes that no consensus could be reached on
specific recommendations for the item regarding various aspects of the arms race, particularly the nucleararms race and nuclear disarmament, as well as a general
approach to negotiations on nuclear and conventional
disarmament;
6. Recalls the role of the Disarmament Commission
as the specialized, deliberative body within the United
Nations multilateral disarmament machinery that allows for in-depth deliberations on specific disarmament
issues, leading to the submission of concrete recommendations on those issues;
7. Stresses the importance for the Disarmament
Commission of working on the basis of a relevant
agenda of disarmament topics, thereby enabling the
Commission to concentrate its efforts and thus optimize its progress on specific subjects in accordance with
resolution 37/78 H;
8. Notes with satisfaction that the Disarmament
Commission adopted by consensus a set of "Ways and
means to enhance the functioning of the Disarmament
Commission" at its 1990 substantive session;
9. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set
forth in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, and
with paragraph 3 of resolution 37/78 H, and to that end
to make every effort to achieve specific recommendations on the items on its agenda, taking into account the
adopted "Ways and means to enhance the functioning
of the Disarmament Commission";
10. Recommends that the Disarmament Commission, as a result of consultations, adopt at its 1990 organizational session the following substantive items for
inclusion in the working agenda of the 1991 session of
the Commission:
(1)

Objective information on military matters;

(2)

Process of nuclear disarmament in the framework of international peace and security with
the objective of the elimination of nuclear
weapons;

(3)

Regional approach to disarmament within the
context of global security;

72

Ibid., para. 33.

Ill.

77

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the First Committee

(4)

The role of science and technology in the context of international security, disarmament and
other related fields;
11. Also requests the Disarmament Commission to
meet for a period not exceeding four weeks during 1991
and to submit a substantive report to the General A'>sembly at its forty-sixth session;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Disarmament Commission the annual report of the
Conference on Disarmament, 37 together with all the official records of the forty-fifth session of the General
Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to
render all assistance that the Commission may require
for implementing the present resolution;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
full provision to the Commission and its subsidiary bodies of interpretation and translation facilities in the official languages, and to assign, as a matter of priority,
all the necessary resources and services to this end;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its forty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the
Disarmament Commission".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990
C
CESSATION OF TIIE NUCLEAR-ARMS RACE AND NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT AND PREVENTION OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Believing that all nations have a vital interest in negotiations on nuclear disarmament because the existence
of nuclear weapons jeopardizes the vital security interests of both nuclear- and non-nuclear-weapon States
alike,
Recalling its resolution 44/119 E of 15 December
1989,
Recalling also that the international community,
through the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 15 the first special session
devoted to disarmament, has agreed that the nucleararms race, far from contributing to the strengthening of
the security of all States, increases the danger of the
outbreak of a nuclear war,
Noting the reaffirmation by the Ninth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 4 to 7 September 1989, that
nuclear disarmament is a process in which all nations
should participate, and its view that the ongoing process
of disarmament could be accelerated and its coverage
widened through the common endeavour of the entire
international community,7
Taking into account that all nuclear-weapon States, in
particular those with the most important nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility for the fulfilment of
the task of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament,
Convinced that the prevention of nuclear war and the
reduction of the risk of nuclear war are matters of the
highest priority and of vital interest to all people of the
world,
Encouraged by the continued recognition by the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United

States of America that a nuclear war cannot be won and
must never be fought,
Aware of the fact that the prevention of nuclear war
and the reduction of the risk of nuclear war are inextricably linked with the cessation of the nuclear-arms race
and nuclear disarmament, and that consequently they
should be viewed in their interrelationship as essential
elements of a process of general and complete disarmament,
Convinced also that all avenues should be explored to
ensure that progress is made in these two vital fields,
and convinced further of the imperative need to take
constructive multilateral action to complement and reinforce the bilateral process under way,
1. Reaffirms that multilateral and bilateral negotiations on nuclear questions should complement and facilitate each other;
2. Believes that efforts should be intensified in order
to initiate multilateral negotiations in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 50 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;
3. Reiterates that, in view of the importance of the
matter, it is equally necessary to devise suitable steps to
expedite effective action for the prevention of nuclear
war;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to establish ad hoe committees at the beginning of its 1991
session on both the cessation of the nuclear-arms race
and nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear
war with adequate mandates in order to allow a structured and practical analysis of how the Conference can
best contribute to progress on these two urgent matters;
5. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session
on its consideration of those subjects;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-sixth session the items entitled "Cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament" and "Prevention of nuclear war".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990
D
REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/83 B of 11 December
1979, 35/152 J of 12 December 1980, 36/92 F of 9 December 1981, 37/78 G of 9 December 1982, 38/183 I of
20 December 1983, 39/148 N of 17 December 1984,
40/152 M of 16 December 1985, 41/86 M of 4 December
1986, 42/42 L of 30 November 1987, 43/78 M of 7 December 1988 and 44/119 D of 15 December 1989,
Having considered the report of the Conference on
Disarmament, 37
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as
the single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament, should have the primary role in substantive
negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Expressing Its regret that the Conference on Disarmament was not able in 1990 to commence negotiations
on the nuclear issues on its agenda,

General Assembly-Forty-Ofth Session

78

Expressing its expectation that the Conference on Disarmament, in view of the positive current process in
some fields of disarmament, will be in a position to
reach concrete agreements on disarmament issues to
which the United Nations has assigned the greatest priority and urgency and which have been under consideration for a number of years,
Considering that in the present international climate
it is more than ever imperative to give a new impetus
to negotiations on disarmament at all levels and to
achieve genuine progress in the immediate future,
Taking note with satisfaction of the relevant paragraphs of the report of the Conference on Disarmament on the progress towards improved and effective functioning of the Conference73 and expressing the
hope that the process will continue in all aspects of its
work,
1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community;
2. Notes the progress in the negotiations on the
elaboration of a draft convention on the complete and
effective prohibition of the development, production,
stockpiling and use of all chemical weapons and on
their destruction, and urges the Conference on Disarmament to intensify its work with a view to completing
negotiations on such a draft convention as soon as possible;
3. Also notes the re-establishment of the Ad Hoe
Committee on a Nuclear Test Ban;
4. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to
strengthen its work, to further its mandate through substantive negotiations, within the framework of ad hoe
committees as the most appropriate mechanism, and to
adopt concrete measures on the specific priority issues
of disarmament on its agenda, in accordance with the
Programme of Action set forth in section III of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly; 15
5. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to provide negotiating mandates to ad hoe committees on all
agenda items, in keeping with the fundamental role of
the Conference as identified in the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session;
6. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its
forty-sixth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the Conference on Disarmament".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990

all aspects of the problem of the cessation of the arms
race and general and complete disarmament under effective international control, which would provide the
Conference with a guideline to chart the course of its
further work and its negotiations",
Recalling also its resolution 35/46 of 3 December
1980, by which it adopted the Declaration of the 1980s
as the Second Disarmament Decade, which, inter alia,
called for the elaboration of the comprehensive programme of disarmament with the utmost urgency,
Recalling funher its resolution 44/119 A of 15 December 1989, in which it called upon the Conference on
Disarmament to consider, at the beginning of its 1991
session, the resumption of the work of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament with the aim of resolving the outstanding issues
in order to conclude the elaboration of the programme,
Having examined the part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament which contains the agreement
that the organizational framework to deal with the comprehensive programme of disarmament, as in the case
of other of its agenda items, shall be considered at the
beginning of the 1991 session, 74
Bearing in mind the conclusions reached by the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Comprehensive Programme of
Disarmament in its report of 1989 to the effect that "it
should resume work with the view to resolving the outstanding issues in the near future, when circumstances
are more conducive to making progress in this regard", 75
Considering that the present improvement in EastWest relations provides the appropriate scenario for a

renewed effort towards the conclusion of the comprehensive programme of disarmament,
Considering also that the conclusion of the elaboration of the comprehensive programme of disarmament
would constitute an important contribution to the success of the Third Disarmament Decade and to the role
of the United Nations in the field of disarmament,
1. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to reestablish, at the beginning of its 1991 session, the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Comprehensive Programme of
Disarmament;
2. Recommends that the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament continue
its work, building on the texts already agreed to, with
the view to resolving the outstanding issues and thus
concluding negotiations on it;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-sixth session the item entitled "Comprehensive
programme of disarmament".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990

E
COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAMME OF DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the 1970s
as a Disarmament Decade and requested, inter alia, the
then Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to
work out "a comprehensive programme, dealing with
13

F
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GUIDELINES FOR APPROPRIATE TYPES OF CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 43/78 H, adopted without a
vote on 7 December 1988,
74

Ibid., pa~a. 133.
Ibid., Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (N44/27), para.
100 (para. 7 of the quoted !ext).
-

75

Ibid., Supplement No. 27 (N45/27), paras. 16-18.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the First Commlttt>e

Reiterating its support for the guidelines for appropriate types of confidence-building measures and for the
implementation of such measures on a global or regional level, 76 as endorsed in that resolution,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General77 on
experience reported by Member States with the implementation of confidence-building measures,
Bearing in mind that confidence-building is a dynamic
process over time, and an interim assessment taking account of the experience gained may be valuable,
Noting with satisfaction the encouraging results of
specific confidence-building measures agreed upon and
implemented in some regions,
Bearing in mind also the particular need for confidence-building measures at times of political tension
and crises as well as their potential to prevent such situations from arising,
Bearing in mind further that confidence-building measures pursued at the regional level can contribute to the
development of global security,
Considering that confidence-building measures, especially when applied in a comprehensive manner, can be
conducive to achieving structures of security based on
co-operation and openness,
Pointing to the example of progress in the implementation of confidence- and security-building measures adopted at Stockholm in 1986 that has contributed to more stable relations and increased security,
reducing the risk of military confrontation in Europe,
Aware that there are situations peculiar to specific regions that have a bearing on the nature of the confidence-building measures feasible in those regions,
l. Recommends the guidelines to all States for implementation, taking fully into account the specific political, military and other conditions prevailing in a region, on the basis of initiatives and with the agreement
of the States of the region concerned;
2. Also recommends to all States that have started
to implement confidence-building measures to pursue
further and strengthen this process;
3. Appeals to all States to consider the widest possible use of confidence-building measures in their international relations, including bilateral, regional and
global negotiations, especially in times of political tension and crises;

4. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to collect relevant information from all Member States;
5. Appeals to all Member States that have not yet
done so to make their contribution to the report of the
Secretary-General;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-seventh session the item entitled "Implementation of the guidelines for appropriate types of confidence-building measures".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990
16

Jbid., Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 3 (NS-15/3),
para. 41 (para. 6 of the quoted text).
11
N45!397.

79

G
TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF TIIE UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTE FOR DISARMAMENT RESEARCH

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/83 M of 11 December
1979, in which it requested the Secretary-General toestablish the United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research on the basis of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General, 78
Reaffirming its resolution 39/148 H of 17 December
1984, in which it approved the Statute of the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, renewed
the invitation to Governments to consider making voluntary contributions to the Institute and requested the
Secretary-General to continue to give the Institute administrative and other support,
Recalling also its resolution 42/42 J of 30 November
1987, in which it took note with appreciation of the report of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies79
and noted that the establishment of the Institute offered new opportunities regarding research in the field
of disarmament,
Noting that the Ninth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 4 to 7 September 1989, expressed in its final
document on international security and disarmament 7
their appreciation for the research work conducted by
the Institute and stressed the need to ensure its continued viability by assured financial support from the regular budget of the United Nations and through voluntary contributions,
Considering the need for the international community
to have access to independent and in-depth research on
disarmament, in particular on emerging problems and
the foreseeable consequences of disarmament,
Noting also in this regard the importance of research
on the economic aspects of disarmament,
Having considered the annual report of the Director
of the Institute 80 and the report of the Advisory Board
on Disarmament Matters8 acting in its capacity as
Board of Trustees of the Institute,
1. Notes the tenth anniversary of the establishment
of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research;
2. Recognizes the increased importance and high
quality of the work of the Institute in the execution of
its mandate under its Statute;
3. Reiterates the conviction that the Institute should
continue to conduct independent research on problems
relating to disarmament and should be further encouraged to undertake specialized research or research requiring a high degree of expertise;
4. Calls upon all Member States and public or private institutions to consider making contributions to
the Institute in order to ensure its long-term viability
and to fulfil the objectives set out in section IV of General Assembly resolution 44/201 B of 21 December
1989;
78
N34/589.
79
80

81

N42/300, annex.
N45/392, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

General Assembly-Forty-Oftb Session

80

5. Recommends the continued implementation of
the Statute of the Institute;
6. Invites the Director of the Institute and the Advisory Board on Disam1ament Matters to continue to
report annually to the General Assembly on the activities conducted by the Institute;
7. Requests the Institute to prepare, with the assistance of independent experts, a research report on the
economic aspects of disarmament and to report to the
General Assembly, through the Secretary-General, at
its forty-seventh session, the costs of this research project being shared between the regular budget of the
United Nations and voluntary contributions.
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990

45/63.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli nuclear armament, the latest of which is resolution 44/121
of 15 December 1989,
Recalling its resolution 44/108 of 15 December 1989,
in which, inter alia, it called for placing all nuclear facilities in the region under International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 487 (1981)
of 19 June 1981, in which, inter alia, the Council called
upon Israel urgently to place all its nuclear facilities
under Agency safeguards,
Noting that only Israel has been specifically called
upon by the Security Council to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards,
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to
commit itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear
weapons, despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the International Atomic
Energy Agency,
Taking note of resolution GC (XXXIV)/RES/526,
adopted on 21 September 1990 by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Taking into consideration the final document on international security and disarmament adopted by the
Ninth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 4 to 7
September 1989,7 in paragraph 12 of which Israel was
condemned for continuing to develop its nuclear military programmes and weapons of mass destruction and
for its refusal to implement the resolutions of the
United Nations and the International Atomic Energy
Agency in this regard,
Deeply alarmed by the information with regard to the
continuing production, development and acquisition of
nuclear weapons by Israel and its testing of their delivery systems in the Mediterranean, thus threatening the
peace and security of the region,
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger international peace and security as a result of Israel's development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and
Israel's collaboration with South Africa to develop nuclear weapons and their delivery systems,

Deeply concerned that Israel has not committed itself
to refrain from attacking or threatening to attack safeguarded nuclear facilities,
1. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's refusal to
renounce any possession of nuclear weapons;

2. Reiterates also its condemnation of the co-operation between Israel and South Africa in the military
field;
3. Expresses its deep concern regarding the information on Israel's continuing production, development
and acquisition of nuclear weapons and testing of their
delivery systems;
4. Reaffirms that Israel should promptly apply Security Council resolution 487 (1981), in which the Council, inter alia, requested it to place all nuclear facilities
under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards
and to refrain from attacking or threatening to attack
nuclear facilities;
5. Calls upon all States and organizations that have
not yet done so not to co-operate with or give assistance
to Israel that could enhance its nuclear-weapons capability;
6. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to inform the Secretary-General of any steps
Israel may take to place its nuclear facilities under
Agency safeguards;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
Israeli nuclear activities and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-sixth session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear armament".
54th plenary meeting
4 December 1990

4S/64.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/152 of 19 December 1977,
35/153 of 12 December 1980, 36/93 of 9 December
1981, 37/79 of 9 December 1982, 38/66 of 15 December
1983, 39/56 of 12 December 1984, 40/84 of 12 December 1985, 41/50 of 3 December 1986, 42/30 of 30 November 1987 and 43/67 of 7 December 1988,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption, ten years ago,
on 10 October 1980, of the Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,82 together
with the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I),82 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices
(Protocol 11) 82 and the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol
III), s2
82
See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.
