9(,

(;pneral Assembl_v-Twenl~·-eighth Session

7. Invites all Member States to formulate their views
on the oricntation of the Fund and either transmit them
to or prescnt thcm bcfore the United Nations Council
for Namibia;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugecs, the spccializcd agencies and other organizations within the Unitcd Nations system to render ali
ncccssary assistance to thc Secretary-General in carrying out thc tasks assigncd to him under the present
resolution;
9. Decides, pending the entry into full operation of
the comprehcnsive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistancc through the United
Nations Educational ancl Training Programme for
Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
1O. Requests the Sccrctary-Gcneral and the United
N ations Council for Namibia to report to the General
Assembly at its twcnty-ninth session on the implementation of the prcsent resolution.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3113 (XXVIII). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portugucse domination,
Having examined ,the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to thc Implcmentation of the Dcclaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 19 including in particular the views expressed by
thc representatives of the national libcration movements
of the Territories concerned who participatcd as observers in the relcvant proceedings of the Special Committec,20
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the present item, 21
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the Frente Nacional para a Libertac;ao de Angola and
the Frente de Libertac;ao de Mo,;:ambique, who participated in an observer capacity in the Fourth Committee's
consideration of the item22 in accordance with the decision taken by the Gencr:.1! Assembly at its 2139th
plenary meeting, on 3 October 1973, 23
Recalling i:ts resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the ful! implementation of thc Declaration, as well as ali other resolutions relating to the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination adopted by the General Assembly, the Security C'.ouncil and the Special Committee,
Recalling, in particular, the provisions of it'i resolution 2918 (XXVII) of 14 November 1972, and of
Security Counci! resolution 322 ( 1972) of 22 Novem19 lbfd., Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.1), chaps. 1, IVVI and IX.
20 A/AC.109/PV.915 and Corr.l, 917, 920, 921 and 929.
21 A/9132 and Add.1 and 2.
22 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee, 2028th and 2055th meetings.
23 See "Other decisions", p. 111.

ber 1972 in which the Government of Portugal was
called upon, ínter alfa, to enter into negotiations with
the partics concerncd, with a view to achieving a solution to the armed confrontation that exists in the African Tcrritories under its domination and permitting the
peoplcs of those Territories to exercise freely their right
to self-determination and independence, and deeply
deploring thc refusal of that Govcmment to comply
with those provisions,
Taking into consideration the programmc of action
adoptcd by the International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973/4
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Territories under
Portuguese Domination, adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its tenth ordinary session, held at
Addis Ababa from 27 to 29 May 1973,
Condemning the continued collaboration of Portugal,
South Africa and the illegal racist minority régime in
Southern Rhodesia, designed to perpetuate colonialist
and racialist domination in the region. and the persistent intervention against the peoples of the Territories
concerned by police and armed forces, as well as by
mercenaries from South Africa and Southern Rhodesia,
Condemning the repeated acts of aggression committed by the armed forces of Portugal agains1 independent African States, which constitute a violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of those States
and seriously disturb intemational peace and security
in the African continent, as reaffi.rmed in Security Council resolution 312 ( 1972) of 4 February 1972,
Condemning any attempt by Portugal to place any
of the facilities in the Territories under its domination
at the disposal of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or any of its members on a bilateral basis for military purposes,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States, particularly sorne of the military allies of Portugal, which,
in defiance of repeated requests addressed to them by
the United Nations, continue to provide Portugal with
military and other assistance both within the context of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and bilaterally,
without which Portugal could not pursue its policies of
colonial domination and oppression of the peoples of
Angola and Mozambique,
Deepl;• disturbed by the intensified activities of those
foreign economic, financia! and other interests which,
contrary to the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, are a~sisting Portugal in its colonial wars
and obstructing the realization by the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese domination of their legitimate aspirations for freedom and independence,
Noting with appreciation the concrete programmes
of assistance being extended to the national liberation
movements of those Territories by a number of Govemments, as well as those initiated by organizations
within the United N ations system and several non-govemmental organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the progress towards national
independence and freedom being made by the national
liberation movements in those Territories, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
particularly in the liberated areas of Angola ánd Mozam bique,
24 A/9061, annex, sect. IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Commiuee

Noting also with satisfaction . t~~ inte!lti~m of the
Special Committee to send a v1S1tmg ~mss1on to the
liberated areas of Angola and Mozambique,
l. Reaffi.rms the inalienable right of t~e ~eoples of
Angola and Mozambique and other :rer!1tones ~nder
Portuguese domination to self-determmahon and ~nd_ependence as recognized by the General Assembly m 1ts
resolutio~ 1514 (XV), and the legitimacy of their
strugg1e by all ways and means at their disposal to
achieve that right;
2. Reaffirms that the national liberation m?vements
of Angola and Mozam~iqu~ are the authent1c representatives of the true aspirat1ons of the _peoples of th?se
Territories and recommends that, pendmg the access1on
of those Territories to independence, all _Go_vemm~n~s,
the specialized agencies and other organtz~ttons w1~hm
the United Nations system and the Umted Nal!ons
bodies concerned shou1d, when dealing with matt~rs
pertaining to the. Territories,. ensu~e the representat1on
of those Territones by the hberat1on movements concerned in an appropriate capacity and in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity;
3. Condemns in the strongest possible terms the
persistent refusal of the Government of Portuga; to
comply with the provisions. of the_ relevant r~solut!ons
of the United Nations and, m particular, the mtensified
armed repression by Portugal of the peoples of the Territories under its domination, including the brutal massacre of villagers, the mass destruction of villages ~nd
propcrty and the ruthless use of nap_a~m and c~e~tcal
substances in order to stifle the legitlmate asp1rat1ons
of those p~oples for freedom and independence;
4. Demands that the Government of Portugal should
cease forthwith its colonial wars and all acts of repression against the peoples of Angola and Mo~ambi9ue,
withdraw its military and other forces and dIScontmue
all practices which violate the inalienable rights of those
populations, including the eviotion from. thei! homes
and the regrouping of the African populations m aldeamentos and the settlement of foreign immigrants in the
Territories;
5. Demands that the Government of Portugal treat
the freedom fighters of Angola and Mozambique captured during the struggle for freedom as prisoners of
war in accordance with the principles of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War, of 12 August 1949,25 and in that connexion invites the lntemational Committee of the Red Cross to
continue to maintain close contact with the liberation
movements as parties to the conflict, to provide reports
on conditions in prisoner-of-war camps and on the
treatment of prisoners of war detained by Portugal and
to make the necessary arrangements to secure the exchange of prisoners of war:
6. Appeals to all Governments, the speciali_zed
agencies and other organizations within t~e _Umted
Nations system and non-governmental orgaruzatlons to
render to the peoples of Angola, M?za~biq~e and _other
Territories under Portuguese dommat1on, m part1cul~r
the populations in the libe_rated areas of _those. femtories all the moral matenal and econom1c ass1stance
neces~ary to continu~ their struggle for the achievement
of their inalienable right to freedom and independence;
7. Urges all Govemments, particularly those members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization which
continue to render assistance to Portugal, to withdraw
1111 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 7S, No. 972, p. 135.

97

any assistance that enables Portugal . to prosecute the
colonial war in Angola and Mozambique, and to prevent the sale or supply of all arms and military matériel
to Portugal including civi1 aircraft, ships and other
means of tr~nsport capable of being used for transp<;>rting military matériel and personnel, as well as suppli~,
equipment and material for the manufacture or mamtenance of weapons and ammunition that it uses to perpetuate its colonial domination in Africa;
S. Appeals to all States to refrain from any collaboration with Portugal involving the use of any of
the Territories under its dornination for military purposes;
9. Calls upon ali States to take forthwith a1l possible
measures:
(a) To put an end to any activities that _helI? to exploit the Territories under Portuguese dommat1on and
the peoples ,therein;
( b) To discourage their nationals and the bo~ies
corporate under their jurisdiction from entering mto
any transactions or arrangements that contribute to
Portugal's domination over those Territories;
(e) To exclude Portugal from taking part on beh~f
of Ang0!a and Mozambique in :.:ny bi!ateral or multtlateraf treaties or agreements relating parti~ul~rly to
externa] trade in the products of those Temtones;
1O. Draws the attention of the Security Council,
having regard to the explosive situation re_suJt_ing from
the policies of Portugal in the colonial Terntones u~der
its domination and from its constant provocatlons
against the independent African States bordering those
Territories and in the light of the outright disregard
by Portug~l of the re]evant resolutions of the United
N r. tions, particularly Council resolutions 312_ (1972)
and 322 (1972), to the urgent need for takmg, as a
matter of priority, a1l effective steps with a view to
securing the full and speedy implementation of General Assemhly rcsolution 1514 (XV) and of the rclated
decisions of the United Nations;
l t. Requests thc Sccretary-Gcneral to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session;
12. Invites the Secretary-Genera1, bearing in mind
the urgent need for mobilizing world public opinion
against the criminal war of repression being waged by
the Government of Portugal against the peoples of the
Territories under its domination, to continue to take
effective and concrete measures through ali the media
at his disposal to give widespread and continuous pu~
licity to the critica) situation obtaining in those Terntories and the heroic struggle of their peoples towards
freedom and independence;
13. Decides to keep the situation in these Territories
under continuous review and to include in the agenda
of its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Question
of Territories under P.:>rtuguese domination".
2198th plenary meeting
12 Decembcr 1973
3114 (XXVIII). Establishment of the Commisi-ion o{ lnquiry on the Reported Massacres
in l\lozamhique

The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the reported massacres in Mozambique,
