S/PV.7686

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7686

th meeting
Wednesday, 4 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mrs. Audouard
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12623 (E)
*1612623*

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Gerard
van Bohemen, Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Since my
previous briefing to the Security Council in December
(see S/PV.7587), the Security Council has adopted
resolution 2253 (2015), which refocused the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), or Da’esh, and its affiliates,
and on limiting the financing of those groups. Since
then, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team established pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, tasked with keeping
us apprised of the threat posed by ISIL, Al-Qaida
and affiliates, has provided the Committee with
several updates.
In February, the Monitoring Team briefed the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, and
more recently also briefed the 1267 Committee on the
expansion of ISIL beyond Iraq and Syria. I will share
some of its findings today.
The threat posed by ISIL has shifted somewhat
since December. ISIL’s core in Iraq and Syria is under
pressure. It has lost control of some territory, and the
destruction of significant parts of its oil infrastructure
has led to a drop in internal revenue generation. As a
response to that, however, we have seen ISIL looking to
2/20

04/05/2016

increase revenue from other streams, including internal
taxation, smuggling antiquities and, potentially,
kidnapping for ransom.
Nor is ISIL short of arms and fighters. Although
recent reports indicate that the flow of recruits to it
is slowing, estimates suggest that to date upwards
of 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters have travelled
to Iraq and Syria. As reported by the Monitoring
Team, in response to the pressure on its core, ISIL’s
centre of gravity is shifting. The threat is expanding
geographically as ISIL affiliates spring up around the
world. And as pressure on ISIL’s core increases, foreign
terrorist fighters are also seeking to return home. Those
developments pose both a challenge and an opportunity
for improving the impact and effectiveness of the 1267
sanctions regime. While some foreign terrorist fighters
return from conflict zones disillusioned by what they
have experienced, others come back radicalized,
battle-hardened and well networked. Such fighters pose
a real threat to the wider international community.
Member States from all regions of the world are
affected. These fighters can exploit networks, including
with local Al-Qaida affiliates, to conduct terror attacks.
Their capacity to initiate complex attacks at great speed
is already becoming a reality.
It is also difficult to detect the travel of foreign
terrorist fighters. Many now use broken travel routes
to and from conflict zones, making it much harder
to track them. Whereas previously they may have
travelled directly from their state of residence to a
neighbouring country of the conflict zone, they are now
taking multiple, indirect routes, often using more than
one passport. If we are to get on top of this threat, it is
essential that Member States implement the steps called
for in resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) and share
information to enable better detection and disruption of
travel by foreign terrorist fighters.
ISIL affiliates in Libya, Afghanistan and Yemen are
steadily gaining a foothold and becoming increasingly
important to the survival of ISIL. As pressure increases
on the ISIL core in Iraq and Syria, it is expected
that ISIL will look to move funds to those affiliates,
including through the use of informal money transfer
arrangements. It is crucial, therefore, that Member
States, particularly those neighbouring Iraq and Syria,
be vigilant in implementing the 1267 regime.
This movement of funds and fighters outside of
ISIL-controlled territory provides an opportunity for
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Member States to detect and prevent the wider spread
of ISIL. This is where the sanctions measures can
have the most impact. When effectively targeted and
implemented, the sanctions can place pressure on ISIL
and its affiliates, preventing the dispersal of funds and
disrupting further attacks on civilian populations. The
measures for the freezing of assets are one area where
the sanctions can really bite. But for this to happen, the
Committee needs targeted designations of individuals
involved in the generation and movement of assets.
Member States with information about these individuals
and entities have a role to play by putting forward new
listing requests, as encouraged in resolution 2253
(2015).
It is also crucial that Member States engage with
and provide updated information to the Monitoring
Team and 1267 Committee on the nature of the threat,
listed individuals and entities, and the status of their
implementation and enforcement of sanctions measures.
This information is fundamental to the operation of the
regime. The Council and international community can
target their response effectively only if they have upto-date information. I encourage those Member States
that have not done so to submit their implementation
reports called for in paragraph 36 of resolution 2253
(2015).
The Committee is also playing its part in assisting
Member States’ engagement with the sanctions regime.
The Committee already held one open briefing for
interested Member States last month, and plans to hold
another two such open briefings before the end of this
year. A one-page outline is available in the Chamber
today, providing an overview of the key upcoming
dates and deadlines for 1267 Committee engagement.
We are also in the process of updating the Committee’s
guidelines with the aim of improving the regime’s
efficiency and effectiveness. These guidelines were
last updated in 2013. It is important that Committee
processes support the efficient and effective operation
of the regime. As the Monitoring Team keeps the
Committee apprised of the evolving threat posed by
ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates, the Committee will
also work closely with key actors, including the other
relevant Security Council sanctions committees.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Van
Bohemen for his briefing.

S/PV.7686

I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I wish to give a brief overview of the
developments in the work of the Committee and its
Executive Directorate (CTED). The Committee, with
the support of CTED and as mandated by paragraph 24
of resolution 2178 (2014), has undertaken a wide range of
actions to address the threat of foreign terrorist fighters
and is currently developing new tools to facilitate its
dialogue with Member States on their implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), as well as its
analysis of measures taken pursuant to resolution 2178
(2014).
The Committee has devoted much of its efforts
over recent months to identifying principal gaps
and good practices in stemming the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters and to building on the analysis
produced, including the three reports issued by the
Security Council on the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and ways in which Member States can
strengthen countermeasures.
The third report (S/2015/975), published
on 29 December 2015, provided comprehensive
recommendations for all States in regions affected by
the threat, as well as global thematic recommendations
covering the criminalization requirements of resolution
2178 (2014), the prosecution of foreign terrorist
fighters, border control and law enforcement measures
to prevent inter-State travel, countering incitement and
violent extremism, preventing financing of foreign
terrorist fighters, international cooperation, and human
rights and the rule of law.
The Committee also continued to enhance
its cooperation with international and regional
organizations and relevant United Nations bodies and
partners. The Council published, on 23 December 2015,
the conclusions of the Committee’s special meeting
(S/2015/939, annex I) with Member States and relevant
international and regional organizations on stemming
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, held in Madrid
on 27 and 28 July 2015, and the guiding principles on
foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/939, annex II), adopted
following the meeting, as well as the declaration of
the meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and

16-126233/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of Interior, held on the occasion of the special meeting
(S/2015/939, annex III).
The guiding principles were identified by the
participants in the special meeting and build upon
existing good practices identified by international
and regional organizations and forums. Intended
to assist Member States in their efforts to stem the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters, they focus on the
detection of, intervention against and prevention of
the incitement, recruitment and facilitation of foreign
terrorist fighters; preventing their travel; and the
criminalization, prosecution — including prosecution
strategies for returnees — international cooperation,
and the rehabilitation and reintegration of returnees.
As the Council will recall, in January 2016, in
my capacity as Chair of the Committee, I submitted
to the Council the global surveys of Member States’
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The surveys rely on data compiled on the basis
of information and updates provided by Member States
to the Committee; reports on country visits — the
Executive Directorate has visited more than 90 States
on behalf of the Committee; regional workshops; and
information provided by international, regional and
subregional organizations and partners. Both surveys
take stock of the progress achieved and remaining
challenges in implementing the measures under
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), which are
also relevant to stemming the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014). I would also
note that the Committee, with the support of CTED,
has been actively addressing the use of information and
communications technology for terrorist purposes.
Last December, the Committee held a special
meeting on this growing and significant threat,
attended by Member States, international and regional
organizations, private sector leaders, and representatives
of civil society. The participants considered ways to
develop a multi-stakeholder approach to this challenge,
including with respect to the evolution of the threat,
the need to strengthen public/private cooperation, selfregulation by the private sector, and online countermessaging. The Committee, with the support of CTED,
intends to hold another special meeting on this topic,
at which it will take stock of progress made since the
December meeting, including partnerships established
with key stakeholders from the private sector.
4/20

04/05/2016

As Council members are aware, I recently chaired
a joint open briefing, together with my colleague from
New Zealand, focusing on new and emerging terroristfinancing trends. We were joined by the President of
the Financial Action Task Force and by representatives
from the private sector. As members are also aware,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
its affiliates pose significant new challenges to the
international community, owing in large part to their
exploitation of the natural and economic resources of
territories under their control, bank robbery, extortion
and the looting of antiquities. The counter-strategy
of the international community focuses in part on
disrupting financial flows to and from ISIL-controlled
areas and ensuring the protection of the international
financial system. However, that presents significant
challenges for many Member States.
In order to disrupt terrorist networks, we must
target their income and their ability to provide
resources to sleeper cells. By cutting off the flow of
funds to such groups we can significantly undermine
their capacity to recruit for, incite, plan and carry out
attacks. Countering the financing of terrorism must
therefore form an integral part of national and regional
counter-terrorism strategies.
Terrorist groups continue to identify innovative
funding methods, and the international community,
especially those Member States directly affected,
must be equipped with the tools required to mount
an effective response. In that regard, the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) — jointly with the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities — will convene a three-day
joint CTC/1267 Committee special meeting on terrorist
financing in December, with the participation of the
Financial Action Task Force.
At our recent joint open briefing, it became clear
that enhanced cooperation within and between public
sector agencies, both domestically and internationally,
was critical to identifying foreign terrorist fighters
and preventing their travel. Participants discussed the
possibility that Member States’ financial intelligence
units be given access to personal information such as
social security and tax records, subject to domestic
data and privacy laws, and proposed that they share
information more effectively, both among themselves
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and with other relevant agencies. They also noted the need
for deeper public-private partnerships in identifying
financing networks of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as the need to establish financial profiles and patterns
to support the work of investigators.
The Committee continues to adopt a risk-based
approach, where appropriate, aimed at facilitating
capacity-building tailored to each State’s perception
of its own needs. The huge diversity of States in
terms of their size and population; the nature of the
various threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters to
particular States; as well as States’ relative capacities
and vulnerabilities to address terrorist threats, makes
a one-size-fits-all approach impractical. States should
therefore develop responses to the threat of terrorism
based on their respective national security concerns,
rather than on a fixed template that might have little
relevance to their situation.
The Committee has also consistently recalled the
position of the Council that all measures taken by
Member States to combat terrorism must comply with
all their obligations under international law and that
States should adopt such measures in accordance with
international law, in particular international human
rights law, refugee law and humanitarian law.
The Committee recognizes that its effectiveness
rests not just on what is done but when it is done. To that
end, it has been implementing measures to act more
rapidly in its dialogue with Member States, and thus to
improve its responsiveness to their needs based upon
the principle of national ownership, without sacrificing
the quality of that dialogue or the opportunity for States
to carefully consider their responses to the Committee’s
outreach efforts. One example in that regard is
the Committee’s request that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) present its findings
immediately upon its return from follow-up visits. This
year CTED also reported to the Committee on recent
visits to Ghana, Kenya, Sri Lanka, Kyrgyzstan and Iraq.
Moreover, the Committee arranged an informal meeting
with representatives of Iraq, the donor community
and technical assistance providers and implementing
agencies to discuss collective efforts in assisting Iraq
in its counter-terrorism capacity-building. That marks
a significant improvement on previous practice, and the
Committee looks forward to strengthening its dialogue
with each of those Member States.

S/PV.7686

The Committee has adopted its 2016 work
programme, which covers all the required objectives
and related activities. The Committee will continue
to take the necessary measures to ensure a practical,
responsive and dynamic approach to its dialogue with
all Member States.
(spoke in Arabic)
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your briefing as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). I also thank the Ambassador of New Zealand
for his briefing as Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
My statement as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) has been approved by all the members of the
Security Council, and as such members will be quite
familiar with it. I shall therefore not read out the
statement in full, but will limit myself to a muchcondensed version. The Member States with us today
that are not members of the Council will be able to read
the official version approved by the Committee on the
1540 Committee’s website, where it will be posted in a
few minutes.
When I last briefed the Security Council, on
22 December 2015 (see S/PV.7597) I spoke of the
extreme violence being perpetrated by terrorists and
their supporters around the world. That violence is much
more intense today, and the terrorists are much closer
to the possibility of acquiring or producing weapons of
mass destruction. We are facing a real threat, as best
illustrated by the fact that an Interpol report states that
Da’esh has a chemical weapons programme under way.
As such, the threat is clearly a global one. The European
Parliament agrees with that as well, stating a week ago
that there was a real risk of a Da’esh attack.
Prevention is without a doubt the best solution to
that threat. And the best preventive tool available to the
international community in the area of non-proliferation
is resolution 1540 (2004). It is therefore essential that

16-126235/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the comprehensive review of the resolution, to which
we are deeply committed, be both ambitious and allinclusive. I will now turn to the preliminary steps we
are working on, which we must develop further this
year, in particular at the third session of the review, to
take place next week in Madrid.
First, with regard to implementation, it is important
to highlight that there has been a continued increase in
the number of measures adopted by States to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), however, we still face the
challenge of achieving its universalization. We need to
strengthen direct interaction between the Committee
and States that need our support. For that to become
reality, it is crucial that we make the non-proliferation
regime and its architecture more efficient.
Secondly, the Committee is aware of the fact that
we need to improve the assistance mechanism by way
of a process that more precisely defines requests,
with a view to making it easier to provide assistance
to States and international organizations. That issue
was thoroughly addressed at the recently held African
Union meeting in Addis Ababa
Thirdly, support and greater coordination for
the various programmes of specialized international
organizations will be a key part of the comprehensive
review. We need to focus in particular on areas such
as biological weapons, where there is no mechanism
comparable to the International Atomic Energy Agency,
which is the relevant specialized body for nuclear
weapons, or the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, which is the specialized body for
chemical weapons.
Finally, with regard to outreach and transparency,
we must make a greater effort to interact more with
Member States to make the work of the 1540 Committee
known, while bearing in mind that there is a direct
correlation between the States that are most involved
in resolution 1540 (2004) and their participation in the
events. It is worth mentioning that the involvement of
civil society enriches the Committee with ideas from
different sectors, as was seen in the informal meeting
with experts held in April, where we were able to talk
about new advances in science and technology, and in
the consultations we held with academics in early April.
In my previous briefing, I said that industry was
a key partner in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Thanks to Germany’s support, that will
be a cornerstone of the open consultations that will
6/20

04/05/2016

take place at Headquarters from 20 to 22 June, at
which Member States, international organizations and
selected representatives of civil society will be able to
contribute their ideas to the comprehensive review.
I will end where I began — on the evolving nature
of terrorism affects all States directly and indirectly.
Non-State actors are already fully engaged in acquiring
technologies and materials that will allow them to
obtain weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, we
must also be fully engaged in preventing them from
doing so. What better way is there to do so than the
comprehensive review of our most powerful and
effective weapon in countering their activities, which
is resolution 1540 (2004).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We start by thanking the
Egyptian presidency for convening this meeting.
The holding of open briefings by the Chairs of the
Sanctions Committees increases the transparency
of Security Council proceedings, which the United
Nations membership has been calling, for especially
in matters of great political sensibility, such as the
sanctions regimes.
We took note with appreciation of the briefings
provided by the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) — respectively, the Permanent
Representatives of New Zealand, Egypt and Spain.
We acknowledge the existence of organic
linkages
and
encourage
the
strengthening
of
cooperation
among
the
Sanctions
and
Counter-Terrorism Committees, their respective groups
of experts and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), as well as among
United Nations specialized agencies, Member States
and the wider international community in dealing with
the impending threats to peace and security caused by
terrorism worldwide.
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The holding of this meeting less than a month
after the debate on 14 April on threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts (see
S/PV.7670) demonstrates the Council’s commitment to
combating the threat posed by terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
The report by the Chair of the 1267 Committee
highlights the expansion of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant beyond Iraq and Syria, the shifting
of its centre of gravity due to military pressure,
with ensuing loss of territory and destruction of
different significant parts of its oil infrastructure.
A matter of great concern expressed in the report is
the return home to many foreign terrorist fighters and
the additional threat caused by those developments,
which as the Chair of the Committee stresses, pose
a greater risk to the international community and an
opportunity for improving the impact and effectiveness
of the 1267 (1999) sanctions regime, which has the
ultimate goal of degrading and destroying that lethal
terrorist organization.
Notwithstanding the fact that sanctions by
themselves are not enough to win the fight against
terrorism, it is imperative to strengthen global
international, regional and subregional cooperation,
as well as national capacities at all levels, and to find
creative ways to launch an ideological struggle to
successfully confront the terrorists. The phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters calls for enhanced cooperation
among States, international and regional organizations,
relevant United Nations bodies and partners to put an
end to the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, which is an
approach that should be at the centre of the Committees’
efforts and runs parallel with the activities employed by
the Counter-Terrorism Committees.
The guiding principles identified to assist Member
States in their efforts to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, the global surveys on the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001), the use of information and
communication technologies for terrorist purposes, the
trends in terrorist financing and the efforts to cut the
flow of funds and undermine the terrorists’ capacities
to exploit natural and economic resources in territories
under their control are matters identified in the Chair’s
report as fundamental responses States should develop
for their security concerns.
Still concerning the report by the Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, we share his view on the

S/PV.7686

need to implement measures permitting the Committee
to act more rapidly and efficiently in its dialogue with
Member States by improving its responsiveness to their
needs based upon the principle of national ownership.
The extreme violence of acts perpetrated by the
terrorists substantiate that the realization of their
already proclaimed determination to make use of
weapons of mass destruction would be a development
of catastrophic dimensions, which as the Chair of the
1540 Committee reminds us, can be avoided only by
constantly vigilance by Member States to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons
of mass destruction. It is against such a backdrop that
the 1540 Committee is undertaking a comprehensive
review on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2014) highlighting the need for continued vigilance at
national, regional and international levels, along with
sustained and intensified support from the Committee.
The priorities and the main thrust highlighted by the
Chair of the Committee of the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has our
support and encouragement by streamlining Security
Council efforts and strengthening cooperation and
effective coordination between the Committee and
overall framework set up to combat terrorism, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Sanctions
Committees related to terrorists activities.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, Ambassador Van
Bohemen and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for your
respective briefings. The three Ambassadors have been
actively promoting the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee; the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to implement their mandates
and coordinate international counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation efforts. China commends the three
Committees on the substantial progress they have made
in their respective work.
The 1267 (1999) Committee is an important
anti-terrorism mechanism of the Council. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and other
terrorist forces pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. The international community
should use a variety of political, economic and
cultural means to design comprehensive measures and

16-126237/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

effective responses. China supports the efforts of the
1267 Committee, within its mandate under Council
resolutions, strengthen the communication with the
relevant countries, to strengthen the review of listings
and delistings and periodically review the sanctions list;
strengthen cooperation with monitors and monitoring
groups; and make greater contributions to the cause
of international anti-terrorism. We hope that the
work of the Committee will be further improved and
that all Members States will, in accordance with the
Committee’s rules of procedure, continue to support
and facilitate its work and fully uphold the authority
and efficacy of the sanctions mechanism.
The
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
(CTC)
represents an important platform for strengthening the
capacity-building of the Member States and international
cooperation in combating terrorism. At present,
terrorist organizations are using the Internet and social
media as important means to carry out their activities.
China supports the efforts of the CTC and the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) to improve
the assessment of the implementation of anti-terrorism
resolutions, carry out country visits, organize meetings
and undertake activities that are designed to fight the
use of the Internet to incite and finance terrorism, in the
framework of implementing Council resolutions, and to
offer necessary technical assistance to Member States.
China hopes that the CTC will continue to strengthen
communication with Member States and promote its
coordination and cooperation with relevant United
Nations agencies in order to strengthen the capacity of
Member States and promote international cooperation
in the field of anti-terrorism and maintain international
peace and security.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) is an important mechanism in the
field of non-proliferation. In the future, the focus
should be on the comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
comprehensive review is an important measure to
ensure the effective implementation of the resolution
and helps to further strengthen the awareness and
capacities of countries against proliferation. We need
to come to grips with the major threats outlined in
the resolution and prohibit non-State actors from
engaging in proliferation activities, especially for
terrorist purposes. We must also avoid introducing
other complex issues that do not fall within the purview
of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee must play
8/20

04/05/2016

its major role in assisting in the implementation of the
resolution, strengthen its assistance mechanism and
satisfy the assistance needs of the countries. Moreover,
all relevant activities carried out by countries should
further the work of the Committee.
China is an important member of the international
campaign against terrorism. The terrorist forces of the
East Turkestan Liberation Organization, represented
by the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, seriously
threaten not only China’s national security but also
regional security and stability. China supports the fight
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
We believe that anti-terrorism strategies should
comply with uniform standards and not be linked to
a specific ethnicity or religion. The United Nations
and the Security Council need to play a major role in
anti-terrorism efforts, in compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
need to strengthen our effective coordination in order
to wage a high-intensity campaign against terrorism.
We attach great importance to international
cooperation in the field of anti-terrorism. As the
President of the Council in April, China convened
an open debate against terrorism (see S/PV.7670)
that served to strengthen the political resolve of all
parties against terrorism and devised a series of new
anti-terrorism measures and recommendations, lending
new impetus to the coordination and cooperation of
international efforts against terrorism.
China firmly opposes the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs). We insist on resolving
proliferation problems through political and diplomatic
means and on effectively preserving and strengthening
the international the non-proliferation regime by
fostering an international and regional security
environment of mutual confidence and cooperation in
order to remove the motivations for WMD proliferation.
China supports exchanges and cooperation among
the various parties in the field of non-proliferation. In
September 2015, China hosted a workshop for the 1540
national focal points in the Asia-Pacific region, which
has played a positive role in strengthening the capacitybuilding of the Asia-Pacific countries in implementing
the resolution. China will continue to comprehensively
participate in and promote international cooperation in
the fields of anti-terrorism and counter-proliferation
in order to promote further progress in relevant fields.
China will continue to support the efforts of the 1267
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Committee, the CTC and the 1540 Committee to ensure
the comprehensive implementation of the mandates set
forth in the Council resolutions, while making new
contributions to international cooperation against
terrorism and non-proliferation.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chairmen of the Committees
with counter-terrorism mandates for their detailed
briefings. The effectiveness of the work of those
bodies will to a large extent determine progress in
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in the field of
counter-terrorist cooperation.
Today, the world is facing an unprecedented upsurge
of terrorist activity. The main threat stems from the socalled Islamic State. Despite its significant territorial,
human and financial losses, to a large extent achieved
through Russia’s Aerospace Defence Forces, the group
misses no opportunity to sew terror and its pseudoideology. Its attempts to gain a foothold in Libya,
Afghanistan, Yemen and other areas of instability are
clear evidence of that.
Recently, the Security Council carried out
significant work in strengthening the international
legal framework for countering the terrorist threat by
suppressing its fuelling and financing and improving
the work of the sanctions and monitoring mechanisms.
In that regard, resolution 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015)
were the most important steps. Today, the main problems
lie in their full-fledged good-faith implementation both
by States Members and within the framework of the
Organization as a whole. In that regard, States that
border conflict zones bear a special responsibility.
We have serious questions about the primary
analytical materials of the Secretary-General and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Group of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. The main problem
is that they contain insufficient assessments and are
not sufficiently concrete. Moreover, such an approach
is a necessary prerequisite to a deeper understanding
of the thrust of the problem, identifying problems with
the implementation of Security Council decisions, and
tailoring the work of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies in counter-terrorism efforts. There is no
shortage of such data, including from open sources. We

S/PV.7686

have also circulated to the Security Council a number
of documents that shed light on the main channels for
smuggled petroleum, artefacts and foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as weapons. As is quite clear from
those documents, the main routes cross Turkey and are
not suppressed by Ankara.
We expect that the Secretary-General’s future
reports, including the May report on resolution 2253
(2015), and of the Monitoring Group will address
the shortcomings that have been pointed out. As the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, has repeatedly stated, this is no
time to bury our heads in the sand like an ostrich.
The international community must acknowledge the
facts. Only in that way we will overcome a common
enemy — the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Referring to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we would like to
state that we expect constructive cooperation with the
group of experts, each of which possesses the requisite
knowledge and expertise in terms of weapons of
mass destruction and export control. The Committee
continues its effective work helping countries to
implement the provisions of the resolution. The number
of States failing to submit relevant national reports is
falling. The Group of Experts is visiting specialized
international forums to inform the international
community on the specificities and tasks of this
non-proliferation mechanism.
We are not opposed to convening consultations with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
industry and business representatives, subject to
the understanding, however, that responsibility for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) lies with States
and their administrative structures. In other words,
civil society is not an independent player in this field.
The main task for the subsidiary body of the Security
Council in 2016 is to conclude the comprehensive
review with a view to identifying existing bottlenecks
in the implementation of the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004).
In our view, the Committee itself requires
fine-tuning rather than radical change. We expect the
States members of the Security Council to approach
the final review with great care. Doing otherwise could
have unpredictable consequences. That also applies
to the creation of additional bureaucratic structures
to address the theme of resolution 1540 (2004). We

16-126239/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

are quite skeptical in that regard, to put it frankly.
States can cooperate directly with the Committee,
as is directly stated in the text of the resolution. The
creation of additional formats that do not enjoy the
consensus support of Committee members could lead
to unnecessary duplication and even undermine the
work of that subsidiary body of the Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The
international community continues to make significant
progress in degrading terrorist groups worldwide, with
significant recent gains against Da’esh in Syria and
Iraq, as well as Boko Haram and other Al-Qaida groups
around the world. But much more needs to be done. We
know that those threats persist, and have even begun to
spread to other locations around the world. We continue
to see Da’esh, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida affiliates
radicalizing and recruiting our citizens to carry out
their deeds even as they recruit new affiliate groups
and establish branches around the world. Da’esh, in
particular, seeks to stage more mass casualty attacks in
public spaces around the world, in conflict zones and in
our very own communities.
As we look at terrorist trends, we are now seeing a
growing number of returning foreign terrorist fighters
from Iraq and Syria posing serious threats to their
countries of origin. From Brussels to Istanbul to Paris,
returnees are sparking new threats, inspiring new
violence and recruiting new sympathizers. The threat of
Da’esh-inspired, homegrown violent extremists is also
growing, as we saw in San Bernadino and elsewhere.
What is clear from all that we have been seeing over
the past years is that no country is immune to the
terrorist threat today. That is why we must not only
counter and respond to terrorist attacks, but we must
also take appropriate steps to prevent radicalization to
violence while ensuring that it is done in compliance
with obligations under international law, including
international human rights law. That requires just the
sort of all-of-United-Nations and whole-of-society
approach offered in the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We applaud the
Secretary-General’s leadership on that issue and hope
that all Member States can endorse his plan during this
summer’s United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review.
In addition to longer-term prevention efforts, we
must continue to do more to fully implement Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014) and
2253 (2015), which are central to the world’s counter10/20

04/05/2016

terrorism efforts and drive the work of two of the
Council’s three counter-terrorism committees. As
we stressed in resolution 2253 (2015), the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities is vital to countering the threats posed by these
groups, in particular their financing and recruiting
activities. We appreciate Ambassador Van Bohemen’s
active stewardship of that Committee and thank the
1267 Committee’s Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for its great work in developing helpful
threat analyses. Thanks to their work, the Council has
been kept updated on the changing terrorist threat
picture, the challenges in implementing resolution 2253
(2015), and new areas on which the Committee and the
Council should focus to better counter the financing
activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL).
While implementing sanctions remains key, there is
also a critical role for the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee’s work is helping
the Council to identify Member States’ weaknesses in
implementing the core international counter-terrorism
obligations, and is driving international attention and
resources towards key vulnerabilities and gaps that
need to be addressed in order to stop terrorists. We
appreciate Ambassador Aboulatta’s active stewardship
of that important committee, as well as the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to address the full array of terrorist threats
and State capability requirements, in particular against
foreign terrorist fighters.
That is why the joint work between the Monitoring
Team and CTED in countering foreign terrorist fighters
is exemplary. That is the kind of solid and actionable
analysis to better counter foreign terrorist fighter flows
to Da’esh in Syria and Iraq that the Council needs
to see more of. In fact, these analyses need to drive
the United Nations’ capacity-building efforts. We
commend the development by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) of its capacitybuilding implementation plan for countering the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters. We call on the Council
and all Member States to increase their support for the
efforts of these three counter-terrorism bodies in order
to better counter Da’esh and foreign terrorist fighters,
including by mobilizing resources to CTITF, as it helps
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to build needed capacity for those States most affected
and in need of assistance.
Turning to the important work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
counter weapons of mass destruction terrorism, I
would like to note that we see resolution 1540 (2004)
as a foundational instrument in our efforts to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. We also strongly support the
resolution and the work of the 1540 Committee. In
light of the allegations of use of chemical weapons
by ISIL, we consider that resolution to be timely and
vital. We should all redouble our efforts to implement
it. Initial information from the Committee’s Group
of Experts indicates that States have taken measures
for only 48 per cent of items on which the Committee
gathers data, representing a meagre 7 per cent increase
in implementation of security measures since 2010. The
data clearly shows that three United Nations regional
groups — Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and Latin
America and the Caribbean — have much lower levels
of overall implementation. That is especially troubling
considering the numbers of violent non-State actors in
Africa and the Middle East.
The data also indicate low levels of implementation
in several policy areas, such as obligations related to
securing biological and chemical items. The second
comprehensive review provides an opportunity to
improve implementation of the resolution. We hope
all States and relevant organizations, civil society and
industry will make meaningful contributions to the
review, including in the United Nations open meeting
on 20 to 22 June, and that we will all seriously consider
ways to improve our overall implementation efforts.

S/PV.7686

under the resolution. The report can be found on the
1540 Committee’s website. Such reporting also supports
the overall objectives of the Nuclear Security Summit,
including elements of the recently adopted United
Nations action plan, to which we remain committed.
We are also preparing to submit a similar updated
report on biological security measures. Through this
year’s comprehensive review, we need to ensure that
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee can evolve
and retain their critical importance and relevance in
addressing the risks that the world faces today.
We look forward to working with the other
members of the Security Council, as well as the broader
international community, to achieving that goal.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
briefing on the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) on preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. We are grateful for the briefings
Ambassadors Gerad Van Bohemen of New Zealand,
Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta of Egypt and Román Oyarzun
Marchesi of Spain, in their capacities are the respective
chairs of those subsidiary bodies. We thank them for
their leadership and for the work they are doing at the
helm of the committees.

I would welcome the sending by all Security
Council members and all United Nations Member States
of a message back to their capital — if they have not
already done so — requesting the start of reflection on
three main actions with regard to how we all approach
resolution 1540 (2004). We think of it as the “3 S’s”:
start, strengthen and stop. First, what new thing should
we start doing? Secondly, what important thing should
we continue to do or strengthen? Thirdly, what should
we stop doing because it does not work or is irrelevant?

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced
that the fight against terrorism must be carried out
within the framework of international cooperation,
in strict accordance with existing international
and regional instruments in that area, the rules of
international law, fully respecting the sovereignty of
States, human rights and fundamental freedoms. In that
regard, Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, because
they constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

As part of our support for the work of the 1540
Committee, in March the United States submitted
an updated report on recent nuclear-security-related
measures we have taken to implement our obligations

The actions of violent extremism perpetrated by
terrorist groups in countries of Africa and the Middle
East have intensified. Terrorism therefore continues
to pose a serious threat to international peace and

16-1262311/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

security. Accordingly, we have no choice but to fully
and effectively implement the measures that have
been drawn up to prohibit incitement, the financing of
terrorism, training and the transfer of arms to terrorist
groups and non-State actors, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. My country reiterates its concern about
the nature and activities of non-State actors, as they
constitute an ongoing threat and source of violence and,
in most cases, they evolve into terrorist groups. The
Security Council must take strong measures to prevent
the training, financing and supply of arms to them.
We must act with a holistic perspective in the
fight against terrorism. Above and beyond combating
terrorism, the international community must focus on
overcoming the root causes of armed conflicts that
have impacted the Middle East and North Africa. The
humanitarian tragedy in Iraq, Syria, Yemen and Libya,
among other places, and the actions of Al-Qaida, the
Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and associated groups demand from the
international community systematic and forceful
responses to prevent, combat and eradicate the scourge
of terrorism.
With regard to the work of the Committee on
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, we believe that
body serves as an important tool in the broader fight
against terrorism. Although in recent months ISIS
has suffered significant defeats in Syria and Iraq, the
activities of that terrorist organization continue to be
a source of concern for the international community.
According to the latest reports of the Committee’s
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
the terrorist threat has shifted its approach with regard
to financing, and the threat continues with attacks
on heavily populated areas, which have an enormous
media impact.
We believe that the role played by the Ombudsperson
in facilitating due process has special importance. We
are of the view that this mechanism must be strengthened
in order to provide greater transparency in reviewing
cases of persons linked to Al-Qaida and their associated
entities. We hope that, in the wake of the adoption of
resolution 2253 (2015), the Office of Catherine MarchiUhel will be allocated the necessary resources to
ensure the independence and professionalism that have
been the hallmark of its work throughout its mandate
to date. Moreover, it is important to highlight the work
carried out the chairmanship to update the guidelines
12/20

04/05/2016

of the 1267 Committee and the work carried out by the
Monitoring Group, which provides regular reports and
assessments of the threat posed globally by ISIS.
Turning to the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, we welcome the
fact that that subsidiary body, with the support of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), continues to focus its efforts for the full and
effective implementation of the provisions set out in
resolution 2178 (2014), concerning foreign terrorist
fighters, and continues its work in identifying good
practices and existing gaps that must be filled by
Member States to combat a problem that today includes
30,000 individuals, including women and young
people, from approximately 100 countries throughout
the world. In that regard, we welcome the significant
reports issued by that Committee in connection with
the threat posed by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and its recommendations for comprehensively
addressing this issue of global scope, taking into
account, inter alia, of the challenges faced by numerous
States in terms of criminalizing the and prosecuting
foreign terrorist fighters.
Venezuela acknowledges the importance of
improving border control capacities, particularly in
areas adjacent to influence of terrorist groups. It is also
important that we continue our efforts to dismantle the
sources of financing of those organizations to restrict
and curb their criminal activities. In the same vein, it
is crucial to make progress in developing innovative
strategies to counter and refute extremist narratives and
ideologies and to foment critical thinking in society,
in order to prevent radicalization, recruitment and the
mobilization of both human and economic resources.
With regard to the work of the 1540 Committee
and measures to prevent terrorist groups from
acquiring weapons of mass destruciton, we believe
that the comprehensive review of the work done by
the Committee over the past five years is essential at a
time when the use of such weapons by terrorist groups,
particularly chemical weapons, has become a genuine
and alarming reality, as is indicated in reported cases
of the use of such weapons in Syria and Iraq. As far
as Venezuela is concerned, the comprehensive review
process must be focused on the establishment of both
human and technical capacity-building throughout the
world, particularly in those countries that are lagging
farthest being in implementing the resolution. The
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

main strength of resolution 1540 lies in its preventive
capacity, with cooperation and assistance being among
its major tools. Through its coordination of the working
group on the national implementation of the 1540
Committee, Venezuela is working actively to ensure
that the comprehensive review process is successful.
Within the context of the comprehensive review,
the Committee must work towards establishing a clear
link between measures to be implemented within the
context of resolution 1540 (2040) and development,
given that development is the main and overriding
goal of developing countries. Moreover, in order to
maximize its effectiveness, the Committee has to duly
take into account the context in which the resolution is
being implemented. A significant number of countries
throughout the world neither produce nor export
materials that could be used to manufacture a weapon of
mass destruction, but they could nonetheless still serve
as transit points or shipment points for non-State actors.
Therefore, the work of the 1540 Committee must focus
on the implementation of those aspects and provisions
of the resolution that are more directly related to the
risks associated with each country.
We need to take into account that, while the assistance
requested by States in nuclear and chemical areas can
be channelled efficiently through the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the same is not
the case in the area of biological weapons because
the Biological Weapons Convention’s Implementation
Support Unit does not have the necessary human or
financial capacity to fulfil that role. That constitutes a
very serious gap in an area of particular
​​
complexity and
danger. The Committee should seriously consider all
potential measures to reverse that major shortcoming.
Finally, we would like to underscore the point that,
irrespective of the need to improve the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and the work of the 1540
Committee in providing assistance and follow-up in
monitoring of the implementation of national plans,
its mandate needs to continue to be characterized by
collaboration and support.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to join
other members in thanking the Chairs of the three
Committees, the Permanent Representatives of New
Zealand, Egypt and Spain, for sharing the activities of
their Committees with us, as well as for their excellent
work in serving as Chairs.

S/PV.7686

Today we face terrorist attacks all over the world
almost every week. I fully agree with the Permanent
Representatives of New Zealand and Egypt that
countering foreign terrorist fighters and terrorist
financing is the key to coping with the serious threats
posed by terrorists. The Security Council addressed
those issues in resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2253
(2015). The full implementation of those resolutions
is critical. Japan has been strengthening its border
security and counter-terrorist financing measures
to better implement the relevant resolutions. For
example, we have adopted and improved biometric
tools, such as fingerprint readers, with the operating
function of fingerprint identification for identity
certificates and passports and with facial images in
the identity certificates as tips to affirm a traveller’s
real identification. In October 2015, we enacted new
legislation to better cover terrorist funds.
Based on those experiences, we urge all Member
States to fully implement the resolutions. Terrorists
exploit vulnerable countries that are short of legislation,
equipment and training, which they use as loopholes.
Japan has been assisting countries on capacity-building
for enhancing the implementation of measures to plug
those loopholes. In particular, Japan has provided
assistance to various countries in the Middle East and
Africa amounting to nearly $28 million in just the past
two years.
Terrorists usually try to disguise themselves
and use forged travel documents when crossing
borders. To discover possible terrorists, Japan has
provided fingerprint readers together with training for
immigration officers. The officers can help to detect the
real identity of terrorists by matching their fingerprints
with those in databases. Similarly, in order to cut off
terrorist financing, we have provided assistance on
enacting laws on counter-terrorist financing and on the
building of networks for confiscating criminal proceeds.
Those measures provide authorities in the region with
a basis for sharing information, freezing assets and
prosecuting terrorist financiers in a concerted manner.
To combat terrorism more effectively, I wish to
highlight the linkage between terrorist activities and
illicit businesses. Many terrorists draw profits through
illegal business, such as drug trafficking and human
trafficking, as well as oil smuggling, in close cooperation
with transnational organized crime. Therefore, we
need to take into account those connections between
terrorists activities and underground businesses when

16-1262313/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

we elaborate counter-terrorism measures. We must
highlight resolution 2195 (2014), which stresses the need
to work collectively to prevent and combat terrorism
benefitting from transnational organized crime.
Strengthening the international non-proliferation
regime — with resolution 1540 (2004) at its core — is
also a high priority for Japan. Capacity-building again
has a key role to play, and Japan is committed to
providing assistance in that field. For example, for more
than 20 years, Japan has hosted Asian export-control
seminars to share best practices among participants. It
is also important for the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
enhance cooperation with relevant international
organizations. It was very fruitful for the Committee
to have been briefed by the Secretary-General of the
World Customs Organization, Mr. Kunio Mikuriya, on
9 February. He said that, although developing countries
used to consider customs bodies as revenue-generating
agencies, they are now increasingly aware of the
customs role in border controls for national security. I
was very much encouraged to hear that remark.
Finally, in response to rapidly evolving methods
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, it
is necessary to review, update and enhance resolution
1540 (2004). Japan is determined to actively engage
in the ongoing comprehensive review process under
the strong leadership of the Permanent Representative
of Spain.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
Mr. President, I welcome your outstanding initiative in
organizing this joint briefing on the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated groups, undertakings and
entities; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism; and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I
would also like to convey the Senegalese delegation’s
most heartfelt congratulations to the Chairs of the
Committees — which is to say, to you, Mr. President, as
well as to Ambassador Van Bohemen and Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi — for the outstanding quality of
their briefings and their leadership in heading the
activities of those bodies.
14/20

04/05/2016

There could be no more opportune time for
convening this meeting, given the recurring violent
terrorist attacks throughout the world. It is therefore more
than urgent to counter the attempts of extremist groups
to take possession of weapons of mass destruction.
However, suppression and military responses can never
be sufficient in themselves in the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. Given terrorist groups’ ability
to change and adapt to a situation, the fight requires
a multisectoral approach, one that necessarily includes
preventive, suppressive and protective measures.
Resolution 1540 (2004), a preventive text that
the Security Council adopted unanimously, founded
on Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
nearly 12 years ago, constitutes a major advantage
in our attempts to prevent non-State actors from
getting their hands on weapons of mass destruction.
The comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), both in a retrospective as
well as in a forward-looking way, affords us a unique
opportunity to refocus our actions and strategies in a
comprehensive, coordinated and cohesive approach
to meet the numerous challenges facing peace and
security throughout the world. The rapid progress in
terms of science and technology, globalization, as well
as the constant change in terms of the business world,
are all factors that non-State actors can utilize to assist
them in gaining hold of weapons of mass destruction.
My delegation welcomes the regional approach,
which the 1540 Committee has decided to adopt
in its programme of work. In partnership with the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the first inter-parliamentary
meeting on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) took place in Abijan on 22 and 23 February
and was attended by more than 72 African legislators
from 18 States. The meeting was an opportunity to
discuss issues related to preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction in Africa and to reflect
on ways to strengthen the national legal frameworks in
place to implement the resolution. This initiative should
be reproduced in all regions of the world, given the
crucial role that lawmakers play in the development and
adoption of legal frameworks necessary for avoiding
the consequences that could occur if nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons were to fall into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists.
The other event that reflects the partnership between
the 1540 Committee and Africa is the participation of
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the newest members of the Committee, including the
Chair, in the assistance and review conference on the
implementation of resolution 1540 in Africa, organized
by the African Union on 6 and 7 April in Addis Ababa.
We also call for extending the cooperation between
the Committee and the African countries, most of
which have received its support as they implement the
resolution. To that end, strengthening the Committee’s
capacities is more necessary than ever, if it is going
to extend its assistance activities to all countries that
request them.
Terrorist groups are increasingly using the
Internet and social media to incite people to violence
and to recruit, finance and plan terrorist acts. In this
regard, it is essential that the relevant provisions of
resolutions 1540 (2004), 2178 (2013) and 2253 (2015)
be implemented effectively by States, in particular
through strengthening their cooperation in information
sharing and through better collaboration with private
service providers with a view to improving regulation
and control systems.
In addition, the recruitment by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other extremist groups
of foreign terrorist fighters, whose number exceeds
30,000 and who come from over 100 countries, is
another major challenge that we must confront in an
urgent, effective and coordinated manner. These
fighters are a real threat to their countries of origin, as
well as to transit and destination countries. In our view,
to eradicate this phenomenon, better cooperation with
respect to border control is imperative. However, the
measures to be taken to this end should not undermine
the principle of the free movement of people and goods.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to commend the
remarkable work done by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), which deserves
our full support and cooperation, given its countless
activities taken on under the guidance of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, whose
recommendations contained in the country visit reports
should be regularly assessed with the full cooperation
of the States concerned.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
willingness and unwavering commitment to remaining
active in the effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Council in the fight against terrorism,
particularly resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), 2253
(2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

S/PV.7686

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to say that yesterday, which saw the first
meeting under the Egyptian presidency of the Security
Council (see S/PV.7685), after listening the briefings of
the representatives of the Red Cross and Médicins Sans
Frontières in this Chamber, I could see how difficult it is
follow satisfy all protocols for running these meetings,
so I wanted to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your handling the role of president. I also wanted to
assure you, Sir, of the full cooperation of the delegation
of Uruguay. At the same time, I would like to join
those who preceded me in thanking the delegation of
China for the excellent work accomplished during its
presidency in the month of April.
I would also like to thank the three Chairs for
their briefings on the activities of their respective
Committees, as well as the Groups of Experts that
support the work of the three Committees.
I will be very brief. My comments actually apply to
the work of all of three Committees since each of them
are different facets of the same risk that is threatening
international peace and security today.
First, I would like to reaffirm Uruguay’s
commitment to freedom, democracy, the rule of law,
respect for human rights, and tolerance. All of these are
values that terrorism is seeking to eradicate from the face
of the earth. For that reason, we energetically repudiate
their activities and their world view. The success of
the work of the Committees depends essentially on the
responsibility of States in implementing the decisions
and recommendations of the Security Council. The
exercise of responsibility requires above all the will of
States to comply with their obligations. I emphasize that
there must be resolute will and a strong commitment
from States, and I say this because there has been a
distinct impression that such will and commitment
have been lacking in certain quarters.
But in addition to will, there must also be capacity,
and the need to build capacity is a theme that was
touched upon by several colleagues who preceded me
this morning, including Mr. Yoshifumi Okamura, who
provided us with a detailed analysis of the various
aspects of capacity-building and institution-building.
This is essential for implementing and strengthening the
decisions and measures adopted at the Committee level.
The various degrees of non-compliance are often
not the result of a lack of will, but the result of lack of
capacity. Something that might seem simple for some,

16-1262315/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

such as border controls, is something that for others
entails huge prior capacity-building, in terms, for
example, of personnel — a trained, educated, equipped
staff. Infrastructure is also needed, from buildings to
communications and transportation infrastructure.
Customs staff is needed, and it must be paid well enough
to withstand the temptation of bribery. Capacitybuilding is therefore at the crux of the ability of a State
to comply with the task we have given it.
International cooperation in this area is therefore
crucial. When I speak of international cooperation, I
mean not only the United Nations, but also international
financial institutions and the different ways to raise the
level of development of peoples so that they can take on
both the material aspects of implementing resolutions
as well as the ultimate way of beating terrorism, which
is by changing minds. We must achieve a level of
development in which terrorism is no longer seen in the
lives of our peoples as a viable option.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
thanking Ambassadors Van Bohemen and Oyarzun
Marchesi, and you, Mr. President, for the briefings
provided in your capacities as Chairs of your respective
Committees. I also wish to express my delegation’s
sincere appreciation to the Ambassadors for their
able stewardship of those Committees. I also take this
opportunity to extend my appreciation to the respective
Groups of Experts and Monitoring Teams supporting
the Committees.
Malaysia reiterates its long-standing commitment to
our collective effort to combat the scourge of terrorism
and eradicate it from our midst. The work of the three
Committees under discussion represents an integrated
bulwark against the threat posed by potential terrorist
acts and actors. In that context, we continue to believe
that joint briefings such as today’s provide an important
opportunity for holistically reviewing and assessing
our efforts to that end, as well as providing us with a
space where we can identify areas with the potential for
further synergies and cooperation between and among
the Committees. For example, a common strain running
through all their work concerns outreach to partners and
stakeholders, including Member States, international
organizations such as Interpol, the Financial Action Task
Force, the World Trade Organization, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the International Air
Transport Association, civil society and academia, as
well as the private sector. Such activities are critical
to enhancing understanding of the various regimes and
16/20

04/05/2016

their mechanisms and contributing to their improved
implementation. Such efforts must continue to be a
central focus for the work of all the Committees, and
in that regard, we welcome the commitment of all three
Committee Chairs to continuing that engagement,
including through open briefings and consultations.
The adoption in December of resolution 2253
(2015) and the January report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/92) accompanying it have brought the evolving
nature of the threat posed by terrorist actors, especially
Da’esh, into sharper focus. As Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi noted in his briefing, there is evidence that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is actively
pursuing a chemical weapons programme. While we
note the existence in relation to that area of strong
international institutions, particularly the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which
monitors the international trade in chemical substances
and related technologies and equipment, the regime
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) provides another layer of protection for
guarding against the possible acquisition, development
and use of such substances by potential terrorist
actors. Against the backdrop of that evolving threat,
and within the context of the ongoing comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation would
like to stress the importance of addressing the gaps in
the current framework, particularly on the biological
and toxic weapons side.
Another area of particular interest to my delegation
is the possibility of replicating the assistance matching
model, as demonstrated last month at the African
regional meeting in Addis Ababa, in other regions,
including my own. In noting the preliminary findings
highlighted by the Chair of the 1540 Committee in
his briefing, my delegation stands ready to continue
to work closely with all Council members, as well as
other partners and stakeholders, in order to ensure a
successful outcome for the review.
The recent spate of terrorist attacks around the
world highlights a disturbing trend in the complexity
and sophistication of terrorists’ planning and execution
of their attacks. We share the view that the growth of
foreign terrorist fighters flocking to theatres of conflict
around the world poses a future threat as well as an
immediate one, including to their home countries, even
if it is not necessarily a definite one. As Ambassador
Van Bohemen noted, such fighters will return home
battle-hardened, radicalized and well networked.
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

A further threat is posed by the expansion of Da’esh
and its affiliates to other territories. It is crucial to
recognize that the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities addresses primarily the front end of the
problem. In order to address it more comprehensively,
the continuity and synergies between the Committee
and its work could be further explored and, where they
already exist, further deepened with other relevant
mechanisms and institutions at the national, regional
and international levels. In that connection, we support
the Chair of the Committee’s call to Member States to
actively engage with it, including by submitting the
necessary implementation reports.
On that note, I would like to conclude by stating
our strong approval of and support for the substantial
analytical and norm-setting work being actively
undertaken by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate under the guidance of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, as you highlighted in
your briefing, Mr. President.
Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Ambassadors
of New Zealand and Spain, for today’s briefings and for
the leadership shown by all three countries in chairing
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
Terrorism continues to be one of the world’s greatest
threats to international peace and security, as the alltoo-frequent attacks that saturate the news remind us.
The Chair of the 1267 Committee emphasized that
the past year saw the Committee’s activities refocused
on the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliate groups.
In that regard, the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015)
was an important step forward in addressing the
current terrorist threat. The 1267 Committee carries
out at least two essential tasks that France considers
extremely important, one of them being analysing the
terrorist threat through the very detailed and valuable
reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and

S/PV.7686

associated individuals and entities. But I should also
commend the quality of the joint briefings with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
on such major subjects as foreign terrorist fighters and
combating terrorism financing.
The second is the implementation and rigorous
monitoring of the sanctions list. In that regard, we
encourage all States Members of the United Nations
to continue to submit requests for the inclusion of
names on the list. But in order to maintain the regime’s
credibility, its procedures must also respect the
fundamental freedoms of the individuals on the list. The
establishment of the post of an Ombudsperson for the
regime represents an unprecedented effort on the part
of the Council to improve its procedural safeguards,
and I should commend Ms. Marchi-Uhel’s outstanding
work on the job.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee also fills two
essential and complementary functions. The first is
doing as much as possible to raise States’ awareness
of new trends in the ever-changing terrorist threat.
In that regard, the Counter Terrorism-Committee
Executive Directorate’s recent work on the issues
of data on travellers and on foreign terrorist fighters
returning from conflict zones is particularly important.
The Committee’s second function is monitoring States’
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and their
fight again terrorism and its financing generally, but
also their efforts regarding other resolutions, such as
1624 (2005), on combating incitement to commit acts of
terrorism, and 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters.
It is therefore crucial that States accept visits from
the Executive Directorate so as to enable it to assess
their systems for combating terrorism and make the
best possible recommendations. It is also essential to
ensure that the United Nations can implement technical
assistance programmes based on those assessments and
recommendations. We therefore consider it fundamental
to ensure that the Executive Directorate continues to
work closely with the other United Nations bodies
involved in combating terrorism in order to carry out
such projects.
Finally, I would like to comment briefly on
the important work of the 1540 Committee under
Spain’s dynamic leadership. Unfortunately, the risk of
biological, chemical, radiological and nuclear weapons
falling into the hands of terrorists is real. The especially
worrying information reaching us from Iraq and Syria
means that we can no longer rule out that possibility.

16-1262317/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

To that we have to add the doubts that remain regarding
Syria’s declaration of its chemical programme to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the potential for the existence of residual capacity
in Syria, which only increases that risk and which we
take very seriously.
However, it would be unfair not to emphasize the
significant achievements of resolution 1540 (2004)
since its adoption. Today an overwhelming majority
of Member States have adopted measures translating
the resolution’s provisions into national legislation.
In areas such as securing sensitive materials and
goods, strengthening border controls and even, when
necessary, establishing mechanisms for export controls,
the international community is working to ensure that
such sensitive materials and goods cannot fall into
terrorists’ hands.
The ongoing comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will be an
opportunity to adapt and strengthen our tools against
this threat. By identifying implementation gaps,
strengthening assistance mechanisms and the dialogue
of the Committee with other international organizations,
we will be able to better prevent the risk of non-State
actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
The meetings in Madrid in a few days, and
especially the open meeting here in New York in June,
will be major landmarks that we must build on. Spain
can count on the support of France to make this year
a success.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin by
thanking the three briefers — not just for their briefings
but for all of their hard work on our collective behalf in
chairing the Committees.
It has been a decade since the General Assembly
unanimously adopted the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and in that time the United
Nations has developed a comprehensive architecture to
counter terrorism. At our disposal we have sanctions
and analysis, we have coordination from the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, and we have
project delivery by the United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism.
But in that decade, the threat has changed. The
spectre of Da’esh now hangs over so many of the crises
that we deal with in this Chamber. Groups like Boko
Haram terrorize some of the world’s poorest people,
18/20

04/05/2016

and the Al-Qaida network has spread to fragile regions
across the globe. I therefore hope that we can use the
10-year anniversary of the United Nations Strategy to
adapt to this new reality, to refresh the framework and
to lay the foundations for another decade of effective
support to Member States as we tackle this scourge
together. I should like to touch in particular on two
aspects of the current threat.
First, as many colleagues have noted, Da’esh remains
a major threat to international peace and security. The
United Kingdom is taking action against that group
within the Global Coalition to Counter Da’esh and other
forums. Significant gains have been made. Da’esh is
now less able to finance its hatred, less able to carry
out its terror and less able to recruit followers to its sick
cause. We must sustain that pressure. United Nations
bodies play a vital supporting role in that effort. The
Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime is tightening
the noose on Da’esh finance, and United Nations panel
assessments offer timely recommendations for States
to address gaps in their national systems. We look
to all States to fulfil their obligations under United
Nations sanctions.
On foreign terrorist fighters, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is helping to map
and understanding recruitment flows. We share and
welcome the assessment that the flow of people traveling
to fight for Da’esh has slowed, but new trends are now
emerging. These include increased numbers of returnees
and, as Ambassador Van Bohemen said, so-called
broken travel — traveling with multiple documents
via multiple destinations to circumvent security. These
shifts show that we cannot be complacent. The United
Nations must facilitate the sharing of best practice and
lessons learned in this area.
The second threat I want to touch on is proliferation
to non-State actors, especially terrorists. Resolution
1540 (2004) is all about preventing the worst-case
scenario — toxic, poisonous or radioactive materials
falling into the hands of terrorists. Full, universal
implementation of the resolution by all States would
go quite some way towards preventing such deadly
proliferation, but that universal ideal is being challenged.
Continued allegations of chemical weapons use in Syria
and Iraq are exactly what resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention were designed to stop.
These are horrific crimes, and all investigations aimed
at bringing to justice those responsible for acquisition,
16-12623

04/05/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

development, manufacture or use of chemical weapons
must be pursued rigourously.
Ultimately, prohibited chemical weapons cannot
fall into terrorist hands if they have been destroyed, in
line with international law. That is why all Governments
in the region should join the Chemical Weapons
Convention without delay and all existing signatories
must unequivocally fulfil their obligations, including
full cooperation with the assessments and fact-finding
missions of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
Looking forward, the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) this summer will be an
opportunity to strengthen our collective security on
this issue. We should be bold. Areas for improvement
could include strengthened regional cooperation,
as neighbouring States are best placed to help each
other; greater understanding of emerging proliferation
challenges, because we need to keep pace with
new technology; and well-resourced and structured
Secretariat support so that the Committee can fulfil
its mandate until 2021 and beyond. We hope that all
States will engage with these ideas at the 1540 (2004)
conference this summer.
Countering Da’esh, stopping foreign terrorist
fighters, strengthening non-proliferation, preventing
violent extremism — those are all major challenges that
require a unified response and coherent support from
the United Nations. United Nations counter-terrorism
structures must be fit for purpose; that is why the
United Kingdom supports an ambitious review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. To
close, I have two key recommendations for that review.
First, we need to ensure that the concepts of
prevention and an all-of-United-Nations approach, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, are incorporated into the
United Nations system. Secondly, we must strengthen
the strategic-level guidance, communications and
coordination of all United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies to get the most value from our resources. The
United Kingdom looks forward to engaging with all
States in the coming months to achieve those aims.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Like others, I thank
today’s briefers for providing extensive information
on the activities of their respective Committee’s and
beyond. We highly commend the dedicated efforts of
the three Committee Chairs, as well as the work of the

S/PV.7686

expert groups aimed at ensuring the comprehensive
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and at promoting effective international
cooperation among all stakeholders to achieve the
objectives set by these instruments.
We welcome the close collaboration of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in overseeing the implementation of
specific counter-terrorism measures established by the
Security Council, promoting international cooperation
in this field, detecting possible gaps in the existing
regulations, and introducing sanctions measures
with regard to individuals and entities engaged in
terrorist activities. Good examples of such teamwork
is the cooperation of the 1267 Committee’s Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
in identifying the emergence of new threats posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
its affiliates worldwide, sharing thematic reports and
holding joint Committees meetings on the topic of
depriving terrorists of their sources of funding.
Notwithstanding the recent achievements in the
suppression of international terrorist threats posed
by ISIL, especially of its financing, there are still
problems that require cohesive actions to be taken
both by the two Committees and by the United Nations
membership at large. Among our present tasks are the
prevention of terrorism spreading to other regions by
staunching the flow of foreign terrorist fighters; the
introduction of comprehensive strategies for dealing
with returnees, who may endanger the internal security
of their States of origin; countering the propaganda of
terrorism and violent extremism; and combating abuse
of information and communications technologies for
terrorist purposes, to name but a few. We are pleased
to note that these topics are duly reflected in the
Committees’ programmes of work. We also commend
the pace kept by the expert groups in conducting their
country visits and producing credible reports and
recommendations aimed at strengthening national
counter-terrorism mechanisms.
Apart from the activities of the international
community in combating terrorism outbreaks at
the global level, we also should not forget about the
available tools to exert pressure on terrorists within the

16-1262319/20

S/PV.7686

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

04/05/2016

existing sanctions framework, reinforced by the recent
resolution 2253 (2015). In that regard, Ukraine supports
the call for introducing a broad range of targeted
counter-terrorism sanctions to disrupt terrorists’
financing and their travelling to conflict regions.

of the existing world order, continuous breaches and
unaddressed violations of international law and the
ongoing conflicts in different parts of the globe continue
to weaken as a whole the security architecture on
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials.

Since 2004, resolution 1540 (2004) has played
a crucial role in strengthening regional and global
non-proliferation efforts. Ukraine, as a State with a
nuclear-weapon past and as a full-fledged party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, is strongly committed to the
implementation resolution 1540 (2004) and makes
every effort to prevent non-State actors from acquiring
materials and technologies that could be used as
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).

With a view to tackling the growing threat of
WMD proliferation globally, we support initiatives
aimed at further strengthening the role and potential
of resolution 1540 (2004) for a long-term perspective,
such as the recent establishment of the 1540 Group
of Friends, which we fully support. Ukraine
welcomes the constructive and results-oriented
approach of the Spanish chairmanship in the process
of the comprehensive review of the resolution’s
implementation, to be concluded by December. It is
important that the process also focus on ways to ensure
that the relevant international legal norms are fully
respected and implemented by all Member States.

At the same time, despite the measures taken by
Member States to prevent proliferation risks, we are
witnessing growing and even more complicated threats
in this area. On the one hand, risks may arise not only
from poor national legislation being in place but also
from the rapid development of science and technology
coupled with a lack of threat awareness among the
members of academia, industry and civil society. On
the other hand, international legal prohibitions have
little relevance to terrorists and criminals who might be
tempted to engage in attacks using chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear materials.
Unlike States, non-State actors pursue their
hostile intentions and are prone to unconventional and
highly unpredictable actions. Moreover, the erosion

20/20

Ukraine stands ready to engage constructively with
all like-minded partners on those crucial matters.
To conclude my intervention, I would like to
reiterate that, while terrorism and the risk of WMD
proliferation by non-State actors continue to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security,
there is a persistent need to ensure close and effective
cooperation and coordination between the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, in particular
in the outreach activities and country visits conducted
within their respective mandates, as well as in the
exchange of information.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

16-12623
