18

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

ately to start negotiations for elaborating a treaty designed to achieve the objective of a comprehensive test
ban;
6. Requests the Confe.rence of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue, as a matter of highest priority, its deliberations on ,this treaty, taking into full account the suggestions already made in the Committee,
as well as the views expressed at the current session of
the Gene·ral Assembly and at previous sessions, and to
submi,t to the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session a
special report on its deliberations on ,this vitally important matter, including the areas of agreement on the
achievement of a draft treaty;
7. Decides ,to include in the provisional agenda of its
twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Urgent need
for cessation of nuclear ,and thermonuclear tests and
conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban" in place of ,the item entitled "Urgent
need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests"
which appears on the agenda 'of the twenty-eighth
session.
2 I 92 nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3079 (XXVffl). Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2935 (XXVII) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol H of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971 and 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, in
five of which there have been appeals to the nuclearweapon States regarding the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco),
Reiterating its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or
protocol,
1. Notes with sati~faction that Additional Protocol
II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which
entered into force for the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America in 1969 and 1971, respectively, has been
signed in 1973 by France and by the People's Republic of China and that the Governments of both
countries have already decided to take the necessary
measures for its ratification;
2. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), in conformity with
the repeated appeals of the General Assembly;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Implementa-

tion of General Assembly resolution 3079 (XXVIII)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco)";
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and
to inform the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session of any measure adopted by them in order to
implement it.
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3080 (XXVIII). Declaration of the Indian O('ean
as a zone of peace

The Genera[ Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2832 ( XXV I) of 16 December 1971, entitled "Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace",
Reaffirming its conviction that action in furtherance
of the objectives of the Declaration would be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Noting the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Indian Ocean, 16 established by General Assembly
resolution 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972 to
study the implications of the proposal, with special
reference to the practical measures that may he taken
in furtherance of the objectives of Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), having due regard to the security
interests of the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean and the interests of any other State
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Noting with satisfaction the progress made by the
Ad Hoe Committee in fulfilling its mandate,
I. Urges all States to accept the principles and
objectives contained in General Assembly resolution
2832 (XXVI), entitled ''Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace", as a comtructive contribution to the strengthening of regional and international
security;
2. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian
Ocean to continue its work, to carry out consultations
in accordance with its mandate and to report with
recommendations to the (icneral As,cmhly at its
twenty-ninth session;
3. Urges all States, especially the major Powers, to
extend their co-operation to the Ad Hoe Committee in
the discharge of its functions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render aH necessary assistance to the Ad floe Committee;
.5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall he
provided with summary records of its proceedings;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
factual statement of the great Powers' milit;1ry presence
in all its aspects, in thr Indian Occ:-n, with special
reference to their naval deployments, conceived in the
context of great Power rivalry:
7. Recommends that the statement should he based
on available material and prepared wi,h the assistance
1e Official Records of the Grnaal As,rembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/9029).

Resolution~ adopted on the report., of tht> First Comn1illee
-

----

---

--------------------------------------------------

of qualified experts and competent bodies selected by
the Secretary-General;
8. Requests that the statement be transmitted to
the Ad H oc O!mmittcc at an e'.irly date, if possible by
31 March 1974;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "lmplementatirn, l 1 f th:.: D.:clar;:tion of the Indian Ocean a~ a Zone
of Peace".
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3U~2 (XXVIH). International co-operation in the
peaf'efu1 mws of out<'r !lpace

The General Assembly,
Ifrwlling its resolutions 2914 ( XXVII), 2915
(XXVII), 2916 (XXVII) and 2917 (XXVII) of 9
November 1972,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 17
Noting with appreciation the way in which the 500th
anniversary of the birth of Nicolaus Copernicus, the
great Polish astronomer, was reflected in space activities,
Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Reaffirming further its belief that the benefits deriving from space exploration can be extended to States
at all stages of economic and scientific development on
an expanding basis if Member States conduct their
space programmes increasingly with a view to promoting maximum international co-operation, including
the widest possible exchange of information in this
field,
Convinced of the need for increased international
efforts, particularly through the United Nations, to
promote and expand practical applications of space
technology and believing that wider participation by
Member States in the activities of the United Nations
relating to space matters may contribute to the objective of such increased international efforts,
Bearing in mind that, since the establishment of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in
I 96 L the membership of the United Nations has been
considerably increased and a corresponding enlargement of the Committee is therefore desirable,
Reaf]irminR the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space.
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites State, which have not yet become parties
to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Cdesti:il Bodies, 18 the
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronaut, the Return of

Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space 19 and the Convention on International
Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects 20 to
g,v-: early consideration to ratifying or accl.'ding to
those international agreements, so that they may have
the broadest possible effect;
3. Notes that the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites has discussed the question of elaborating
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth
satellites for direct television broadcasting referred to
in General Assemblv resolution 29 I 6 ( XXVII) and
endorses the decision· of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space, as set out in paragraph 66 of its
report, to reconvene the Working Group in 1974;
4. Notes that, in responding to the request of the
General Assembly, the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space and its Legal Sub-Committee have
achieved further significant progress towards the completion of the draft treaty relating to the Moon and the
<lraft convention on registration nf objects launched
into outer space;
5. Recommends that the Legal Sub-Committee
should, as a matter of the highest priority, make every
effort to complete at its next session the draft treaty
relating to the Moon and the draft convention on registration of objects launched into outer space;
6. Recommend1· further that the Legal Sub-Committee should consider at its next session, as a matter of
high priority, the question of elaborating principles
governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites
for direct television broadcasting with a view to concluding an international agreement or agreements in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2916
(XXVII), taking due accnunt of the interdisciplinary
character of the subject and of the work of the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites;
7. Recommends also that the Legal Suh-Committee
at its next ,c,sion should respond to the request, m:ide
by the Working Group on Remote Sensing t)f the Earth
hy Satdlite,, for the Sub-Committee's views on the legal
implications of the earth resources survey by remote
~L·nS:1~;! s,1tcllites, devoting part of that sc~sion to this
purpose:
8. Agrees that the Legal Sub-Committee at its next
session, as time permits, should consider matters relating to the definition and/ or delimitation of outer
space and outer space activities;
9. Welcomes the comments of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, contained in paragrnph 57 of its report, regarding the role and functions of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee
and agrees that, with regard to its future work, the
Sub-Committee should proceed on the lines indicated
in section V of its report; 21
10. Notes with satisfaction that, in promoting international co-operation in the application of space techll'.1lou;v, considcrahlc attention h;1s been given to the
pote;tial of remote sensing of the earth by satellites
for development programmes of all countries, especially of developing countries;
0

11. Welcomes the various efforts envisaged by the
Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the
Working Group on Remotl' Sensing of the Earth by
1

17 Tbid., Supplement No. 20 ( A/9020 and Corr. I).

rn Resolution 2222 (XXT), annex.

19

n Resolution 2345 (XXII), annex.

w Rcsolntion 2777 (XXVI), annex.
11 A/AC.105/116.
