S/2007/680

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 21 November 2007 from the President of the Security
Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that your report of 27 September 2007
pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 1762 (2007) (S/2007/568) has been brought to
the attention of the Security Council.
The members of the Security Council take note of the contents of the report
and in particular of the steps that you have “taken to provide for the appropriate
disposition of United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) archives and other property under arrangements ensuring, in
particular, that sensitive proliferation information or information provided in
confidence by Member States is kept under strict control”, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1762 (2007). Council members approve of the overall
archiving procedure as set out in the report.
With regard to the issues raised in paragraph 35 of your report, the members of
the Security Council suggest that access to the “confidential” information in the
UNMOVIC archives be restricted for a period of 30 years and that access to the
“strictly confidential” information be restricted for a period of 60 years.
Following the expiration of this period, confidential and strictly confidential
information would be reviewed by the Secretary-General every five years. If the
information was provided in confidence by a Member State, the Secretary-General
would consult with that Member State. Following this review, the Secretary-General
would have the discretion to recommend to the Security Council under a
non-objection procedure the declassification of information.
Security Council members also support granting earlier access to the archives
to Member States and relevant international organizations, such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations Environment Programme, on a case-by-case basis,
following careful consideration of the reasons for allowing such access. The Council
suggests the nomination by the Secretary-General, with the approval of the Council,
of a three-person ad hoc committee to recommend in each case whether such access
should be granted. The recommendations of this committee would be sent to the
Council under a non-objection procedure.
The members of the Security Council also recommend that the Secretariat
expeditiously and economically transfer to the Government of Iraq all UNMOVIC
property that is not proliferation-sensitive or subject to export control restrictions.

07-60932 (E) 231107

*0760932*

S/2007/680

Property that is sensitive or subject to restrictions should be appropriately disposed
of at the earliest possible date in consultations with the State or entity from which
the property was purchased or donated.
The members of the Security Council note the requirement of resolution 1762
(2007) that the Secretary-General transfer all unencumbered funds not used for
payment of outstanding bills or for the costs associated with archiving and property
disposition to the Development Fund for Iraq, and in that regard further note the
transfer of 25.1 million United States dollars already made by the United Nations.
If, following completion of the tasks outlined in resolution 1762 (2007), a portion of
the encumbered US$ 12 million is unspent, Council members urge that it be
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq without delay. Members of the
Council request an update each quarter on relevant spending by the United Nations.
The members of the Security Council welcome the continuing efforts of the
Secretary-General and Secretariat staff of the United Nations to dispose
appropriately of UNMOVIC archives and other property as soon as possible. The
members request monthly updates in closing down UNMOVIC in a manner
consistent with resolution 1762 (2007). The members also request a briefing on
what steps the Secretariat is planning to provide for the enhanced physical security
of the archives, in particular those containing sensitive proliferation information.
(Signed) R.M. Marty M. Natalegawa
President of the Security Council

2

07-60932
