TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 10 SEPTEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1508) . . . . , . , . . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add. 1
and2) . . . . . . . . .,.,...,
.,...,..,..,
...................

1

S/PV.1508

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. ‘The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President : Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present : The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 508)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421
and Add.1 and 2).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Yesterday
the Security Council invited the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic and Indonesia, at their request,
to participate in the discussion of the item before it,
without the right to vote. I invite those representatives to
take their places at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel),
Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic) and Mr, H. R.
Abdulgani (Indonesia) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Since
yesterday’s meeting the President of the Security Council
has received letters from the representatives of India and

MEETING

10 September

1969, at 3 p.m.

Somalia, in which they a& to be invited to participate in
the current discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice of the Security Council and with the consent of
the Council, I propose to invite the representatives of those
countries, namely, India and Somalia, to participate in the
discussion of this question, without the right to vote.
3. If there are no objections,
proposal accepted.

we shall consider

the

4. Unfortunately, in view of the limited number of places
at the Security Council table, we shall have to ask the
representatives of India and Somalia to take the places
reserved for them at the sides of the Council chamber, on
the understanding that when it is their turn to address the
Council they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Sen (India) and
Mr. A. A. Farah (Somalia) took the places reserved for
them,
5. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item
before it. The first speaker on my list is the representative
of Algeria, on whom I now call.
6. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated porn French}:
Mr, President, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
express our pleasure at seeing you preside over our work.
We are convinced that, under the leadership of a diplomat
of your stature and one so rich in experience, our debates
will be successful.
7. I should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor.
During our long debates, Ambassador de PiniBs, with great
style and effectiveness, managed to bring our deliberations
to a successful conclusion.
8. The date 21 August 1969 is one of the most painful
moments for the Moslem community in the world. On that
date the Al Aqsa Mosque, a sanctuary revered by hundreds
of millions of Moslems, was damaged by flames. The
announcement of the destruction of that holy place has
aroused intense emotion and a wave of indignation throughout the world. Although the world conscience is reluctant
to believe in this further sacrilege, the fact remains that it is
becoming increasingly aware that the military occupation is
at the source of that crime. There can be no doubt
whatever that, following the destruction of many dwellings,
this is one more episode, but not the last. For the burning
of the Al Aqsa Mosque once again raises the question of the

occupation and the urgent need for dealing with the
Palestinian conflict in its true context. It is no use deploring
or regretting this new crime if the international community
lacks the political courage to embark resolutely on the
search for a peace based on justice,

15. In the Israeli daily newspaper Hayom of 7 June 1965,
the chief Rabbi of Israel, Nessim, declared:
“The frontiers of the land of Israel were established
under divine guidance. The order of God is irrevocable,
No force on earth.can change what God has createdl. Here
no law or logic is involved.”

9. The’sacrilege perpetrated in the Holy Land attests to
the resurgence of a fanaticism which international Zionism
keeps constantly alive and to which it gives such increasing
fdrce as to make all mankind shrink in horror.

16. According to a dispatch dated 17 August 1967 from
Agence France-Presse, on 16 August 1967, the Rabbi of the
Israeli army, Shlomo Goren, expressed a desire to see the
Jewish Temple reconstructed in the place of the Holy
Mosque of Al Aqsa.

10. This abominable crime against human civilization, its
virtues and spiritual values casts shame on those who have
inspired it, as well as on those who have carried it out.

17. Thus, the process that was to lead to the destruction
of the Holy Mosque was initiated with the support, or at
least with the approval, of the Tel Aviv authorities and
Israel could not be unaware of the fact that it would end in
the crime which is being considered by the Security Council
today.

11. The Zionist dialectic, which is essentially colonial and
which first managed to appropriate a country and extend
its domination there at the expense of two million of the
legitimate inhabitants, today seeks openly to exploit its
Messianic and theological sentiments, the presumptuousness
of which cannot stand up to historical analysis. But if the
Zionist venture knows that its mystical and biblical claims
are open to question, it nevertheless tries to assert itself by
acts which bear the stamp of the most brutal type of
colonialist practice and ideology.

18. Israeli propaganda has found in religious fanaticism a
means of recruiting persons willing to carry out such a
sinister mission. As chance would have it, the person
responsible for the fire belongs to a sect whose programme
was not unknown to the Zionist authorities. The following
passage appears in the journal The Church of God, dated
1 September 1969:

12. After the totalitarian and massive dispossession of the
Palestinian people and the attempt to destroy their culture,
political personality and their very name, Israel is entering a
new stage in the execution of its programme, namely, the
removal of all traces of Arab-Islamic civilization. At present
an attempt is being made, through press campaigns, since
the issue is too serious and extends beyond the framework
of the Middle East, to deny Israel’s responsibility for the
crime or, at least, to attenuate it.

“The Church of God went back to Jerusalem in 1966
and held the first General Assembly since the days of the
Apostles, declaring the fulness of the Gentiles had come
in, and the time for the rebuilding of the Tabernacle of
David was upon us. In 1967 the Church went back there
and restored the Throne of David. A King like David had
come forth of the Gentiles and the time for the moring’of
the veil from his eyes and restoring the Kingdom of God
to Israel had come ,” 1

13. After the crime had been committed,, the Tel Aviv
authorities rashly hastened to accredit the hypotheses, first
that the fire was caused by the friction of old beams, and
then by a short circuit. Since these hypotheses were
immediately invalidated by the true guardians of the Holy
Places, that is to say, by the indigenous population itself,
Israel then revised its position in the face of the evidence of
the facts and under the pressure of international public
opinion. It was, in fact, the vigilance and the vigorous
reaction of the indigenous population, supported by world
opinion, that led Israel to arrest the person responsible for
the crime.

19. It is hardly surprising that people who profess: such
fanaticism should hold their general assembly in territory
occupied by the Zionists, since they pursue the same aim.
The same mystique of the redemption of the universe
inspires both movements. What no honest man can deny is
that the followers of such a doctrine provide exc:ellenl
recruits, psycholo@cally prepared for any action under
remote control. The use of fanatics for such missions as the
desecration of the Al Aqsa Mosque is part of long-established methods.
20. Be that as it may, the burning of that great spirifuat
centre is but the tragic outcome of the passivity of the
international community, which believes that it has found a
way of appeasing its conscience by merely ado@@
resolutions which Israel has been quick to disregard.
Assured of the unreserved support and, we would even saY#
the direct encouragement of its Western allies, in particular
the United States of America, Israel defies the rest of
humanity. Reprisals are established as a political doctrineThe systematic destruction of whole villages, of buildings
that were the glory of Jerusalem, and the oppression of the
Palestinian population are daily events under the Zilonist
occupation.

14. As we see it, Israel’s responsibility is clear. First of all,
as an occupying Power, the policy of destruction pursued
by Israel for over 20 years has not been confined only to
the dwellings of the legitimate population of Palestine.
World Zionism has clearly revealed its mystical dimension,
based on the theory of the chosen people. In the eyes of
the Zionists, Israel is the fulfilment of the biblical promise
made to Abraham, Israel continues to cultivate a Messianic
and theological state of mind in a century when political
morality is becoming increasingly removed from religious
motivations. We need only read the statements of Zionist
personalities to realize the psychological preparation that
preceded the Al Aqsa fire.

1 Quoted by the speaker in English.,
2

21. Thus the fire of 21 August is in fact only the
culmination of the contempt shown by the invader towards
those who he has conquered. History abounds in such
situations,

and to prevent it from ‘taking its fate in its own hands are
greatly mistaken. On the contrary, the aggressiveness of
that imperialist policeman, Israel, can only strengthen the
will of the Middle Eastern countries to resist. As for the
Palestinians, despite all adversities, they will continue their
fight for liberation. And in this legitimate undertaking they
will find at their side all countries which cherish justice.
The fact that, today a large number of countries have asked
the Security Council to consider the problem of the Middle
East is evidence of this,

22. Refusing the fate their enemies have reserved for
them, the Palestinian’people have decided to take the only
course left to them; namely armed struggle, in which free
men find the most appropriate way to express their
stubborn will against a racist usurper. Thus, although
mourning the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque, the
Palestinian people, without any discrimination based on
religion, will find in this painful event a source of renewed
energy in their struggle against Zionist fanaticism. For
many centuries the Palestinian people have been able to
protect all the Holy Places, for they are the true heir of all
the cultural and religious wealth the Palestinian land has
bequeathed to world civilization. In less than two years of
foreign occupation, two sanctuaries revered by over one
thousand million people have been the victims of odious
sacrilege.

29. Thus the Security Council, which assumes a grave
responsibility in the eyes of history, must recommend the
measures necessary to put an end to a situation which
already threatens world peace and security.
30. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The next
speaker on the list is the representative of India, I invite
him to take a place at the Council table, and call on him to
make his statement.
31. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, normally non-members of the Council are not expected to comment on the
Council’s office-bearers, but this rule has been laxly
observed. We should like to offer our congratulations to
you on your Presidency of the Council this month and
record our appreciation of the work done by the outgoing
President, the Ambassador of Spain, Mr. de Pinies. We are
confident that under your wise guidance thisCouncil will
discharge its responsibilities with speed and fairness. I also
thank the members of the Council for permitting me to
participate, without vote, in this debate.

23. While the burning of the Mosque has aroused the
emotion which we have witnessed throughout the world, it
also serves to remind the international conununity that no
military occupation can be prolonged without constantly
endangering international peace and security.
24. Our Organization; it is true, has adopted-and always
unanimously-resolutions
condemning the measures taken
by the Zionist occupier in Jerusalem and refusing to
recognize that those measures have any validity. But what is
the use of these resolutions if they are destined to remain a
dead letter because no effort is made to put them into
effect? Do we really think that the problem can be settled
by inertia, and that in the last resort oblivion will be the
. only
3. remedy?

32. On 21 ‘August, a renowned and revered place of
worship in the Islamic world, the Al Aqsa Mosque in
Jerusalem, was severely damaged by fire. This act of
vandalism has been rightly condemned throughout the
world, including my country. The Government and the
people of India have expressed their shock and indignation
at this sacrilege. In a statement in the Indian Parliament on
26 August, the Foreign Minister of India expressed strong
condemnation of this act of desecration. The statement of
the Foreign Minister has already been circulated to the
members of the Council.2 Similar sentiments have been
expressed by the major political parties both within and
without the Indian Parliament,

.‘. 25. In view of the gravity of the new situation created as a
result of the fire at the Al Aqsa Mosque and its disastrous
consequences, both for the region and for the world, a large
number of African and Asian countries which are Members
of our Organization have brought the matter before the
Security Council. Such a step must remind the Council of
its basic obligations, which are to enforce respect for its
resolutions and to ensure their scrupulous implementation.
26. Yet, so far, the Council has been content to pronounce condemnations and to issue warnings to Israel,
without following up its decisions in any positive way. This
is due mainly to the negative attitude of the United States
of America which, while associating itself with the decisions
of the Security Council and expressing its regrets, continues
to arm the aggressor by supplying him with the most
modern weapons which are designed to crush the will to
resist of the Palestinian liberation movement and the Arab
peoples.

33. Only yesterday the Prime Minister of India said at a
public meeting in Delhi that this was an act which was
condemned by people all over the world belonging to all
religions. She added that the burning of a holy place
belonging to any religion was a deplorable act. She
commented that this act had increased tension in that area,
which could have world-wide repercussions.
34. The outrage against the holy shrine is a matter that
goes beyond’the spiritual injury to the followers of Islam
alone. It concerns the cherished values of mankind and its
cultural heritage. We in India, with our firm belief in
secularism and the separation of the religious from the
temporal, have felt especially grieved at the desecration of a

27. Assured of such unconditional support, the pampered
child of imperialism mocks the decisions of our Council and
calmly pursues its policy of the total “Israelization” of
Palestine.

2 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1969, document
S/9447, p. 176:

28. But those who think they can continue to use Israel to
halt the political and social movement of the Arab world
3

--

:
.:

I

1
j, ‘.
i,
j.
:
,;.
:.
/
:

‘. I,
,i

,‘I/

place of worship, Numerous civic and religious leaders of
many faiths have expressed their profound shock at this
incident and have extended their sympathy to their Moslem
brethren in this moment of common agony. Public meetings, demonstrations, even riots, have taken place in
different parts of India, including many principal cities, to
condemn the incident and to call for prompt action to
prevent its recurrence.

from taking actions that would tend to change the status of
Jerusalem. Those and other resolutions also reaffirm the
principle of international law that territory cannot be
acquired by military conquest. My delegation believes that
the sanctity and security of places of worship in the Holy
City can be assured through the implementation by Israel
of the relevant provisions of the Security Council’s unani..
mously adopted resolutions on Jerusalem.

35. While we must continue to express our profound
shock and dismay at this sacrllege;we must not bc diverted
into believing that this is a religious issue. Indeed, any
attempt to create such a diversion will do incalculable harm
and present fresh difficulties in solving the west Asian
problem. It is understandable therefore that in certain
quarters this incident is being treated as if it were nothing
more than an unfortunate and regrettable accident and that
all measures had been taken to repair the losses, punish the
guilty, to prevent any repetition, and so on. It is of the
utmost importance that the consideration of this question
should take place in its proper perspective; that is to say,
the political implications of the circumstances in which the
incident took place and could recur.

39. The recent aggravation of tension and the recrudes..
cence of large-scale violence are symptoms of the under..
lying problem in the west Asian region, For more than a.
generation peace in this area and the life and liberty of its
inhabitants have had a precarious existence between incessant tension and some rare spells of calm. The long chain of
conflict has complicated the task of finding just and lasting;
solutions. The conflict of June 1967 has significantly added
to these problems. At the heart of current tensions is the
fundamental issue of foreign occupation. When this matter
was first debated in the Security Council more than two)
years ago, the delegation of India stated its basic position
on the larger issues. Speaking at the 1357th meeting of the
Security Council, my predecessor said:

36. To us, the incident represents a much wider malaise
and is a direct consequence of the illegal occupation by
Israel of the Holy City of Jerusalem and many other Arab
areas. The injustice which the Arabs have suffered in the
hands of the Israelis offers the only explanation for the
widespread reaction that the burning of the Al Aqsa
Mosque has brought about in many countries and continents. To minimize the importance of this reaction is to
be blind to the realities of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Of
course, those who wish to benefit from armed action would
like nothing better than that the central issue should be lost
sight of and that the world should quietly acquiesce in the
occupying Power keeping its territorial gain.

“ . . * we shall have to take more far-reaching steps, the.
most important of which would be to order an immediate
withdrawal of all forces to the positions they occupied on
4 June 1967. Unless we take that step immediately, we
shall be faced every day with situations like the ones we:
have had to deal with in the last few days,” [1357th
meeting, para. I72.1
Since then, two years have passed during which the Council
has barely moved from one cease-fire to another, Vast Arab
territories remain under Israeli military occupation. There
are frequent incidents involving loss of life and property,
often on an enormous scale and affecting territory far from
the cease-fire lines. As if to emphasize its attitude towards;
the United Nations, Israel launched fresh attacks into the
territory of the United Arab Republic at the same time as;
the Security Council took up the question of the desecra..
tion of the mosque at Jerusalem.

37. It is ironical that a State which is a creation of the
United Nations should be the one consistently to flout the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council and bring, in the train of such defiance, incidents
like the burning of this holy mosque, Looking at it from
this aspect, we cannot escape the conclusion that what
happened in Jerusalem on 21 August is the direct consequence of the Israeli occupation of that city and its wanton
neglect of the protection of Arab rights there. Israel thus
: cannot be absolved of responsibility for this outrage,

40. We have said this many times before, and I do not
hesitate to repeat again, that it is unrealistic to expect any
peace in the region without the withdrawal of Israeli armed
forces from occupied Arab territories. The Security Council
must face this reality which contradicts the ideals of ou!
Organization. The principle of non-acquisition of territory
by military conquest is a part of the larger principle of the
non-use of force in inter-State relations and is specifically
written into the Security Council’s resolution 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967. This and other elements of that
resolution have the support of the overwhelming majority
of Member States of the United Nations. And yet we must
regretfully admit that a just and lasting peace is as elusive as
ever. I ihall not go into the causes of our absence of
progress so far. These are well known. But let me say tltls:
that with every passing day when hopes recede andl
frustrations rise, it is incumbent on our Organization to
support by every means the fragile structure of a peaceful1
settlement in the area, We earnestly urge the Security
Council, especially its permanent members, to exert their
utmost in securing the implementation of the resolution of

38. Even though this meeting of the Security Council has
been called on a specific complaint, I submit that the issue
before us has wider and deeper implications. The city of
Jerusalem is sacred to the followers of three religions and
the status of its places of worship has been of special
concern to the United Nations for a number of years, The
safety and sanctity of these religious places is related to the
maintenance of the unique character of Jerusalem. It is for
that reason that the United Nations has on many occasions
expressed itself against any change in the juridical status of
the city. I need only to refer to the two resolutions of the
General Assembly in 1967, 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V);
and the unanimously adopted resolutions of the Security
Council, 2.52 (1968), of 21 May 1968, and 267 (1969), of
3 July 1969. Those resolutions call upon Israel to desist
4

22 November in all its aspects. This would not prove an
impossible task if all parties were to show sufficient will
and purpose. Let me quote from what the Prime Minister of
India said last year. Speaking in the General Assembly on
14 October 1968 she said:
“ , . I the west Asian crisis also needs to be resolved by
political means, There is every opportunity for doing so,
if it is recognized that the security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the States in this part of the world
cannot be based on the redrawing of State frontiers by
force or on the basis of permanent hostility.“3
41. The incident at Jerusalem on 21 August and all that
has happened both before and after that date show the
emptiness of the Israeli claim that its occupation of Arab
territories has not increased the tension in that area. In our
view, so long as Israel continues its present policy of
defiance and refuses to withdraw, it will be absurd to
pretend that all can be well between the Israelis and the
Arabs, or that in the field of internal law and order in the
occupied territories the situation will remain peaceful;
for, far from there being a satisfactory situation, the
tension in west Asia continues to increase and continues to
upset the peace in the area and also to extend that threat to
peace far beyond Israeli-Arab borders. It should be the duty
of all of us, and above all of the Security Council, to ensure
that peace returns to the Middle East. The few days of
reflection which we have had since the despicable burning
of the Al Aqsa Mosque have convinced us more than ever
before that peace can return to west Asia only if Israel will
carry out, or can be made to carry out, fully and faithfully
various resolutions of the United Nations, and particularly
of this Council, Israeli intransigence is no longer a matter of
the prestige and authority of the United Nations; it is a
signal for far worse things to come. We must stop it.
42. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Somalia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to address the
Council.
43. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, my delegation
would like to thank you and, through you, the members of
the Security Council for responding to the request by 2.5
Member States of this Organization that a meeting of this
Council be called to consider the grave situation resulting
from the extensive damage caused by arson to the holy Al
Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, My delegation, which was
among the signatories of that request, would also like to
thank the Council for allowing it the privilege of speaking
in the debate.
s
44. This grave incident has affected not only th$. Arab
inhabitants of Jerusalem but also Moslem peoples throughout the world. The Council has already been told by
previous speakers of the importance which Moslems
throughout the world attach to that holy, revered and
historic shrine. It is sufficient for me to say here that the Al
Aqsa Mosque is the third most holy shrine in the Moslem
world, since only the shrines at Mecca and Medina have
3 See Official Records 01 the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Plenary meetings, 1693rd meeting, para. 158.

greater religious significance. Those who understand the
strong spiritual andemotional ties which Moslemsattach to
this sacred Mosque will also understand the violent reactionswhich took placein Moslemcountrieswhen newsof
the burning of the shrinebecameknown. In every Moslem
country there were widespreaddemonstrationsto protest
this sacrilegiousact. It is important that the Security
Council should take careful note of these protestsand this
widespreadindignation, becausethey show that the problem of Jerusalemis not one that concerns only the
immediateparties to the Middle East conflict. The problem
of Jerusalemis onethat transcendsnational frontiers andis
of vital concern to Moslemnations spreadthroughout the
world whosepopulationstotal over 600 million people.
45, My delegation considersit important to view the
burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque first of all within the
context of other events that have taken placein the Holy
City of Jerusalemover the past two years and then to
consider it as a part of the question of the status of
Jerusalem-andindeed, aspart of the Middle Eastsituation
that arisesfrom Israel’sillegaland continued occupation of
Arab landsfollowing its aggressive
war in June 1967.
46. First, I should like the membersof the Security
Council to considerthe burning of the Mosqueagainstthe
background of Israeli attitudes and actions. There have
been well substantiatedreports that in their policies and
actions, the Israeli authorities, including their officials,
soldiers and tourists, have been particularly offensive to
Moslem sensibilitiesat the Holy Al Aqsa Mosqueand the
surrounding Haram Ash-Sharif from the time this sacred
area came under Israeli military control. In thesetwo years
the Israeli authorities have proceededwith a plan of action
which has resultedin the demolition of placesof worship,
severalbuildingsand religiousfoundations in Old Jerusalem
and many private Arab dwellings,in order to clear the area
for a squarein front of Al Buraq, called by the Jewsthe
“Wailing Wall”. The World Moslem Congresscalled the
attention of the international community to this action in
August 1968.
47. Sometime earlier, 14 Moslemand Christianleadersof
Jerusalem submitted a memorandum to the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations protesting the desecrationof Moslemand Christian
Holy Places.Last year the Israeliscommencedexcavation
work in the area of the Mosquewith the declaredobject of
uncovering the remains of the first Jewish Temple of
Solomon. One can understandexcavation for archaeological
reasons,but when it involves desecrationof the holy shrine
of another faith, then the situation takes on a more
ominous dimension.The situation assumeda menacingand
provocative character when a prominent group of Israelis
declared their intention to restore the secondTemple of
Judaismon the site of the Mosque.
48, The representativeof Jordan whoseGovernmentis the
de @re authority for the Old City of Jerusalem,haslodged
many complaints in this Council over the past two years
against the offensive and provocative behaviour of Israeh
authorities and Israeli nationals towards Moslem Holy
Placesand buildingsin the City.

“It was remarked clearly the ineffectiveness and the
slowness of the Israeli firemen in extinguishing the fin:
which was finally extinguished by the Arab firemen whu
came from Ramallah and Al Khalil. The Israeli police had
prevented the population from helping in queIling the
fire. It was a tragic shock for Islam. The Al Aqsa Mosque
area should be cleared and the key of the Magharbah gate
must be delivered immediately to the Waqf Committee.‘&
Supreme Moslem Council of Jerusalem and Moslem
leaders will never co-operate with any Israeli Committee
to investigate the arson, and they will not recognize the
results of its investigation. The Israelis are violating the
international law in unpermitted excavations beside AI
Aqsa Mosque and in the Moslem properties, They have
desecrated our Holy Places many times, most recently
when a group of Israeli youth had led what was called a
military parade inside the Mosque zone,”

49. Those, then, are some of the considerations which
must be taken into account on the question of the burning
of the Al Aqsa Mosque. Moslem peoples throughout the
world cannot ignore the fact that a climate conducive to
acts of vandalism against Moslem holy shrines has been
produced by the callous and aggressive actions of the Israeli
authorities and Israeli people.
50. Before I proceed to the next stage of my statement,
permit me to refer to the statement made yesterday in this
Council by the representative of Israel on the question of
the burning of the Mosque. Yesterday, for the first time we
heard a statement from him which was relatively free from
vituperation and threat. He endeavoured to give the Council
his Government’s version of the fire. But an examination of
his statement raises many doubts, particularly in view of
contrasting accounts from elsewhere, and if his statement is
to be taken seriously, perhaps he would give the Council
more information on some of the following points.

55. The second statement made by the Supreme Muslim
Council was issued on 30 August 1969 and it reads as
follows:

51. For example, the Israeli representative stated that only
one ninth of the Mosque had been damaged. Yet press
agencies whose correspondents reported from the spot have
described the damage as extensive. The heart of the
Mosque-the pulpit-and the entire roof on one side were
completely destroyed.

“The Supreme Muslim Council and some of the Mayors
and Chairmen of Municipalities in the West Bank of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan have convened to discuss
the situation resulting from the arson of Al Aqsa Mosque,
and at the present situation they decided:

52. The Israeli representative claimed that the fire had
been extinguished within one hour. Yet according to
international press reports the fire raged for a much longer
period. Indeed, the blaze, according to those reports,
required the assistance of fire brigades from the surrounding towns of Jerusalem. Despite this assistance, we are told,
the tire raged for several hours.

“1. To establish an Arab Committee to investigate the
arson thoroughly and submit its reports to the Muslim
Council as soon as possible.
“2. To establish a committee from architects, meritbers of the Arab Architects syndicate, to prepare a reporl
on the damage and to assess the possibilities for its repair.

53. The representative of Israel read out from an Israeli
law, No. 5727 of 1967, relating to the protection of Holy
Places. Surely, Israel’s responsibility as an occupying Power
is not discharged by pointing to the law on the statute
book, but by ensuring that it discharges its responsibilities
in accordance with the law.

“3. The participants in the meeting consider the whole
area of Al Haram As-Sharif, a closed precinct folr
everyone except Muslim prayers at the times of prayers
only, until further notice.
“4. The participants strongly demand the closure ci:
the Magharbah gate and the delivery of its key to the
Waqf Committee immediately.

54. All of these questions have in fact been answered by
Sheikh Hilmi Al Muhtasib, Chairman of the Supreme
Moslem Council in Jerusalem. The Israeli representative
found it convenient to cite from the statements which that
distinguished leader has made on the subject, but has
conveniently overlooked the entire content of his statement. Since the Israeli delegation attaches importance and
credibility to the statement of that eminent religious leader,
allow me to read from two statements which that distinguished She&h made soon after the fire. The first statement
was made on the evening of 21 August 1969, a few hours
after the arson had been committed. At that time some
Israeli officials tried to relate the fire to an electrical
contact. She&h Muhtasib described this as follows:

“5: The participants strongly demand the stop of the
excavations practised by the Israeli occupiers around the
precinct of Al Haram As-Sharif and further demand a
permission for the above-mentioned Arab Architects
committee to investigate the excavations being carried1
now beneath the Silsileh gate.
*
“.*.
“8. To invite the diplomatic corps to visit Al Aqss
Mosque and to view the extensive damage caused by the
arson.

“The Supreme Moslem Council is convinced that the
fire was a premeditated act caused deliberately by one or
several persons. The guards of the Mosque had seen a
blond young man entering and leaving the Mosque a few
minutes before the burning; and the Committee of the
Arab Architects established by the Moslem Council
immediately after the arson proved the impossibility of
electrical contact as a reason for the incident,

“9. The Muslim Council neither recognizes any ccm
mission appointed by the occupying Israeli authorities
nor accepts any reports issued by it concerning the arson;
however, at the same time the Muslim Council welcomes
any investigation commission representing all Arab and
Muslim States.
6

“IO. The participants have observed, after the pre.
liminary reports, regarding the arson, that the Municipality had not discharged its duties adequately and
effectively in extinguishing the fire.”

open conflict will be endemicin the Middle East and in
other partsof the world.

56. This leads to what should be our next consideration:
the position of these Holy Places vis-&vis the status of
Jerusalem.It is a fact that Israel’sseizureof the Holy City
in the war of June 1967 and its declaredintention of
annexing it to Israel causedgrave anxiety to Moslemsand
Christians throughout the world. In resolutions 2253
(ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of the fifth emergencysession
of
the General Assembly,Israel was called upon to rescindall
measurestaken to change the status of Jerusalem.When
Israel failed to comply with the termsof thoseresolutions,
the Security Council adopted resolution 252 (1968), which
stated that it:
“Considers that all legislative and administrative
measuresandactionstaken by Israel,includingexpropriation of land andpropertiesthereon, which tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot
changethat status.”
Israel respondedcharacteristically by refusing to rescind
those measuresand, asa further mark of its contempt for
the Security Council,enactedlegislationdesigned
to consolidate its annexation of the Old City. The Security Council
is all too familiar with the measurestaken by the Israeli
authorities to strengthen their grip on the area. Arab
families have been evicted from their homes,their houses
demolishedand properties seized, and IsraelisettlersestabIished in their place. Theseacts havegivensubstance
to the
charge that Israel is in fact embarked on a plan to change
the historic character of the Old City and to increase
further the displacedArab population of Palestine.

59. The presentunsatisfactorystateof affairs,culminating
in the latest outrageby Israel againstthe United Arab
Republicyesterday,underlines
what wemustexpectin that
critical area of the world if aggression
is allowed to go
unchecked. The latest incident prompted the Summit
Conferenceof the Organizationof African Unity, meeting
in Addis Ababa, to adopt a resolution,supportedby 41
African Headsof State andGovernment,condemningthat
provocative and unwarrantedattack on an African sister
State.
60. The late PresidentEisenhowerin his book Waging
Peacewrote, with referenceto Israeliaggression
in 1956:
“Should a nation which attacks and occupiesforeign
territory in the face of United Nationsdisapprovalbe
allowedto imposeconditionson its own withdrawal? If
we agree that armed attack can properly achievethe
purposesof the assailant
I fear we will have turned back
the clock of internationalorder.“4
That judgementis astrue and relevant today asit wasin
1956.
61. Thereremainsto be statedthe kind of actionthat my
delegationconsidersshould be taken to deal with this
entirely disturbinganddistressing
situation.

62. On the questionof the Holy City, in particular the
burning of the Al AqsaMosque,my delegationwould like
to seethe United Nationsconduct an impartial investigation into the graveeventsof 21 August 1969 and other
measures
taken by the Israelioccupationforcesagainstthe
Arab inhabitantsand their property and againstproperty
57. Although the Security Council, regrettably, hasnot
belongingto religiousfoundations.My delegationwould
taken any effective counter-steps to put a halt to these
like the Security Council to recognizethat any acts of
measures, the one redeeming feature of this distressing
destructionor desecration
of holy places,religiousbuildings
situation is the fact that, on the basic question of the
and sitesare likely to endangerinternational peaceand
iIlegaIity of Israel’sactionsin Jerusalem,all membersof the
security, Furthermore,I shouldlike the Security Councilto
Security Council, including the four permanentmembers,
acknowledgethat there shouldbe unimpededaccess
to the
consider that the Israeli authorities have grosslyexceeded
Holy Shrine of Al Aqsaby representatives
of Governments
their powers under international law governingmilitary
of Islamiccountriesto assess
the damageand to prepare
occupation and that many of their actionscontravenethe
andexecuteplansfor its repair.
provisions of the Charter and of the UniversalDeclaration
of Human Rights.
63. On the question of the status of Jerusalem,my
delegationis convinced that, unlessthe Security Council
58. Neither the future of Jerusalemnor the statusof the
takes
meaningfulaction to enforceits resolutionson this
Old City-nor the protection of the holy shrinesof Islam
matter, not only wiIl the CouncilemboldenIsraelto take
and Christianity-can be consideredin isolation from the
further unilateralstepsfor the completeannexationof the
general situation prevailingin the Middle Eastfollowing the
Holy City, but it will createwithin the United Nationsa
1967 Israeli aggression.
As my delegationhasstatedin the
of the
past, a peaceful settlement of the Middle East problem lack of confidencein the efficacy and seriousness
Security Council with regardto its own decisions.
Israelhas
must be approachedwithin the framework laid down by
beencensuredtime and againfor its aggressive
actsandfor
the Security Council resolution of November1967. There
can be no hope of peacein the Middle Eastsolong asIsrael its defiance of Security Council and GeneralAssembly
resolutions. The Security Council should not preclude
is allowed to continue its occupation of Arab territory. No
action under Article 41 of the Chartershouldits decisions
State, whether it be Israel or any other, shouldhave the
continueto be flouted.
right to dictate conditions to or claim anything from the
victim of its aggression.If these principlesare not upheld
4 Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years: Waging Peace,
by the world community, then, I submit, the United
Doubleday; New York, 1965, p, 188.
Nations will help to ensure that bitterness, distrust and
7

64. On the question of the general Middle East situation,
my delegation would like to see the four permanent
members, in concert with Ambassador Jarring, activatethey have been in a lengthy recess for the last few
months-their role in persuading both Israel and the Arab
States to bring about a peaceful settlement of the crisis by
full acceptance and implementation of the provisions of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November.
65. In conclusion, I would say that the incident of the
burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque is symptomatic of the
general situation in the Middle East, and it underlines the
necessity of attacking at its roots this problem which
remains as a continuing threat to world peace.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call on
the representative of Israel to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.
67. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It had not been my intention
to speak today; I shall therefore confine myself to two
factual observations, particularly on the statement we have
just heard.
68. The representative of Somalia referred to statements
made by Sheikh Hilmi Al Muhtasib, the President of the
Jerusalem Moslem Council. Had the Somalia representative
taken the trouble to read the verbatim record of yesterday’s
meeting, he would have found that my speech reported the
principal points from the She&h’s statements precisely as
the representative of Somalia did today himself.
69. He also referred to alleged excavations affecting the
sacredness of Al Aqsa, and the Mosque compound in
general. I should like to say that the only extraordinary
activity on that site since 1967 has been the repair work
carried out by the Waqf, the Moslem religious authority, on
the dome of the Al Aqsa Mosque, damaged when the
Jordanian army used it for machine-gun emplacements in
the June 1967 hostilities. Those repairs were executed
under the supervision of an Egyptian architect, an expert
on the Mosque, whose presence was approved by Israel at
the request of the Moslem authorities. No archaeological
excavations whatsoever have taken place in the Mosque
compound; the only excavations in the vicinity are the
archaeological works proceeding to the south of the area, in
accordance with projects basically approved by the Jordanian authorities and commenced before 1967. To suggest
that those excavations affect or endanger the Al Aqsa
Mosque is sheer falsehood,
70. Professor H. J. Reinink, the Special Representative of
UNESCO entrusted with reporting on the compliance with
The Hague Convention on the Protection of Cultural
Property in Armed Conflict, was quoted in the DirectorGeneral’s report of May 1968 to the seventy-eighth session
of the Executive Board of UNESCO as follows:
“I satisfied myself on the spot that the excavations
being carried out by Professor Masare near the South wall
do not threaten the Mosque quarter of Jerusalem, which
is unique in the world,”

71. I have listened with care to the statements made in the
course of today’s meeting; Israel’s position was am&
describedyesterday. Today I should like to bring to the
Council’s attention the following declaration issuedin
Jerusalemon 8 September:
“The Israel Interfaith Committee-Jews, Moslemsand
Christians-wishto expresspublicly the sorrow andgrief
which they share with their Moslem brethren, in the
country and beyond, at the damagedoneby the fir,: at
one of Jerusalem’s
most valuable and beautiful historical
and cultural monuments,and at the desecrationof what
is to millions of the children of Abraham one of tlteit
most venerated sanctuaries. We are gravely concerned
over the atmosphereof suspicionand hostility that has
developedas a result of the fire at the Al Aqsa Mosque,
and over the eagerness
with which slandersand accusa.
tions, including the most objectionableforms of group
denunciation,have beenvoiced and deliberatelyspread
in
certain quarters-religious and secular-before there was
even a possibility of ascertainingthe relevant facts. \‘e
greatly deplore the abuseof the calamity that befell the
Holy Place, for the purpose of fomenting hatred and
inciting to violence.
“We appealto all children of Abraham-Jews,Christians
and Moslems-andto all that seekthe peaceof Jerusalem,
for prayer that God pour out upon us some of ltis
boundlesscompassionand love, and help us to look to
one another with understanding,patienceand hope.”
72. The declaration was signed by ProfessorR. J. ‘Zwj
Werblowsky, Chairman; Sheikh Tawfik Mahamud A!
Asaliya, Kadi of Jaffo; Rabbi Dr. Israel Goldstein; and
Joseph M. Raya, Archbishop of St. Jean D’Acre, Haifa,
Nazareth and all Galilee.
73. It is in that spirit, not in acrimony, that we preferto
approachthe questionon the agenda.It isin that spirit jlhat
I shouldlike to declaretoday that it is perfectly naturaland
legitimate that Moslem States or communitiesshouldfeel
they have a specialinterest in this matter and shouldwish
to take responsibility for the necessaryrestorationworkat
Al Aqsa. As far asthe Israel authoritiesare concerned,ae
problem need arisein the Waqfs enlistingsuch co-opera.
tion.
74. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):Theresre
no more speakerson my list for today. If no other
representativeswish to speak, we shall adjourn today’s
meeting.
75. With regard to the next meeting of the Security
Council, consultationshave beenheld with the members
of
the Council andwith the representativesof the countriescs
whose initiative this item has been brought before the
Council for consideration. On the basisof theseCOnsUlta+
tions, the consensus
is that the next meetingof the SectIn@
Council on this matter should be convenedtomorrow, 11
September,at 3 p.m.
The meeting roseat 5 p.m

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
d6positoires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

Nations
Unies
sent
entier.
Informer-vow
der venter,
New York

KAK IlOJIY’IMTb

M3flAHllf-i

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

tar

CONSEGUIR

publicociones

de

las Nociones

en todar
parter
del mundo.
Conrulte
Ventos,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

en vente
dons
ouprbs
de votre
ou Get&e.

OPTAHMBA~MM

est6n

en vcnto

a su librero

o dirijore

$U.S. 0.50 (or

les librairies
et ler agencer
librairie
ou odrerrez-vou.s
L:

06bE~MHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidas

UNIES

equivalent

tiAl.Mti

UNIDAS
en librerlos

y cosos

o: Naciones

in other

currencies)

Unidas,

dirtribuidoros
Secci6n

de

82225-December

1972-2,05c’
