UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/954
4 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 4 DECEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 4 December 1997 which
I have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee
established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Attached to the letter is the first periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1136 (1997) of 6 November 1997. I should be grateful if you would bring the
letter and its enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

(Signed)

97-34828 (E)

051297

051297

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

French]

Letter dated 4 December 1997 from the Chairman of
the International Monitoring Committee addressed
to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the first report, covering
the period from 31 October to 4 December 1997, requested by the Security Council
in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in the
Central African Republic.

(Signed) Gen. Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 3

Enclosure
First report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(4 December 1997)

INTRODUCTION
1.
At its 3829th meeting, the Security Council unanimously adopted its
resolution 1136 (1997), which was essentially a continuation of its earlier
resolution 1125 (1997). In other words, the Council approved the continued
conduct by Member States participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor
the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) of the operation in a
neutral and impartial way to achieve its objective as set out in paragraph 2 of
Council resolution 1125 (1997). The Council requested the Member States
participating in MISAB, namely, the International Monitoring Committee to
supervise the implementation of the Bangui Agreements, which represents them, to
provide periodic reports to the Council at least every month through the
Secretary-General.
2.
This first report describes developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic from 31 October to 4 December 1997.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
3.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Amadou Toumani Touré, is the body that
directs the actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance
directly from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of
the Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee.
4.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action that
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Agreements of 25 January 1997 in
the form of a timetable, a significant part of which has already been
implemented or is currently being implemented.
5.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE
INTERNATIONAL MONITORING COMMITTEE
6.
It should be noted that since its establishment by the heads of the States
members of the International Mediation Committee, the International Monitoring
Committee has received logistical and technical support from the United Nations
/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 4

Development Programme (UNDP). The continuation of such support will make it
possible to carry out, inter alia, diverse operations, namely:
(a) Political monitoring of the pursuit of disarmament operations in
Bangui and later in other parts of the country;
(b) Coordination of activities relating to the organization and conduct of
various seminars and conferences provided for in the context of national
reconciliation.

LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION
7.
As indicated in the previous reports, MISAB receives logistical support
from the participating States, France, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Government of the Central African Republic.
8.
While recognizing the generous efforts that the States participating in
MISAB, France, OAU and the Government of the Central African Republic continue
to make to assist the African contingents based in Bangui, it must be
acknowledged that the material conditions of the troops stand in need of
improvement, as they are far inferior to those enjoyed by other similar forces
operating in other conflict areas. An appropriate solution to this state of
affairs should be urgently found in order to avoid demoralization among the
troops, which up until now have been endeavouring to carry out their work with
selfless dedication.
9.
The International Monitoring Committee welcomes the request that the
Security Council made to the Secretary-General in its resolution 1136 (1997) to
establish a Trust Fund for the Central African Republic that would assist in
supporting the troops of States participating in MISAB and in providing
logistical support to them. It is important to emphasize that the ability to
maintain security in the Central African Republic in a particularly sensitive
subregional context will depend on the dispatch with which States Members of the
United Nations contribute to the Fund.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BANGUI AGREEMENTS
Provisions already implemented
10. The provisions of the Agreements of 25 January 1997 on the formation of a
Government of national union, the adoption of an amnesty law covering offences
in the context of the third rebellion and the situation of former heads of State
have already been implemented, which is to be commended.
11. The text of the law on the material benefits to be provided to former
Presidents of the Republic was adopted on 30 October 1997 by an overwhelming
majority. It now remains for the Head of State to issue a decree enacting the
law. Under the aforementioned law, "Any former President of the Republic, who
was democratically elected and who is currently enjoying his civil rights, shall
receive a pension the sum of which shall be equivalent to half of the salary of
/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 5

the President of the Republic". It should be noted that the persons concerned
shall also receive a number of material benefits and special consideration with
respect to protocol and security, which will enable them to maintain a standard
of living in keeping with the high office that they previously held.
Suspension of the parliamentary audit
12. The bill on the abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the
parliamentary audit has not yet been able to be adopted following the intense
debate on the subject that took place in November. This first bill was rejected
by a majority of deputies. Currently, the Presidency of the Republic and the
Government are redrafting the bill for submission to the National Assembly for a
second reading. This resubmission will be preceded by an awareness campaign
among members of Parliament. It should be noted that the adoption of the bill
is an important point of the Bangui Agreements. It will, for all intents and
purposes, be resubmitted for a second reading, unless the Head of State decides
otherwise.
Disarmament
13. As indicated in paragraph 11 of the previous report (S/1997/828), a
coordination and security meeting took place on 5 November under the
chairmanship of Colonel Alioune Ibaba, Coordinator of the International
Monitoring Committee, with the participation of the Minister of State for
Territorial Administration, responsible for Public Safety and Disarmament,
members of the Committee, the command of MISAB as well as the principal
officials responsible for various national defence and security services. The
meeting made it possible to define a strategy to guide the activities to be
carried out in the field in order to recover the remaining arms in good
condition. Implementation of the strategy began on 10 November.
14. On the basis of apparently reliable information, the security forces
(National Gendarmerie and Central African Police Force) are conducting searches
in various neighbourhoods while covered by elements of the Central African Armed
Forces, themselves protected by elements of MISAB. Although all the searches
conducted to date have yielded no results, it can not yet be said that those to
be organized - perhaps with a little more precision - will be useless. In other
words, the various participants in these operations have not yet given up and
are seeking to refine their methods in order to achieve their objectives. It
should be noted that the lack of success in this new phase of disarmament has
given rise to suspicion and frustration among certain opposition political
parties.
15. Since the signing of the truce agreement of 28 June 1997 and the ceasefire
agreement of 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been turned over to MISAB:

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 6

Heavy weapons

Designation

Quantity

120 mm mortars

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 4

81 mm mortars

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 15

60 mm mortars

surrendered:

14 out of a total of 19

14.5 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

6 out of a total of 6

12.7 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 3

75 mm recoilless guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 2

73 mm anti-tank rocket
launchers

surrendered:

66 out of a total of 67

Rocket-propelled grenades

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 11

surrendered:

112 out of a total of 127

Total

(weapons recovered:

88.18 per cent)

Increase
(12 November2 December 1997)

1

1

0.78 per cent

Light weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(12 November2 December 1997)

Hand-guns (misc.)

surrendered:

16 out of a total of 111

Submachine-guns

surrendered:

299 out of a total of 459

Assault rifles

surrendered:

261 out of a total of 541

2

MAS 36-49/56-M14 rifles
+ muskets

surrendered:

651 out of a total of 1,181

2

Light machine-guns

surrendered:

52 out of a total of 80

.30-calibre machine-guns

surrendered:

15 out of a total of 17

surrendered:

1,302 out of a total of 2,389

Total

(weapons recovered:

54.49 per cent)

4
0.16 per cent

16. In the light of the various factors listed in paragraph 13 of the previous
report, it is easy to understand why the recovery of all light arms remains
uncertain in spite of all the resources brought to bear and the strategies
employed.
17. The status of munitions and explosives recovered and packaged as at
2 December 1997 is set out below:

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 7

Designation

Quantity

Remarks

5.56 mm rounds

69 085

+1

7.5 mm SLC rounds

14 000

7.5 mm S/B rounds

123 954

+6 621

7.5 mm X rounds

34 075

+75

7.5 mm X S/B rounds

135

7.62 mm rounds, NATO

15 962

7.62 mm Kalashnikov rounds

40 955

+295

7.62 mm long rounds

121 261

+1

7.62 mm Tokarev rounds

2 810

+1 910

9 mm Para rounds

5 523

+117

731

+3

12.7 mm rounds

2 200

+1 472

14.5 mm rounds

15 434

+112

37 fragmentation hand grenades

1 857

+6

Fragmentation hand grenades, China

3 165

+17

16

+13

1 151

+11

6

+6

.37 stun hand grenades

1 046

+3

FL LAC F4 hand grenades

1 304

+4

.12-calibre riot control rounds

GR FLG AP34
RPG 7 rockets
73 anti-tank rocket launchers

F4 hand grenades

316

Russian grenades

1

60 mm mortars

1 713

+8

81 mm mortars

852

+18

120 mm mortars

113

+11

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, US

168

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, China

223

No weapons in inventory

M79 40 mm rounds, US

6 060

No weapons in inventory

Time fuses (inactive)

2 325

7.5 mm grenade cartridges

+2

755

Pyro detonator

6 100

+6 100

Total:
Various rounds

446 880

Explosives and detonators

26 416

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 8

Recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence
18. This provision of the Bangui Agreements remains a kind of apple of discord
between those in power and the opposition. Indeed, although everyone is in
agreement in recognizing that the rational and consistent implementation of the
282 recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence can and should
form the basis for the solution of many problems facing the Central African
Armed Forces, it has proved difficult to find common ground for their
implementation.
19. Of all the recommendations, two or three hold the attention of all
political circles. These are the recommendations concerning the dissolution of
the Centre national de recherche et d'investigation (National Research and
Investigation Centre) (CNRI) and the Section d'enquête, de recherche et de la
documentation (Survey, Research and Documentation Section (SERD) and that
relating to the reduction of the staff of the Presidential Guard. These
recommendations touch on sensitive areas in which it is at present difficult to
find a modus vivendi between the head of State, supported by the political
parties of the presidential majority, on the one hand, and those in the Group of
Eleven, on the other. The International Monitoring Committee is very much aware
of this situation. The restructuring of the Central African Armed Forces, the
National Gendarmerie and the Central African Police Force, as advocated in a
number of recommendations, appears to be the key to the response to be given to
those recommendations. The implementation of the demobilization, retraining and
reintegration project would to some extent promote a move in that direction.
National reconciliation
20. This is the culmination of the long but exciting process of the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. As indicated in the previous reports,
this phase is in itself a delicate process in view of the fact that its ultimate
aim is to exert a positive influence on the individual and collective psychology
of brothers who have had to confront each other and to maintain, or even
cultivate, a climate of general distrust from the outset of the crisis. In
practice it has fallen to the International Monitoring Committee, and more
particularly to its Chairman, General Amadou Toumani Touré, to carry out the
twofold task of managing and then eliminating this climate, hence the need to
take a number of actions envisaged in the spirit of the Bangui Agreements with a
view to restoring the climate of harmony and concord which prevailed in the
Central African Republic at the time of the revered patriot, Barthélémy Boganda.
21. Thanks to the logistical, financial and technical support of UNDP, the
International Monitoring Committee and the Ministry of Human Rights, National
Reconciliation and Democratic Culture have organized awareness-raising seminars
in various regions of the country between 18 November and 10 December 1997.
22. Thus, three teams, each composed of deputies, local elected officials,
representatives of the Ministry of the Interior and of the Ministry of National
Reconciliation, together with resource people designated by the International

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 9

Monitoring Committee, have led, and are leading, seminars on peace, unity and
national reconciliation:
at Bambari (for the central region of the country),
at Bossangoa (for the north-west),
at Bangassou (for the south-east),
at Berbérati (for the south-west),
at M'Balki (for the south),
at Kaga Bandoro and Sibut (for the centre-north),
at Ndélé and Birao (for the north).
23. The systematic coverage of the country has made it possible to reach within
a reasonable period of time all the populations of the country. The same
messages have been brought to them and rich in-depth discussion meetings have
been held on the need to achieve peace and national reconciliation, conditions
conducive to the economic recovery and sustainable development of the country.
The conclusions reached at these various seminars will provide a data bank to be
made available to the participants in the National Reconciliation Conference
which could be held in January 1998.
24. With regard to the National Reconciliation Conference, a preparatory
committee was established on 17 October 1997, composed of 40 members
representing the public authorities (the Presidency of the Republic, the
Government, the National Assembly and the judicial authorities), the parties of
the four major political groups, trade unions, employers, the various
professions (lawyers, doctors, pharmacists, architects, notaries), religious
denominations and women. The Preparatory Committee for the National
Reconciliation Conference, presided over by the Minister for Human Rights,
National Reconciliation and Democratic Culture, is responsible for:
(a) Preparing the draft rules of procedure and the provisional agenda for
the Conference;
(b) Establishing the criteria for the representation of national entities
and quotas for participation;
(c) Assembling all the necessary documentation for the preparation and
smooth functioning of the work of the Conference.

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND
THE VARIOUS GROUPS OF POLITICAL PARTIES
25. General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee, returned to Bangui on 21 November 1997 after a consultative mission
to the various heads of State of countries participating in MISAB. Since his
return, at the head of the International Monitoring Committee, he has resumed
various contacts with the highest authorities of the Central African Republic
(the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and the President of the
/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 10

National Assembly), the former heads of State (Presidents Dacko and Kolingba),
the leaders of the various political groups and a number of individuals. These
meetings were of assistance in, inter alia:
(a) The evaluation of the progress made in the implementation of the
Bangui Agreements;
(b) The search for solutions to those provisions which have not yet been
implemented or those which are being implemented at a slow pace;
(c) The study of the various possible hypotheses during the post-MISAB
period, in other words after 6 February 1998, the date on which the mandate
authorized by the Security Council in resolution 1136 (1997) expires;
(d) The joint search for ways and means of finding a solution to the
thorny problem of arrears of wages and salaries;
(e) The study of the elements of the strategy to be adopted to convince
the international community of the need to provide direct and effective
assistance to the Central African Republic by organizing a round table of donors
to be held during the first quarter of 1998.

COOPERATION WITH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
26. Pursuant to the Security Council's request to the Secretary-General in
resolution 1136 (1997) to provide a report within three months on the
implementation of that resolution, the arrival of a multidisciplinary mission
from the United Nations Secretariat to collect the elements necessary for the
preparation of the report was announced. The International Monitoring Committee
will follow the work of this mission with great interest.
27. The talks which Mr. Pierre Etienne Ly, Resident Coordinator for the United
Nations, had with various leaders at Headquarters at the beginning of November,
together with the working meetings a week later which were coordinated by the
Department of Political Affairs and in which Ambassador René Valéry Mongbe
participated, enabled the United Nations Secretariat to draw up the terms of
reference for the multidisciplinary mission, after receiving the expert advice
of General Amadou Toumani Touré.
28. The adoption by the Security Council on 6 November 1997 of resolution
1136 (1997), in which the Council approved the extension of the mandate of MISAB
for a period of three months, in other words until 6 February 1998, was a source
of satisfaction both to the Central African authorities and to all political
circles in the country. The latter have indicated their wish to have the
protection of a force of one kind or another until the 1999 presidential
elections in order to see the whole electoral process take place in an
atmosphere of peace, calm, freedom and transparency. The populations, for their
part, are feeling more and more secure now that the spectre of the afflictions,
horrors and difficulties of all kinds is definitely receding. Like resolution
1125 (1997), therefore, the new resolution has been seen as having a sort of

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 11

catalytic effect on the work of the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB.
29. The International Monitoring Committee and MISAB also welcome the adoption
of resolution 1136 (1997) and:
(a) Reaffirm their readiness to work with the Central African people in
consolidating the peace which has been restored;
(b) Express the fervent hope that the international community will respond
positively and within a reasonable period of time to the invitation by the
Security Council in paragraph 6 of the resolution to contribute to the Trust
Fund for the Central African Republic which the Secretary-General has been
requested to establish;
(c) Hope that paragraph 9 of the resolution, in which the Security Council
urges all States, international organizations and financial institutions to
assist in post-conflict development in the Central African Republic, will be
implemented since, here as in other countries which have encountered the same
difficulties, there can be no genuine and lasting peace without a minimum of
economic and social development.
30. Moreover, despite the excellent results obtained in agricultural production
(in both cash crops and food crops), the Central African Republic, where
industrial and commercial activities have clearly been in a state of paralysis
for several months, is still experiencing difficulties in meeting its internal
obligations (wages and salaries, pensions, scholarships, the functioning of the
State apparatus) and its external commitments, in particular the repayment of
arrears due to the Bretton Woods institutions.
31. It took an exceptional decision by the head of State and strong action by
the Government to constrain those responsible for the major enterprises to
discharge some of their arrears and this made it possible for one month's wages
and salaries to be paid on 28 and 29 November and then on 2 and 3 December 1997.
Moreover, the thorny problem of arrears of wages and salaries, pensions and
scholarships provides a reason for the strike which is still taking place in
certain sectors, such as higher education. The greatest concern of the Central
African authorities is therefore to find the necessary resources to resolve this
problem of six months' arrears of wages, salaries and other payments. The
official demonstrations planned in celebration of the National Day on
1 December 1997 were cancelled for reasons of economy.

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE
32. There has been no significant change in the arrangements made since the
submission of the previous report. MISAB is continuing to ensure security in
all neighbourhoods of the Central African capital by occupying 20 surveillance
posts and is participating in joint security patrols in conjunction with the
Central African security and defence forces in all districts of Bangui.

/...

S/1997/954
English
Page 12

33. Hold-ups, armed robberies and other criminal acts have become very rare
thanks both to the progress achieved in disarmament and the constant vigilance
instituted by the system of joint patrols. It is worth repeating that the image
of Bangui as a peaceful city has been restored.

CONCLUSIONS
34. The Security Council's approval of the extension of the mandate of MISAB
until 6 February 1998 has given a new impetus to the mediation efforts, in so
far as it will to a large extent help MISAB to continue to ensure security and
to complete its peace-building mission.
35. The success of the deployment of MISAB will depend above all on the
understanding which the international community demonstrates in practice in the
implementation of paragraph 6 of resolution 1136 (1997).
36. The International Monitoring Committee hopes to continue to enjoy the
logistical and technical support of UNDP in order to pursue its twofold mission
of ensuring the political direction of MISAB and monitoring the implementation
of the Bangui Agreements through continuing mediation.
37. In order to avoid any slippage or any risk of a return to square one which
might lead to social disruption, it is urged that all measures should be taken
at the appropriate levels, including the level of the Secretary-General, to
arouse a greater awareness among States Members of the United Nations,
international organizations and financial institutions with a view to providing
the necessary assistance to the development of the Central African Republic, as
requested by the Security Council in paragraph 9 of resolution 1136 (1997).
38. A project for the restructuring of the Central African Armed Forces, the
National Gendarmerie and the Central African Police Force, taking into account
the various recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence, is
being considered by the highest Central African authorities. This project, the
preparation and implementation of which are eagerly awaited at the earliest
possible date by the whole Central African political community, is strongly
supported by the International Monitoring Committee.
39. As it has stated on many occasions, the International Monitoring Committee
will continue to spare no effort in urging all the parties to the Central
African crisis to continue to work with wisdom and dignity towards the effective
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. This is the price of genuine and
lasting peace.

-----
