S/2017/230

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 March 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
18 November 2016 to 1 March 2017
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2330 (2016).

II. Situation in the area of operation and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a volatile environment attributable to the
ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. This is notwithstanding a number of
violations of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces
(Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are set out below. The Syrian
Arab Armed Forces and non-State armed opposition groups engaged in exchanges
of heavy weapon fire in the area of separation and the area of limitation. Different
armed groups, including the listed terrorist group Jabhat Fath al -Sham (formerly
Nusrah Front) 1 and Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade/Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, 2 which
pledged allegiance to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) also continued to
exchange fire in the UNDOF area of operation. Inside the area of separation, the
presence of the Syrian armed forces and military equipment, as well as any other
armed personnel and military equipment other than that of UNDOF, is in violation
of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As underscored again by the Security
Council in its resolution 2330 (2016), there should be no military activity of any
kind in the area of separation.
__________________
1

In July 2016, the Nusrah Front announced that it had changed its name to Jabhat Fath al-Sham
and declared that it had cut ties with Al-Qaida.
2
The merger between the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade and Harakat al Muthana was initially
announced on 12 April 2016. On 24 May 2016, open sources reported that both groups were now
operating under the umbrella name of “Khalid ibn al-Walid Army”. The grouping is assessed as
being ISIL-affiliated.

17-04354 (E)

220317

*1704354*

S/2017/230

3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the
crossing of the ceasefire line by individuals, are violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. In his regular interaction with both sides, the Head of M ission
and Force Commander of UNDOF continued to call upon both parties to exercise
restraint and prevent any miscalculations that might lead to an escalation of the
situation. This was particularly the case when responding to incidents of spillover
and retaliatory fire.
4.
Incidents of spillover and retaliatory fire across the ceasefire line decreased
significantly during the reporting period. On 27 November 2016, the Israel Defense
Forces reported to the Head of Mission and Force Commander of UNDOF that
Israel Defense Forces personnel had received small arms fire across the ceasefire
line from the area of separation in the vicinity of former United Nations position 86.
The Israel Defense Forces responded with an airstrike across the ceasefire line,
which reportedly killed four members of the responsible group, named as Khalid ibn
al-Walid Army according to the Israel Defense Forces and open sources. A further
airstrike was reportedly conducted in the early hours of 28 November. UNDOF
could not observe the point of origin or point of impact of either of the airstrikes,
the latter of which reportedly impacted in the vicinity of United Nations position 86.
5.
On 8 February 2017, it was reported by open media that an incident of
spillover fire had occurred on the Israeli-occupied Golan and that the Israel Defense
Forces had taken subsequent action by firing across the ceasefire line. UNDOF did
not observe the incident and was unable to confirm the report. Following liaison by
UNDOF leadership, the Israel Defense Forces confirmed on 9 February that they
had fired across the ceasefire line in response to spillover fire that had occurred the
day before. The Senior Syrian Arab Delegate confirmed an impact in the vicinity of
Baath and was adamant that the spillover had not been caused by the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces. No further details regarding the incident, origin of the spillover fire
or point of impact of the fire across the ceasefire line have been provided to
UNDOF by the Israel Defense Forces to date. The issue of spillover fire remains a
serious cause of concern for UNDOF as it could result in escalation between the
parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
6.
The berm, or earthwork, in the area of separation remained a concern for
UNDOF throughout the reporting period. The berm is over 2 kilometres long and
appears to be facilitating movement in the corridor between Hamidiyah al -Jadidah
and Jabata al-Khashab. The berm crosses the ceasefire line in at least one location
and is used by armed groups, thus making the area of separation a target for the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces. This continues to have the potential to draw fire,
particularly indirect fire, closer to the ceasefire line and the technical fence.
7.
Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, from the
Bravo side to the Alpha side continued to be observed almost daily. Instances of
interaction between Israel Defense Forces soldiers and individuals from the Bravo
side have increased from the previous reporting period. On 30 N ovember, UNDOF
observed five persons loading a vehicle with unknown goods approximately
40 metres east of the Israeli technical fence gate in the vicinity of United Nations

2/10

17-04354

S/2017/230

observation post 54. On 7 December, UNDOF observed a brief interaction between
Israel Defense Forces personnel in an armoured vehicle, who opened the technical
fence and a white pickup truck that moved from Mu’allaqah and crossed the
ceasefire line from the Bravo side to the Alpha side. After the brief interaction with
the Israel Defense Forces, the occupant(s) of the white vehicle crossed back into the
area of separation and moved towards Mu’allaqah.
8.
UNDOF also observed a number of interactions between the Israel Defense
Forces and individuals from the Bravo side that involved Israel Defense Forces
armoured and soft-skinned vehicles, as well as trucks, ambulances and/or stretchers
from the Bravo side. Although the exact nature of these interactions could not be
confirmed, they appeared to suggest the provision of medical assistance. S uch
incidents occurred at night on 13 December and on 9, 15 and 18 January.
9.
There has also been increased interaction between Israel Defense Forces
soldiers and individuals from the Bravo side on Mount Hermon during the reporting
period. These incidents involved individuals with vehicles and mules from the
Bravo side loading unidentified objects during interaction with the Israel Defense
Forces on 6 January and on 5 and 21 February. On 17 January and 17 February, in
addition to the transfer of unidentified objects from the Israel Defense Forces to the
persons from the Bravo side, the interaction involved the transfer to the Israel
Defense Forces of an individual on a stretcher. UNDOF also observed movement of
five individuals on 20 February and two individuals on 28 February from the Bravo
side to the Alpha side after interaction with Israel Defense Forces on Mount
Hermon.
10. It is of note that similar movement of unarmed unidentified persons with
varying numbers of unloaded mules was also observed from Mount Hermon by
UNDOF personnel on 12, 19, 20 and 22 January. Notably, UNDOF observed that,
on the return routes, the mules had been loaded; however, no interaction by the
unidentified persons with the Israel Defense Forces was observed by UNDOF on
those occasions. The increase in interaction is a concerning trend because of the
strategic importance of the Mount Hermon complex. From its observation, UNDOF
cannot confirm or verify the nature of the interaction described in the paragraphs
above. The Israel Defense Forces have insisted that the interactions were of a
humanitarian and medical nature. On occasion, unidentified armed elements were
also observed during such interactions. As previously reported by UNDOF, there is
a concern that such interaction heightens the risk of clashes between the armed
groups and the Syrian Arab Armed Forces, including on Mount Hermon.
11. On 5 January, a civilian (a shepherd) sustained serious injuries to his right leg
following a mine incident on the Bravo side in the vicinity of United Nations
observation post 73. Following immediate first aid and stabilization by UNDOF
personnel, the shepherd was medically evacuated to the Alpha side, where he
continues to receive medical care. The positive and speedy reaction of the Israel
Defense Forces and the trauma care of the Israeli medical services is highly
commended and undoubtedly saved his life. UNDOF will oversee his return to the
Bravo side when his medical condition permits such a move.
12. In the context of the ongoing Syrian conflict, combat in the northern part of
the area of separation and area of limitation on the Bravo side continued in the
vicinity of Tall Hamariyah, also known as the “Castle”, and Hadar. Tall Hamariyah

17-04354

3/10

S/2017/230

was captured by armed groups on 10 September and remains contested. A spike
occurred on 19-20 November when the Syrian Arab Armed Forces advanced
through the southern villages of Hadar and reportedly captured Tal al Naqar from
armed groups. There was a further slight spike in combat on 15 January, which
suggested that fluctuations in the intensity of the fighting remain prevalent.
13. The level of transborder movements decreased from the previous reporting
period, with 16 recorded instances in November, 3 in December and none in
January. It is assessed that the decrease in combat and movement in the Mount
Hermon complex is related to the onset of winter weather conditio ns.
14. In the central area of the area of separation and area of limitation on the Bravo
side, kinetic military activity remained at low levels between armed groups and the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces, albeit with consistent reports of direct and indirect
firing. Firing continues to be observed along the front lines in the vicinity of Syrian
Arab Armed Forces positions towards positions held by armed groups in south
Gharbiyah, Al Qunaytirah and Umm Batinah and the contested area of Samdaniyah.
15. There were also frequent reports of movement of armed groups and
observation of their equipment in the area of separation. A T55 main battle tank, a
multiple launch rocket system BM-21, a technical vehicle mounted with an
anti-aircraft weapon and two D30 towed artillery pieces were reported in the areas of
Hamidiyah al-Jadidah, Al Qunaytirah and Qahtaniyah during the reporting period.
16. In the southern part of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side,
which remain for the most part under the control of armed groups, clashes continued
between the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army on one side and the Free Syrian Army and
the Nusrah Front on the other. Significant spikes in military activity were observed
on 28, 29 and 30 November and again, between 3 and 7 January, in the area of
limitation on the Bravo side.
17. UNDOF protested all violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement to
both parties, including the presence of unauthorized equipment in the area of
separation and firing into that area. The Head of Mission and Force Commander
reminded the parties of their obligation to abide by the terms of the Agreement and
to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground.
18. During the reporting period, on several occasions, United N ations personnel
observed persons on the Bravo side unearthing and removing mines in close
proximity to United Nations positions. On 20 November and 20, 22 and 23 January,
United Nations personnel at observation post 54 observed persons, assessed to be
shepherds or other civilians, searching the ground and digging up items. On two
occasions, on 22 and 23 January, the persons were observed emptying the explosive
content from mines and carrying the empty containers away. On 22 November,
United Nations personnel at observation posts 51 and 53 observed four persons in
the vicinity of each location digging and collecting objects from the ground. On
26 January, United Nations personnel at observation post 53 observed two unarmed
men digging in a minefield. The individuals removed six brown circular-shaped
items from the field and returned to the area of separation in an easterly direction.
19. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed seven locations where
410 tents and other structures had been set up for internally displaced persons in the
area of separation and in proximity to that area. The number of people in the camps

4/10

17-04354

S/2017/230

could not be ascertained and appeared to fluctuate. The camp east of Burayqah
village in the central part of the area of separation increased from approximately
230 tents to 272 tents, huts and containers of various sizes. Owing to the closure of
the established crossing point at Al Qunaytirah between the Alpha and Bravo sides
since late August 2014, UNDOF remains unable to facilitate, in cooperation with
the International Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian crossings, including for
students, between the two sides.
20. Since its temporary relocation from a number of positions in September 2014
and pending its full return to the area of separation, UNDOF has continued to
maintain visibility of that area and the ceasefire line from its positions on Mount
Hermon, position 80 in the southern part of the area of separation and position 22 on
the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) military observers in Observer Group
Golan, who maintained five fixed and four temporary observation posts along the
Alpha line. The focus of the activities of the Group was on continuous s tatic
observation and situational awareness. Observer Group Golan -Damascus suspended
the maintenance of temporary observation posts on Mount Hermon owing to the
severe winter conditions in December 2016. Operations are expected to resume in
spring 2017.
21. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections
in the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended because of the
security situation. As in the past, UNDOF has faced some instances of restriction on
its freedom of movement. UNDOF continues to engage with the Israel Defense
Forces in an effort to reduce the delays and challenges experienced by United
Nations personnel in crossing through the technical fence to United Nations
observation posts and positions.
22. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel observed 155 mm
artillery weapons on the Alpha side within 10 kilometres of the ceasefire line on
22, 23 and 24 November and 5 December. Repeatedly throughout the reporting
period, United Nations personnel observed a multiple -rocket launching system and
Iron Dome systems at locations within the 10 and 20 kilometre zones in the area of
limitation on the Alpha side.
23. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation to assess whether the conditions on the ground permitted an
incremental return to vacated positions in that area. In this regard, UNDOF
conducted a reconnaissance mission to some former United Nations positions and
observation posts on the Bravo Side on 17 February and 21 February visiting Camp
Faouar and United Nations position 25 in Khan Arnabah and United Nations
observation post 56 near Jaba. The situation in the area was calm and usual day -today activities were observed, with security measures being ensured by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. Observation post 56 was found occupied
by the Syrian Arab Armed Forces. The UNDOF Head of Mission and Force
Commander also continues his frequent visits and inspections of Camp Faouar and
Mount Hermon on the Bravo side.

17-04354

5/10

S/2017/230

24. During the reporting period, UNDOF has continued to advance the limited
return to Bravo side operations in line with its phased plan. Since UNDOF
redeployed to Camp Faouar on 14 November, work has progressed satisfactorily and
working and living conditions for UNDOF personnel at the Camp have improved
steadily, in line with the Mission support plan. From an operational perspective, the
security and defence of the Camp have been continuously practised and all deployed
elements have been integrated into a cohesive and effective component with clear
command and control. Construction of key infrastructure and accommodation has
continued, kitchens have been established and ablution units installed. Previously
available water sources have been refurbished, guaranteeing supply, and regular
deliveries of food and provisions are taking place, enabling day-to-day subsistence
in the camp and the building of strategic reserves.
25. After the winter, the Nepalese armoured personnel carriers currently deployed
at Camp Faouar will conduct a handover to a newly generated mechan ized infantry
company and then redeploy to strengthen the Mount Hermon complex. This new
mechanized company will give UNDOF the protected mobility and capacity to
commence patrols around and beyond Camp Faouar, conditions permitting.
26. Following the first five months of deployment, no adverse reaction to the
return of UNDOF to Camp Faouar has been perceived. There has been no increase
in combat or threat surrounding the camp and UNDOF assesses that no deliberate
actions have been taken by any armed group to threaten the presence of UNDOF on
the Bravo side. This positive assessment is tempered by acknowledging the overall
low to medium levels of activity in the areas of separation and limitation during this
period. The Mission will continue to monitor the situation and ensure that force
protection and the safety and security of UNDOF personnel remain a primary
consideration.
27. In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2330 (2016),
efforts continued to deploy appropriate technology, including counter -improvised
explosive device (IED) capabilities and a sense and warn system, to ensure the
safety and security of UNDOF personnel and equipment. With regard to counter IED technology, UNDOF capability requirements for new units specify the
requirement for jammers for armoured vehicles. In parallel, the Mission’s approach
includes reliance on tactics, techniques and procedures to combat specific IED
threats in the UNDOF area of operations. Options to deploy sense and warn
technology as contingent-owned equipment were explored with various troopcontributing countries, but have not been successful thus far. The Department of
Field Support, in consultation with the Department of Peacekeeping O perations and
UNDOF, is evaluating the viability of commercial options to meet Mission -specific
technical requirements. Acquisition and deployment will follow appropriate
consultations with the parties. UNDOF has approached the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Government of Israel to permit deployment of sense
and warn and counter-IED capabilities. A response is pending from both sides.
28. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon and Camp
Faouar from Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the United
Nations positions were conducted almost daily and with an UNDOF security escort,
accompanied by a liaison officer from the office of the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate.
UNDOF continued to carry out contingency planning for the reinforcement and

6/10

17-04354

S/2017/230

evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts and to update its
contingency planning for the relocation and evacuation of United Nations personnel
on both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as in Damascus. UNDOF, through it s
Force Reserve Company, conducted regular rehearsals, exercises and training for all
identified contingencies. UNDOF and the Observer Group Golan continued regular
evacuation and reinforcement exercises and contingency planning. The
implementation of risk mitigation, including force protection measures
recommended in the military capability study of UNDOF conducted in October
2015, continued at observation posts, positions and the operational base at Camp
Ziouani.
29. As at 1 March, UNDOF comprised 830 troops, including 33 women. Troops
are currently deployed from Bhutan (2), Czechia (3), Fiji (299), Finland (2), India
(203), Ireland (136), Nepal (183) and the Netherlands (2). In addition, 72 military
observers from UNTSO, including 8 female observers, assisted the Force in
carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
30. In its resolution 2330 (2016), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to implement immediately its resolution 338 (1973), decided to renew the
mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2017, and
requested me to report every 90 days on developments in the situation and the
measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various levels to
implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation in the
Middle East (A/71/328), submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 70/16
on Jerusalem and 70/17 on the Syrian Golan.
31. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive,
just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its
resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
32. I note with concern the serious violations of the Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian Forces that occurred on 27 and 28 November 2016 and
on 8 February 2017. I am concerned that incidents of spillover, if le ft unchecked,
could escalate into a serious situation that could lead to direct military action
between the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As previously
reported by UNDOF, the Israel Defense Forces hold the Syrian Government
responsible for any spillover fire incidents to the Alpha side, regardless of the point
of origin of the fire. The reported significant airstrikes by the Israel Defense Forces
on 27 and 28 November against the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army appeared designed to
deter such attacks on its personnel. It is disappointing that a further incident

17-04354

7/10

S/2017/230

occurred on 8 February, with the Israel Defense Forces firing across the ceasefire
line in response to alleged spillover fire. It remains critical that the parties maintain
their liaison with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent any escalation of the
situation across the ceasefire line. It is not acceptable for UNDOF to be reliant on
open sources to determine the extent of a deliberate violation of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement. For its part, the United Nations will maintain its efforts to
ensure that the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic
continues to hold.
33. I remain gravely concerned by the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its
implications for the stability of the wider region. The continued fighting on the
Bravo side between the Syrian armed forces and armed groups, and between
different armed groups, including listed terrorist groups such as Nusrah Front and
ISIL affiliates such as the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, in the southern part of the
areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side, as well as the firing of missiles
by the Israel Defense Forces across the ceasefire line, jeopardize the long-term
ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and continue to significantly
affect the UNDOF area of operation.
34. The presence of the Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment
in the area of separation are violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
The increased use of heavy weapons by the Syrian armed forces and armed groups
in the continuing Syrian conflict is disturbing and remains the single largest
impediment to the successful implementation of the UNDOF mandate. I note that,
while the reduction in the levels of firing continues in the northern part of the
UNDOF area of operation, listed terrorist groups and other armed groups continue
to maintain control over significant sections of the areas of separation and limitation
in the UNDOF area of operation. The established crossing between the Alpha and
Bravo sides remains closed.
35. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions
throughout the country, including in the UNDOF area of operation, and to remove
all military equipment and all armed personnel from the area of separation.
36. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line.
The firing of missiles across the ceasefire line by the Israel Defense Forces has the
potential to escalate tensions between the two sides. The continued presence of
unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of limitation on the Alpha side is
also of concern.
37. Interaction between the Israel Defense Forces and unidentified individuals
from the Bravo side, including in the area of Mount Hermon, is worrying,
particularly as such interaction has the potential to lead to clashes between armed
elements and the Syrian Arab Armed Forces. I reiterate my call to both parties to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement regarding the requirement to maintain stability
in the area. All military activities in the area of separation conducted by any actor
pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the local civilian population, in addition to the
United Nations personnel on the ground. I call upon all parties to take all measures
necessary to protect civilians.

8/10

17-04354

S/2017/230

38. As UNDOF consolidates its presence at Camp Faouar and continues its efforts
to intensify its operations in the area of separation, it remains critical that the safety
and security of United Nations personnel be assured. The circumstances under
which the troops and military observers are operating remain complex and
challenging and require continued vigilance and risk mitigation measures. I renew
my call on the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to fulfil its primary
responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations personnel in the areas of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side. I also renew my call on countries with
influence to strongly and urgently convey to the armed groups in the UNDOF area
of operation the need to cease any actions in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement that jeopardize the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and to accord United Nations personnel the freedom to carry out their
clear and important mandate safely and securely. The safety and security of United
Nations personnel must be ensured.
39. Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued
commitment to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the
presence of UNDOF in calling for a return to vacated positio ns in the area of
separation. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation remains a priority for
the Mission. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties with UNDOF in
order for the Mission to advance its planning. As a matter of priority, the technology
and equipment necessary to enhance the UNDOF observation of the area of
separation and the ceasefire line and to improve force protection remain critical. At
the same time, the parties must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison
function of UNDOF.
40. It is equally important that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and freely. It is essential that UNDOF continue
to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary for it to return fully to the
area of separation, conditions permitting.
41. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF
remains a key factor for the Mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue to
count on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF proceeds with its
planning, including in relation to the augmentation of required capabilities, in
preparation for the envisaged increased operations in the area of separation. I am
grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Finland, India, Ireland, Nepal
and the Netherlands for their contributions, their commitment and their resolve. I
am also thankful to the Member States contributing military observers to UNTSO.
42. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Jai Shanker Menon, and the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perfor m the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances. I have full confidence that UNDOF will continue to
employ its best efforts to carry out its mission.

17-04354

9/10

S/2017/230

Annex

10/10

17-04354
