S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6404th meeting
Monday, 18 October 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Juen
Mrs. Grgić-Stojanović
Mr. Rizzo
Ms. Zhang Changwei
Ms. Legendre
Mrs. Ntyam-Ehya
Mr. Arima
Mr. Ramadan
Mr. Pintado
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Agasandyan
Mr. Söylemez
Mr. Afshar
Ms. Germain

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-59122 (E)

*1059122*

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Costa Rica and Ecuador, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it was so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
would like to start by expressing the Movement’s
appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this debate
under your presidency to address the critical situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine,
at this crucial juncture as the moment of truth is
drawing closer than ever. I would also like to express
our appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive briefing
before the Council today.
Despite all the serious and credible efforts
exerted by different international and regional parties
to ensure the resumption and continuity of direct
negotiations on the Palestinian track towards the
achievement of the well-known and internationally
supported objectives of peace, a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine remains
regrettably far from being achieved, as Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to pursue its illegal
policies and practices, which are not only endangering
the two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders,
but also rendering it practically impossible.

2

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call on
the international community to be resolute in
demanding that Israel, the occupying Power, abide by
its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the Quartet Road Map. Israel must cease its unlawful
colonization in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem; place a complete and
indefinite freeze on all settlement activities, including
so-called natural growth; and respond favourably and
in good faith to the international consensus in this
regard, including to the repeated demands of the
United Nations, the European Union and the Quartet.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses grave
concern over the many possible repercussions of
Israel’s determination to continue illegal settlement
construction and not to extend the partial ban or the socalled 10-month moratorium on settlement activities.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that serious and
genuine negotiations cannot be conducted while Israel
continues to carry on such illegal actions and
provocations, which are totally contradictory to the
known tenets of a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Moreover, Israel’s continuous expansion of
settlement-building in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem — the latest example of
which is the recent announcement of the approval of
238 new housing units in East Jerusalem — destroys
the mutual trust and confidence required for any
successful negotiations and reveals that Israel has yet
to abandon its expansionist goals and truly commit to
the bases of the peace process, including the principle
of land for peace. We reiterate our demand that Israel
refrain from all such illegal and provocative actions
aimed at prejudging the outcome of the final status
negotiations, fulfil its obligations under the Road Map,
and cooperate constructively with efforts to ensure the
continuity of direct peace negotiations for the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the conflict in the Middle East.
In this regard, we are all aware of the unanimous
global conviction that Israel must respect its
obligations as an occupying Power as an imperative
condition for materializing the two-State solution and
creating an environment conducive to achieving a
lasting solution based on the agreed terms of reference:
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid terms of reference,

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

including the principle of land for peace; the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map.
We are assured that the Palestinian Authority is,
in word and deed, determined, with Arab support, to
pursue the path of peace. This was reflected clearly in
the statement of the Arab follow-up committee,
convened in Sirte recently, and it is now incumbent
upon Israel to show equal commitment, despite all the
negative signals from the Israeli side in the past few
months. Further, on the ground, the Palestinian
Authority, with international support, also continues to
exert efforts positively and constructively to lay the
foundations and build national institutions in
preparation for the independence of the Palestinian
State. Those efforts must be fully supported.
On the Israeli side, however, we continue to
witness growing acts of violence by settlers against
Palestinian civilians, including children, as well as the
burning of Islamic places of worship, orchards and
agricultural fields. The Non-Aligned Movement is also
alarmed by the increased issuing of additional homedemolition orders in occupied East Jerusalem and the
revocation of residency rights of yet more Palestinian
Jerusalemites, including elected Palestinian Legislative
Council representatives. The Movement is deeply
concerned regarding these illegal actions, which
represent clear attempts to alter the demography and
character of the city and to prejudge the outcome of the
future permanent status negotiations, imperiling the
basis of the two-State solution. Moreover, the Jewish
loyalty oath bill, adopted recently by the Israeli
Cabinet, represents yet another attempt to isolate the
Palestinian-Arab minority in Israel and to illegally
force their movement outside the State of Israel at the
same time that more Palestinian land is being seized
and occupied by settlers supported by the Israeli
Government.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
concrete steps need to be taken during the coming
period to immediately resume direct negotiations. The
complete freeze of all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is essential for such a resumption. The
international community should put forward a formula
for a final settlement, or rather an endgame based on
the well-known and internationally agreed parametres
in this regard, which will lead to the independence of
the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

10-59122

The situation in Gaza also remains among the
Non-Aligned Movement’s top priorities. The Movement
reiterates that the unacceptable and unsustainable
situation of the Gaza Strip has to come to an end. This
unresolved crisis continues to have serious
repercussions on the efforts for peace and to inflict deep
suffering on the Palestinian civilian population.
International humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention and United Nations resolutions,
must fully apply and be respected by the occupying
Power. In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
emphasizes the need to press Israel to lift fully its illegal
blockade, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009), General
Assembly resolution ES-10/18 and other relevant United
Nations resolutions. This is essential to addressing the
critical humanitarian and socio-economic situation in
Gaza and to alleviating the many hardships being
endured by the Palestinian civilian population.
In this connection, the Movement re-emphasizes
the urgent need for the reconstruction of Gaza and calls
on Israel to allow the import of essential reconstruction
materials, including those necessary for the longoverdue reconstruction of United Nations facilities and
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to
enable economic revival in Gaza. We reiterate the need
for a sustainable regime for opening all Israeli border
crossings with Gaza and enabling the free movement of
persons and goods in accordance with international law
and international humanitarian law.
Turning now to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned
Movement remains deeply concerned over Israel’s
ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty, in breach
of resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement calls on all
concerned parties to fully implement resolution 1701
(2006) in order to end the current fragility and to avoid
the recurrence of hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

3

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to thank you wholeheartedly, Sir,
for convening this meeting. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Turkey and the members
of his delegation for their efforts last month. I further
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing to the Council this morning.
This open debate has been convened in
circumstances that do not augur well for the Middle
East, given Israel’s feverish efforts to obliterate our last
hopes to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region through its unprecedented
aggressive policies in the Arab territories occupied
since 1967. While the entire world seeks to establish a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East and
insists that the achievement of peace is an urgent
prerequisite for the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security, it is astonished by Israel’s
continued beating of the drums of war, appropriation of
land, ongoing settlement activity, blockade of Gaza and
threats to again expel millions of Palestinians from
their homeland under the racist pretext of affirming the
Jewish identity of the State of Israel — an outdated
policy whose consequences are known to all.
These practices in no way indicate Israel’s real
intentions or a desire for peace on its part. Israel has
already made its rejection of peace clear by refusing
even to accept the modest request to extend the
moratorium on settlement activity. Israel claims these
days to be negotiating peace on the basis of the twoState solution, yet its settlement activities are on the
verge of making that solution dead letter and without a
chance of survival.
Peace is only as viable as the desire to make
peace is translated into practical deeds. Political
manoeuvring behind the smokescreen of paying mere
lip service to peace only exacerbates an already tense
situation and pushes it towards the precipice. We would
stress once again that Syria’s demands for peace are
not the type of compromises that Israel claims to be
making courageously and publicizing as painful. We
are talking about usurped lands and rights that must be
restored in full to their legitimate owners.
Syria and the Arab States have sought peace
through the adoption of the Arab Peace Initiative,
including the full restoration of usurped Arab rights,

4

Israel’s complete withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories to the line of 4 June 1967, the establishment
of a Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, and
the settlement of the question of Palestinian refugees in
accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy.
However, Israel’s answer to the Arab Peace
Initiative has been its invasion of the West Bank, its
2002 massacres of Jenin and Nablus, its policy of
continued expansion and settlement, and its
appropriation of land and usurpation of natural
resources and capabilities. Israel has not stopped at
these cumulative, provocative excesses. It committed
yet another act of aggression against Lebanon in the
summer of 2006, followed by its aggression against
Gaza in 2008, which killed thousands of Palestinian
civilians and injured many, many more. Israel’s crimes
include the murder of humanitarian activists of various
nationalities who tried to deliver humanitarian
assistance to Gaza on the freedom flotilla.
Not satisfied with all this, Israel has continued to
pursue settlement policies, build the racist separation
wall, violate and desecrate holy shrines, lay siege to
the defenceless Palestinian people of Gaza, and
endorse decisions to Judaize the city of Jerusalem, the
most recent of which was the decision to renovate
certain parts of the old town. Moreover, Israel pursues
its policy of collective punishment, the detention of
thousands of Palestinian civilians and officials, and the
abuse of detainees, including women, by Israeli
soldiers.
The most recent of these racist Israeli decisions,
adopted only a few days ago, concerns the requirement
of non-Jews to pledge allegiance to the Jewish State. It
is yet another expression of Israeli fascism, manifest in
killings and racist laws that contradict twenty-first
century calls for freedom and equality. They also
contradict Israel’s claim to be an oasis of democracy in
the Middle East.
The Palestinian people still await international
justice and expect us to come to their rescue. The
question we must ask ourselves, however, is how long
Israel will remain an entity above the law and
accountable to none. How can we explain to the world
the fact that the Security Council has chosen to remain
silent vis-à-vis these crimes? Today more than ever
before, the Council is called on to undertake practical
and concrete measures, commensurate with Israel’s

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

flagrant behaviour, to compel Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories. The international
community must also strive to lift the deeply unjust
siege of the Palestinian people of Gaza, open all the
checkpoints, and reconstruct Gaza while providing
international guarantees to prevent Israel from again
destroying facilities and infrastructure there.
Israel continues to refuse to return the occupied
Golan to its motherland, Syria, and to comply with the
decisions of international legitimacy, particularly
resolution 497 (1981). It pursues a policy of terror and
oppression of the Syrian people of the Golan. It detains
Syrian citizens of the Golan and continues to
confiscate land in order to plant mines and expand
settlements. We recall that Israeli mines in the
occupied Syrian Golan injured 531 people, of whom
202, for the most part children, died and 329 were
permanently disabled.
Israel continues to steal the water of the Golan. A
few days ago, it drew water from the al-Ram dam in
the occupied Syrian Golan, which led to a total loss of
the reservoir’s water and to the death of all fish there.
Here, we stress that Syria’s sovereign right to the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967 is not
subject to negotiation. Our full recovery of the Golan is
the basis on which any steps to build peace should be
founded. As President Bashar Al-Assad has said, it is
clear that the Israeli Government is not concerned
about peace. Its main concern has been security in a
very narrow sense — their settler, expansionist and
hostile security, which in their view can be achieved
only at the expense of our rights and our security.
It is illogical and not even acceptable that we
Arabs have to continue to provide proof and evidence
that we are seriously interested in peace, despite our
repeated declarations and statements to that end on
various occasions, in particular since the convening of
the 1991 Madrid Conference. The Israelis must prove
that. The Israelis must express in deeds, not only in
words, that they are ready for a just and comprehensive
peace. They should seek to convince us Arabs that they
are sincere about it, because they are the ones
occupying our land. It is they who aggress our people
and displace millions of them, not the other way
around. They are the ones who undertake all such acts
and, above all, they use protection and promises as a
guise to blackmail us and to gain further concessions.

10-59122

The Israeli Permanent Representative tried this
morning to distract the Council’s attention from
focusing on the Israeli occupation of Arab land. He
vehemently tried to make the Council consider any
issue except the central issue of peace. Why? It is
simple — because its failure to mention ending the
occupation and achieving peace means that Israel is
trying to shirk its responsibility for ending the
occupation and achieving a just and comprehensive
peace, including the establishment of the Palestinian
State.
Israeli State terror, on the other hand, is known to
all. It is documented by many international and Israeli
institutions intent on trying to uncover Israeli
violations of the human rights of Arabs in occupied
Arab lands. There are reports of the carnage, crimes,
occupation and aggression of Israeli State terror, which
has continued for more than 60 years. Israel has
mastered State terror. It has committed all sorts of
crimes in Qana, Jenin, Nablus, Gaza, Bahr el-Baqar,
Deir Yassin and al-Quneitra. The terror has even
extended to United Nations representatives, such as
Count Bernadotte. Israeli State terror has targeted
United Nations Members and peace activists, including
the ship Rachel Corrie and Turkish victims.
It also included the first air piracy case in history
when Israel hijacked a Syrian civilian aircraft in 1954. I
repeat that Israel hijacked a plane in 1954 and shot
down a civilian Libyan jet in 1971. Recently, as
representatives well know, Israel forged passports of
some of its allies to assassinate Mahmoud Al-Mabhouh,
a Palestinian citizen in Dubai.
The list goes on. We recall what has recently been
disclosed by classified Israeli documents concerning
the 1973 war. These documents show that, by the
second day of the 1973 war, Israel had prepared a
nuclear bomb, with which it planned to attack the city
of Damascus. That is in an Israeli document. Israeli
State terror is a threat to the world’s peace and security,
as was made clear at the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in New York in May, when it
unanimously decided to name Israel as the main
obstacle to the establishment of a nuclear weapon-free
zone in the Middle East.
In conclusion, I wish to cite some excerpts from
the Israeli press.

5

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

First, Haaretz has stated that high- or low-ranking
Israeli leaders can expel any citizen from the occupied
West Bank or any other Palestinian territory and that
Israel may meet those who wish to extend their hand in
peace and good-neighbourliness with more settlements
and graves. Israel Today has written that if Israel really
wants to pursue peace, it must stop following a policy
of provocation and discrimination against the Israeli
Arabs. Maariv has stated that Israel cannot conclude
peace with Syria without giving up the Golan, but
Israel is not prepared to do so. Haaretz has asked
whether Israel’s refusal even to discuss the Arab Peace
Initiative meant that it must once again sacrifice
thousands of soldiers, as it did in 1973, if it wishes to
start genuine peace negotiations.
Maariv has written that no one objected to a rabbi
publishing a book allowing a Jew to kill a non-Jew, and
then asked why Israelis were astonished when mosques
are quietly burned without any condemnation being
raised. Maariv also has stated that Israelis have become
a vindictive people who fail to see the misery of their
neighbours, having been brainwashed and taught that
the suffering of Arabs is not like their own, and that an
Arab woman’s mourning of her son’s death is not as
deep as a Jewish mother’s grief.
Finally, Yediot Ahronot has stated that Israel is
the only State that has occupied a people for 40 years,
and yet it humiliates anyone who protests that fact.
Haaretz has written that Israel’s image had never been
so low.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Council’s meeting comes at a time when American
efforts are intensifying and are coupled with an
international undertaking to find an environment
conducive to the success of direct negotiations between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Those negotiations are
conducted with a view to reaching a two-State solution
establishing an independent Palestinian State based on
the lines of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, to live in peace and security in a stable and
secure region, side by side with all States and peoples
of the region, including Israel.
Jordan supports those efforts and calls on Israel to
respond to them so that direct negotiations can be
resumed and lead to a positive outcome that addresses
all final status issues, including Jerusalem, refugees,

6

security and borders. The parties must demonstrate
their seriousness by adhering to peace. That requires
halting all unilateral Israeli measures in the occupied
West Bank — at the heart of which is East Jerusalem —
including construction inside settlements, forced
evacuation and deportation, confiscation of land and
property, and policies of demolition of Christian and
Muslim Palestinian homes and eviction of their
occupants. It also includes all forms of archaeological
excavations and digging tunnels under and around holy
Christian and Muslim sites.
Beyond their illegality and unlawfulness, such
measures violate the rules of international law and
international humanitarian law. With them Israel is
blatantly flouting its obligations as the occupying
Power while impeding United States and international
efforts.
Jordan welcomes the statement by United States
President Barack Obama during the General
Assembly’s general debate last month (see A/65/PV.11)
on the importance of achieving a two-State solution
and the strenuous efforts to bring about successful
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
question of Palestine; no solution to the conflict can be
effected without settling it via a two-State solution.
The achievement of that solution and of a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in conformity
with international legitimacy and the Arab Peace
Initiative, is of vital interest to, and enjoys the support
of, the entire world, not merely the States and peoples
of our region.
The Arab Peace Initiative, adopted in Beirut in
2002 and reaffirmed time and again at subsequent Arab
summits, most recently at the Sirte summit in Libya
this month, reveals the collective Arab and Islamic
commitment to an equal, comprehensive, permanent
and just peace. Unfortunately, that initiative has not
received from successive Israeli Governments a
response commensurate with its importance.
Here I would like to reiterate my country’s view
of the gravity and enormity of the consequences and
dimensions of the absence of peace and stability in the
Middle East. When His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin
Al-Hussein always recalls the centrality of the
Palestine question and emphasizes its priority and
primacy over the other issues in the region, we proceed
from the complete conviction that achieving a two-

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

State solution and a comprehensive peace is the only
way to effectively and harmoniously resolve the other
issues in the region, including manifestations of
bigotry, extremism, terrorism and violence.
Jordan regrets the Israeli Government’s decision
not to extend the moratorium on settlement activities in
the occupied areas. That threatens to derail the whole
negotiating process, contrary to the wishes and
demands of the entire international community — to
whose will Israel pays no heed.
The President: I now give the floor to the His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia, and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia; and
the EFTA country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
declaration.
When we discussed the situation in the Middle
East in July, the European Union and others expressed
the hope that both parties to the conflict would very
soon engage in direct, substantive discussions of all
final status issues. That hope turned to reality when
direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority started in Washington on 2 September, and
later continued in Sharm el-Sheikh and Jerusalem. The
European Union commended Israelis, Palestinians and
the United States, as well as other Quartet and Arab
partners, for bringing the start of those negotiations
about.
Today we meet at a moment when efforts are
being made to overcome the current deadlock in the
negotiations — which began only a month ago.
There is no alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution. The European Union calls on all parties to
earnestly seek a satisfactory way to keep the
negotiation process active and moving, and eventually
to gather momentum. We welcome the decision of the
Arab Peace Initiative Follow-up Committee to leave
the door open on the continuation of negotiations.
In this context, the European Union deems it
indispensable that both sides show restraint and refrain
from actions that could negatively affect the

10-59122

continuation of the process. To that end, both sides
must uphold and implement previous commitments and
strive to create an environment conducive to a
successful outcome of the negotiations. The European
Union stresses the need for the Quartet to continue to
play an essential role in the peace process.
The European Union recalls that settlements in
occupied territory are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a
two-State solution impossible. We regret Israel’s
decision not to extend the moratorium instituted by its
Government last November. The moratorium has had a
positive impact. We reiterate our call on Israel to end
all settlement activities, including in East Jerusalem.
If there is to be a genuine peace, a way must be
found, through negotiations, to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States. The
European Union continues to call for a complete halt to
all violence, in particular rocket fire and terrorist
attacks.
When the European Union High Representative,
Catherine Ashton, visited the region at the beginning of
the month, she discussed with the Palestinian Authority
the work it is doing to build institutions for statehood.
The European Union takes note of the assessment by
the World Bank, which stated that if the Palestinian
Authority maintains its current performance, it is well
positioned for establishment as a State at any point in
the near future.
The European Union stresses the crucial
importance of the continuation of the Palestinian statebuilding process — including the implementation of
the Fayyad Plan — which the European Union will
continue to support actively.
Political and financial support of the entire
international community is essential. The European
Union urges those who have made financial
commitments to deliver on their promises. All efforts
to achieve Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Mahmoud Abbas must also be accelerated.
The European Union High Representative has
visited Gaza twice this year and has praised the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its continuous
efforts to provide health, education and social
protection services. The European Union has
welcomed Israeli steps to ease the entry of goods into

7

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

Gaza, but reiterates its calls for full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings to
enable the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods
and persons to and from Gaza, including goods from
the West Bank. High Representative Ashton’s
discussions with the Palestinian Authority have also
focused on how the donors can support exports, in
order to allow the people of Gaza to gain a greater
stake in their economy and their future.
The European Union calls for a solution that
addresses Israel’s legitimate security concerns,
including a complete stop to all violence and arms
smuggling into Gaza. The European Union has offered
its assistance towards achieving this objective. The
European Union also calls on those holding the
abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to release him
without delay.
The European Union also recalls that peace in the
Middle East should be comprehensive and reiterates
the importance of negotiations on the Israeli-Syrian
and Israeli-Lebanese tracks. As regards Lebanon, the
European Union supports the Secretary-General’s
recent unequivocal statement reaffirming the
independence of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The
European Union urges all parties not to interfere in the
Tribunal’s work and not to prejudge its outcome.
The European Union reaffirms its full support to
the Lebanese authorities and commends the crucial role
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon. It also calls upon all
parties concerned to implement all provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006), to respect the Blue Line in its
entirety and to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and UNIFIL.
These are the elements of the future — Statebuilding, strong economic development, and security —
and they need to be nurtured, but nurtured in the
context of serious ongoing talks on all final status
issues, which should lead to a two-State solution. The
European Union reiterates its readiness to contribute
substantially to the development of a comprehensive
and sustainable solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State of
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

8

Mr. Crowley (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes this opportunity to again address the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We also wish to
congratulate you and your delegation, Mr. President,
for effectively and efficiently steering the work of the
Security Council during the month of October.
South Africa wishes to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing delivered earlier to
the Security Council. My delegation associates itself
with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
This debate is timely and takes place at a critical
juncture in the latest round of stalled negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli parties. My
delegation was hoping that we could address this
meeting of the Security Council in the month of
October on a more optimistic note, on a more hopeful
note. My delegation was hoping that, at this point in
time, some measure of progress would have been
reached through direct negotiations, which would
signal a forward-moving momentum that would place
us firmly on the path of finding a sustainable and
peaceful resolution of the outstanding permanent status
issues and that would bring us closer to the realization
of a two-State solution.
Our hope was based on some very positive and
encouraging developments, including the efforts to
resume negotiations between the parties through
proximity talks, the continued engagement of
the Quartet — and separately the United States of
America — with the Palestinian and Israeli leadership,
the resumption of direct talks between the parties on
2 September on all permanent status issues, and the
continued support of the Arab League and
Non-Aligned Movement, with the hope of seeing the
direct talks achieve the ultimate objective of creating a
two-State solution and ushering in a new era of Middle
East peace and security. Those developments were
significant and created an atmosphere at the
international level conducive to moving the process
forward and to ensuring that the Palestinians would
realize their inalienable right of self-determination.
Throughout the period of negotiations, the resolve
of the parties was severely tested through incidents such
as the continued imposition of the inhuman blockade of
the Gaza Strip, the continued construction of the

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

unlawful separation wall, and the violent assault by
Israeli forces on the international humanitarian flotilla
on 31 May 2010. Further threats to the negotiations
stemmed from Israel’s decision not to extend the
settlement freeze when it expired on 26 September
2010.
In connection with the latter decision, my
Government issued a statement in which it noted,
“with serious concern that the partial moratorium
imposed by the Israeli Government in November
2009 on the further construction of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian West Bank
has not been renewed. The ten-month Israeli
moratorium, which expired on 26 September
2010, was not renewed despite the resumption of
direct negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian
leaders…”.
Furthermore,
the
halting
of
settlement
construction is seen by the South African Government
as a commitment already agreed to by the Israelis
during prior negotiations, including at the International
Middle East Peace Conference at Annapolis, which
took place in November 2007 and in which South
Africa participated.
My Government further stated that
“the continued building of new settlements
threatens to halt negotiations between Palestine
and Israel, as Palestinian President Abbas has
repeatedly made it clear that in the absence of a
halt to settlement construction, he would not
continue with the negotiations”.
The South African Government further noted that
“[t]he first few rounds of direct IsraeliPalestinian talks held during September 2010
appeared to have demonstrated a clear intention
by both parties to effectively move the peace
process forward. The South African Government
accordingly calls on the Israeli Government to
honour its previous international commitments by
putting an end to all further settlement
construction in the Palestinian West Bank
indefinitely. In so doing it will demonstrate its
serious intention to bring about the establishment
of a viable and fully independent Palestinian
State, existing side by side in peace with Israel
within internationally recognized borders”.

10-59122

During our negotiations to establish a democratic
South Africa, my country also experienced moments
that threatened to derail the negotiations process and
tested the resolve of our political leadership. Focused
on the broader goal of peace, democracy and
reconciliation, the South African political leadership
defied all those who sought to have them fail in
achieving those objectives.
This is such a moment in the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations process, where the leadership of Palestine
is confronted with circumstances that make it difficult
for them to count on the good faith that is necessary for
negotiations. My delegation has always stated that a
long-term solution to the challenges facing the region
can only be achieved through negotiations. For that to
happen, it is essential that a climate of mutual trust and
peace be created and that the Israeli political leadership
take the difficult decisions needed to ensure sustainable
peace in the region.
We therefore call on the Israeli Government to
desist from all actions that could have a negative
impact on the negotiations process. Israel’s current acts
threaten to undermine the legitimacy of the process by
weakening the Palestinian Authority as an equal
partner in the negotiations process. The Palestinian
Authority has come to the talks in good faith,
expecting the full implementation of Israel’s previously
agreed commitments under international law, as well as
relevant Security Council resolutions and Israel’s Road
Map obligations.
My delegation also calls for continued unity
among the Palestinian political leadership which, in
our view, would strengthen the negotiations process.
South Africa urges the international community,
this body and all players concerned to exert all the
influence necessary and pressure Israel to meet its
obligations under various Security Council resolutions
and under international law. The Security Council in
particular has to shoulder its responsibility for ending
the Israeli occupation and ensuring that the Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination is met.
My delegation remains convinced that the only
viable solution to the challenges confronting the region
is a political solution based on the creation of a
Palestinian State coexisting peacefully alongside Israel
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and the implementation of resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and

9

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

1850 (2008), as well as the Madrid terms of reference,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
Israel has an historic opportunity to move the
peace process forward and to keep this flame of hope
alive. If they do, they will ensure that the dream of a
Palestinian State is brought a step closer and will bring
within reach the realization of peace and security for
themselves and for the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for
convening this open debate on such an important issue.
We also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
of the Non-Aligned Movement delivered earlier by the
representative of Egypt, and the statement of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to delivered by
the representative of Tajikistan.
This meeting of the Security Council has been
convened at a time of great anxiety in the Middle East,
following the convening last month of direct talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Regrettably,
those talks are now in danger, as Israel did not extend
the moratorium on settlement construction on the West
Bank that expired on 26 September.
As one of the core issues, settlements remain the
biggest obstacle to peace, as we have seen since the
return to direct negotiations on 2 September. Israel’s
settlement policies and practices — which have been
aimed at altering the demographic composition,
physical character and status of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem — are nothing but a blatant
violation of international law. The transfer of civilians
to occupied areas, whether or not in settlements that
are under military control, is contrary to article 49 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which clearly states
that the occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.
Back in 1980 — 30 years ago — in paragraph 6
of resolution 465 (1980), the Security Council called
on Israel “to dismantle the existing settlements and in
particular to cease, on an urgent basis, the

10

establishment, construction and planning of settlements
in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem”.
We therefore believe that the Council could take a
similar step by pronouncing itself collectively, and
with a single voice, to urgently demand that Israel
dismantle the existing settlements and cease the
construction and planning of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory. If Israel has a genuine
commitment to peace, and not propaganda about peace,
it must stop all settlement construction, expansion and
planning in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built there, in compliance with
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
The conflict in the Middle East has indeed been
going on for far too long. For 60 years, the illegal
Israeli occupation has made the region a theatre of
tension and violence. On the Palestinian part, the
nation has been facing hardship and surviving without
a State. The list of suffering of the Palestinian people
caused by the Israeli action is long and continues to
grow by the day, week and year.
There is no doubt that Israel’s illegal occupation
since 1967, its excessive and disproportionate use of
force and its policy of collective punishment are crimes
against all we stand for: the values of humanity and the
values of respecting the sanctity of the Charter. That is
a clear violation of international law and international
humanitarian law.
For many years, Indonesia has joined the
international community in drawing attention to the
consequences of Israel’s continued illegal activity in
occupied Arab territories. We therefore support the
current surge in diplomacy aimed at relaunching
negotiations and jump-starting a comprehensive peace
process, as illustrated by ongoing efforts, in particular
by the United States. On its part, the Security Council
must, and indeed can, exert a positive influence on the
Middle East peace process. Not least, that would send a
signal that the Council is once again shouldering its
Charter-mandated responsibilities.
In response to a suggestion by President Abbas
during his recent visit to Indonesia, we recently
convened an informal ministerial consultative forum on
Palestine here in New York, which was attended by
Palestine, Indonesia, Brazil, India and South Africa.

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

All of them agreed to hold consultations on a regular
basis and to assist the cause of Palestine in every forum
possible. For the immediate future, we will calibrate
our course of action in consultation with Palestine,
depending on the direction the direct talks are taking.
There is perhaps no international issue more
important to Indonesia, and closer to our hearts, than
the effort to find a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in order to bring to an end the illegal Israeli
occupation that began in 1967. Therefore, the
commitment of Indonesia to an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine living side by side in peace and
security with its neighbour is absolute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
My delegation would first of all like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this public debate on the
situation on the Middle East. We would also like to
thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the
most recent events in the region.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with those to
be delivered by the representative of Mauritania on
behalf of the Arab Group, and by the representative of
Tajikistan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. I should now like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.
The international community has followed with
great interest and hope the positive signs that emerged
in the month of September. Thanks to the flexibility
demonstrated by the Palestinian side, with the support
of Arab countries, as well as the efforts of the
American Administration, direct Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations were relaunched in Washington,
D.C., on 2 September, following 12 months of
suspension. The resumption of negotiations, with the
ultimate goal — as announced by President Barack
Obama on 23 September in his speech in the General
Assembly — is to reach an agreement that will bring in
a new Member State into the United Nations, namely, a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State living in
peace with Israel.

However, that hope was quickly eclipsed by the
persistence of the Israeli Government in its
colonization policy after having refused to extend its
moratorium. In addition, some days later, the
international community learned of the decision by the
Israeli Government, in spite of all the appeals made of
it, to authorize tenders for the building of 238 housing
units in the eastern part of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
There is no doubt that this illegal decision is a serious
development that could endanger the chances for
renewing peace talks. As a response to those illegal
measures, the Arab Peace Initiative Follow-up
Committee, which met recently in Sirte, has confirmed
the conviction of the Arab party that a return yet again
to Israeli-Palestinian negotiations must be contingent
on the total cessation of Israeli settlement in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds.
My country, whose King, His Majesty
Mohammed VI, is Chair of the Al-Quds Committee,
wishes once again to express to the Council its deep
concern about the decisions by Israeli authorities in the
matter of the eastern part of Al-Quds, whereby it
intends to modify the demographic composition of the
Holy City and thereby undermine any possibility for
success in establishing a viable Palestinian State. The
persistence of such unilateral measures, which create
an untenable situation, weakening those who work for
peace and choose the path of dialogue to regain their
legitimate rights, makes clear the policy of Israel
towards the Arab population of the Holy City,
especially the plan to raze 20 Palestinian homes in the
Silwan neighbourhood.
It is worrisome to see that, even as they renew
their commitment to achieve peace, Israeli authorities
have continued throughout this past summer their
policy of confiscating, seizing and expropriating lands
for the construction of settlements, bypass roads and
walls, thus leading to the expulsion of more that 600
Palestinians living in the eastern part of Al-Quds and
the rest of the West Bank. Meanwhile, Israeli police
continue to violate the compound of the Holy Al-Aqsa
mosque. Given the central place of Jerusalem in the
Middle East crisis, and what that city represents for all
religions, we urge the international community, and
especially the Security Council, to live up to their
responsibilities and take action to put an end to these
practices.
Today there is an international consensus about
the need for a two-State solution and a comprehensive

10-59122

11

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

peace in the Middle East, in accordance with the
relevant decisions and the Arab Peace Initiative,
adopted in 2002. The international community, in
recognition of the gravity of the cessation of the peace
talks, must take a stronger and more effective position
so as to create the basic conditions necessary to relaunch genuine negotiations to preserve the
fundamental common interests of the peoples of the
region and thereby ensure an environment of peace,
security and cooperation.
Our deep concern about the proliferation of
obstacles to restarting direct talks nevertheless goes
hand in hand with our firm and unalterable conviction
that the peace process is an inevitable choice and that it
will result in ensuring a just and comprehensive peace
in the region, in the interest of all its peoples,
guaranteeing their security and the recovery of their
rights.
In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco
continues to follow with great interest the increased
efforts of President Obama and the Quartet and all
international efforts, especially those of the European
Union. We hope that they will lead to a return to
genuine and sincere talks based on the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Road Map and past agreements
and arrangements between the parties.
For its part, the Kingdom of Morocco will
continue to work within the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee to find through negotiation a lasting,
comprehensive solution to all final status issues,
especially that of Al-Quds — with the understanding
that such a fair and comprehensive solution will only
be possible if Israel withdraws from all Arab territories
occupied since June 1967, including the Syrian Golan
and the rest of occupied Lebanese territory, and if a
viable Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital is
created.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Tajikistan.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
Group. First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-

12

Taranco for the very important briefing he has given
us.
The stalemate in the Middle East process is very
worrying, especially as it came as a result of Israel’s
attempts to dictate its own terms. The peace process
cannot achieve genuine progress under the prevailing
conditions. Israel should live up to its commitments
and obligations, especially those stipulated by the
agreements signed with the Palestinian side and
enshrined in the Road Map.
It is self-evident that building Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, jeopardizes the peace process. It also sends
signals about Israel’s real intentions. Israel cannot
pretend to make peace with the Palestinians and at the
same time persist in stealing their lands for settlements.
It is therefore the responsibility of the international
community to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to
refrain from actions that would undermine peace
efforts. In order for the peace process to succeed, Israel
should halt all settlement activities — including socalled natural growth — in all occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Also to be
successful, the peace process should have a clear
timeframe and clear implementation mechanisms.
The situation in East Jerusalem is a matter of
great concern for the OIC and its member States.
Israel’s measures in occupied East Jerusalem are aimed
at forcefully altering the historical character of the city.
We consider Israel’s decision to change the structure
and shape of the centuries-old walls of the city an
assault on its cultural heritage. Changing the
demographic fabric of East Jerusalem through the
expulsion of Palestinians from the city and
expropriating their properties is a grave violation of
international law.
The situation in Gaza is also very worrying. One
and a half million Palestinians are living in harsh
conditions as a result of the shameful, illegal and
unjustified Israeli blockade. Israel must lift the
blockade and allow the reconstruction of Gaza.
The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We
call on Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining
Lebanese occupied land in the Shebaa farm lands, the
Kfar Shouba Hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar
village.

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

The OIC also joins the international community
in reaffirming that all measures and actions taken, or to
be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel abide fully
and immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
lines of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The OIC Group would also like to stress that
peace in the Middle East can be achieved only by
ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
land occupied since 1967, establishing an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and achieving a comprehensive and just solution for
the plight of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
The international community and the Security
Council in particular have a legal and moral
responsibility to take prompt and decisive actions to
ensure the implementation of relevant resolutions
based on international legitimacy and to meet the
challenges we face in maintaining international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): A month ago, the
international donor community met here in New York
in the framework of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee to
assess the progress made on building Palestinian
institutions in the Palestinian territory. At that meeting,
the World Bank reported to the donor community that
the Palestinian Authority (PA) is now “well positioned
for the establishment of a State at any point in the near
future”.
Over the past few years, the PA has made
impressive efforts in building transparent and
accountable institutions. Economic growth, combined
with a steady decline in budget deficits, gives hope that
the Palestinian economy is gradually moving towards
financial sustainability. However, the World Bank
report also stated clearly that this emerging State
structure is not sustainable in its current form, but
remains dependent on foreign aid.

10-59122

Sixty per cent of the West Bank is still under full
Israeli control. These areas are currently serving as
military or environmental zones or are occupied by
illegal settlements, and the PA cannot serve the
Palestinian population in these areas properly either
with regard to security or in ensuring proper
infrastructure and utilizing the economic potential.
If the PA is to become independent of the support
of the international donor community, it must be
allowed to tap into the potential for economic growth
that these areas hold. And the potential is substantial.
Independent surveys suggest that the Jordan Valley
could generate $1 billion-worth of industrial and
agricultural output annually, and employ as many as
100,000 Palestinians.
East Jerusalem has traditionally been the engine
of the Palestinian economy. Today, restrictions on the
movement of goods and people have severed ties
between the city and the rest of the West Bank,
harming trade and economic growth. The continued
expansion of Israeli settlements, exemplified by the
recent decision to add another 240 units to settlements
on occupied territory, only adds to the separation of
East Jerusalem from the West Bank. The expansion of
PA governance into these areas is necessary to secure
economic growth and a sustainable Palestinian
Authority.
At a time when direct talks have stalled over
Israel’s decision to continue the expansion of illegal
settlements, it is worth recalling that the stakes are
high. The Palestinian State structure is there and ready
to assume statehood responsibilities. The donor
community stands ready to carry its share of the burden
in seeing the Palestinian State-building process
finalized. In the international community, there is
consensus that there is no alternative to the two-State
solution and that detailed final-status negotiations over
many years have dealt with many, if not most of the
critical issues. Norway strongly supports all initiatives
to bring credible negotiations back on track, and
supports actions taken by the parties and the
international community to underpin continued
Palestinian State-building efforts.
The President: I give
representative of Saudi Arabia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. AlNafisee (Saudi Arabia): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for a second

13

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

term. I should also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez-Taranco for his detailed briefing on
the subject today.
At the outset, I should like to express my
appreciation for the convening of this debate to address
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine, at a time when the Middle East has a dire
need to resume direct peace process negotiations and to
prevent a stalemate situation as a result of the ongoing
illegal Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly East Jerusalem.
In spite of all of the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to restart direct negotiations towards the
establishment of a two-State solution based on the
1967 borders, the Israelis continue to build these illegal
settlements and bring more irrelevant questions to the
negotiating table, such as the recognition of Israel as a
Jewish State — a clear indication from the Israeli side
that it is not seriously interested in reaching a just and
peaceful solution, which is an internationally supported
objective.
In light of the ongoing situation, my Government
repeats its call on the international community to
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, restart direct
negotiations with the Palestinian Authority and halt all
illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular East Jerusalem.
Two years have passed since Israeli occupation
forces invaded the Gaza Strip and the Security Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009). Nonetheless, the
widespread destruction of Gaza remains unabated, in
spite of all assistance efforts. Israel’s occupation forces
continue to hinder the delivery of assistance by closing
key crossings, increasing checkpoints, building a wall
that now isolates Gaza from the rest of the world,
pursuing a policy of collective punishment against the
population of Gaza, and creating obstacles to the
reconstruction process to heal the damage that Israeli
war machine caused. All of these practices and others
committed by the Israeli occupying forces clearly show
the persistence of Israeli aggression towards the
Palestinian problem.
Since Israel annexed East Jerusalem in 1967, a
bitter transformation of the holy city has displaced the
city’s Arab population to create a Zionist East
Jerusalem. Stripping Arab citizens of their identities
and resettling them elsewhere is akin to ethnic
cleansing. The situation in East Jerusalem deteriorates

14

daily as Israel’s policies demolish homes, destroy
identities, displace people and alter records in order to
rewrite history and change Jerusalem’s demographics.
In light of these illegal activities, the Kingdom
reaffirms its condemnation of the continued
resettlement of Arab Israeli citizens and calls for the
immediate cessation and dismantling of Jewish
settlements in the occupied territories.
We reiterate that the building of settlements is
illegal under international law and constitutes an
obstacle to peace negotiations. If Israel claims that it
wants negotiations and is committed to peace, then it
should first cease all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories and dismantle existing
settlements.
The Secretary-General confirmed in a recent
statement the illegitimacy of settlement activity and
called on Israel to fulfil its commitment, in accordance
with the Road Map to peace, to freezing all new
settlement, including so-called natural population
growth, and dismantling all existing settlements built
since March 2001.
The international community has demanded in
concert the cessation of settlement activities on the
basis of their illegitimacy. Will these demands be met
with concrete action from our Security Council? Will
the Council respond to the positions of concerned
Member States by compelling Israel to stop new
settlement
activities
and
dismantle
existing
settlements?
Unfortunately, however, it is clear that things are
not going in the right direction if we wish to reach the
two-State solution, mainly due to Israel’s insistence on
continuing to build illegal settlements. Indeed, the
Israeli Government announced last week the start of
construction on 238 new housing units in East
Jerusalem.
In Lebanon, the ongoing threat posed by Israel to
the sovereignty of the people of that country further
complicates an already complex situation.
Finally, Israel is ignoring or disregarding the call
of the international community to start negotiations in
good faith on the return of the occupied Golan to its
legitimate owner, Syria.
The Government of my country hopes that the
wish expressed by President Barack Obama at the
opening of the sixty-fifth session of the General

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

Assembly, that the Palestinians will take their seat as a
full member in next year’s session of the General
Assembly, will come true. We hope that Israel will
avail itself of the opportunity of direct negotiations to
respond, howsoever late, to the Arab Peace Initiative
and prove that it is a real partner capable of making
peace by participating in the two-State solution in
order to end six decades of bloodshed, conflict and
continuous threats to international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your successful presidency of the Security Council
this month. I thank you for convening this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on behalf of the
Secretariat. I align myself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Mauritania on behalf
of the Arab Group and the representative of Tajikistan
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
This year has seen a serious move forward by the
Quartet and the States sponsors of the peace process.
The efforts of the United States resulted in the conduct
of indirect negotiations and the launch of direct
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides.
Arab countries have shown a serious desire for peace
and created a climate conducive to stimulating the
peace negotiations, but that will not continue
indefinitely.
On behalf of the Arab States, in September 2009
the State of Qatar addressed a letter to the United
States mediator seeking guarantees that Israel would go
along with the Arab position. Now, more than a year
later, the world has seen the radical positions of the
Israeli Government, which evades its internationally
agreed obligations and recently brought the
negotiations to a deadlock.
The Israeli Government persists in its policy of
illegal settlement in the occupied Palestinian territories
and the occupied Syrian Golan, in defiance of the
demands of the Arab Peace Initiative ministerial
follow-up committee in its statements. The latest such
statement was issued at the end of the meeting held on

10-59122

8 October in the city of Sirte, Libya, under the
chairmanship of the State of Qatar, before the special
summit.
There is an international consensus that the
Palestinian issue will be resolved when there are two
States living side by side in peace. However, Israel’s
expansion of settlements, particularly around East
Jerusalem, undermines the chances of achieving a twoState solution based on the 1967 borders, and threatens
the contiguity of the Palestinian territory as one of the
basic components of statehood.
The Israeli Government seeks to justify the
expansion of settlement activity by pointing to socalled natural growth. This concept is completely
unacceptable because the settlements are neither legal
nor the product of natural growth. The Israeli policy
encourages settlement in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly East Jerusalem, by providing
Government subsidies and incentives to encourage the
transfer of its civilian population to Palestinian
territory, in contravention of international law.
In addition, the international community should
not be deceived by the so-called temporary freeze on
settlement construction. It is necessary instead to stop
settlement activity and dismantle all settlements
established in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, in conformity with relevant United Nations
resolutions. A lasting, just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East can be based only on the principle of
land for peace, the terms of reference of relevant
Security Council and General Assembly decisions, and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which will have to be
reconsidered following a loss of confidence in Israel’s
intentions.
We emphasize that it is essential to engage all
segments of the Palestinian population towards the
success of peace efforts, and that our Palestinian
brothers ought to do everything in their power to foster
national unity in the interests of the Palestinian people
and to guarantee the geographical and political unity of
the Palestinian territory. However, it is wrong to think
that the current crisis in the Palestinian national
dialogue is a Palestinian issue alone, since the parties
that called for the rejection of the results of the 2006
democratic elections caused a split in Palestinian ranks,
thus easing pressure on Israel, the occupying Power.
It is equally important to provide protection from
Israeli criminal acts, which are imprescriptible and

15

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

may require those liable to provide compensation
under international law. It is high time to take action to
ensure that such acts do not recur, particularly as they
are catalysts of international terrorism. Furthermore,
many of these acts are considered to be acts of
international terrorism and have not been forgotten by
the international community.
There is no need to describe these acts in detail,
as there have been so many such Israeli attacks on
many Arab countries, not to mention instances of
murder through espionage and maritime piracy, the
division of occupied territory and all-out military
aggression with internationally prohibited weapons.
It is of critical importance to break the illegal and
inhumane siege imposed on the people of Gaza as a
whole. Worse yet, Israel impedes the efforts of the
United Nations and others to rebuild what was
devastated by the Israeli military assault on the Gaza
Strip. Is this civilized behaviour?
We reiterate our firm rejection of the illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
and its attempts to change the Arab identity,
demographic composition, legal status and religious
character of the city. We stress that all these attempts
are null and void and without legal effect. The
international community must reject the attempts of the
Israeli Government to desecrate Islamic and Christian
holy sites, demolish houses in the city, expel its Arab
residents and withdraw their identities with the aim of
Judaizing the city. Such attempts violate the
obligations of Israel, the occupying Power, under
international law, are in contravention of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and undermine the
foundations of a peaceful solution of the Palestinian
issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
While the Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory
continues, we must point out the ongoing Israeli
violations of Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution
1701 (2006), which are summarized in the letters that
have been circulated by the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations. Those violations,
which are acts of provocation and arrogance, must end
if the Israeli Government does not seek to destabilize
the region, as it claims.
Moreover, Israel continues to occupy the Syrian
Golan Heights and to deplete its wealth. We reaffirm
here the decisions of the General Assembly declaring
the Israeli decision to annex the Golan invalid and call

16

for its return to Syria, the implementation of Security
Council resolution 497 (1981), and the return of the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories to Lebanon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I extend to you, Sir,
my congratulations to Uganda for the successful
handling of the work of the Security Council this
month. We would also like to associate ourselves with
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement and Tajikistan
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. May I also associate myself with the
statements made by my colleagues, the representatives
of Saudi Arabia and Qatar, and with statement to be
made by the representative of Tunisia. I am sure we
speak with one voice.
The resumption of the Israel-Palestine direct
negotiations last month had rekindled hope for all of us
for sustainable peace in the Middle East and a
permanent political settlement of the Israel-Palestinian
question. But I fear that our hopes and optimism
appear to be short-lived, as the window of opportunity
for meaningful and sustained negotiation is once again
closing.
We need to extend our hands and grasp this
fleeting moment of history, because we believe that the
Security Council, the Middle East Quartet and the
international community must act together in tandem to
prevent the collapse of the talks. Today’s open debate
can effectively communicate a collective message, if
we focus ourselves on three key areas so that the talks
will now move in the right direction. The first one is
the unconditional cessation of all settlement activity by
Israel.
The international community must play a role in
this. They must sensitize Israel to get it to announce its
unconditional cessation of all settlement activity.
Settlement activity violates international law, vitiates
the atmosphere of the talks and mutes the voice of
peace and compassion. It amounts to a colonization
procedure of the Palestinian territory.
Settlement activity in recent times has shown
numerous patterns. The more worrying trend is in and
around East Jerusalem, where the status of the
centuries-old prayer places, mosques, churches and
cemeteries of the Palestinian people are being altered

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

in the name of excavation and the creation of new
housing space. Violence by settlers against their
Palestinian neighbours has become a routine, albeit
regrettable corollary of that activity.
We
note
with
particular
concern
the
announcement made this past Friday by the Israeli
authorities of their intent to build 238 housing units in
East Jerusalem’s neighbourhoods of Ramot and Pisgat
Ze’ev. Israel must stop this illegal activity. It must also
end its calculated ambiguity on settlements in the West
Bank, with a categorical renunciation of any new
project. At the moment, we are allowing settlement
activity to derail the negotiations or cast its threatening
challenge as a shadow upon the peace process of the
world.
Secondly, improvement in the lives of the
Palestinian people is very important. This will indicate
whether we are proceeding towards peace. The
negotiation process must run in parallel with this. A
myriad of checkpoints, roadblocks, military siege and
separation walls cannot indicate peace and progress.
This has infested the land of the prophets and the holy
books and it must end. This must stop.
We acknowledge a set of measures taken by the
Israeli authorities — and this is important — to ease
restrictions on movement in the West Bank and to
improve Gaza access. Such measures must be sustained
by a deeper political commitment to improve
livelihoods in Palestine through respect of human
rights, freedom of movement and unrestricted flow of
commerce. It cannot simply be a tap that can be turned
on or off.
Thirdly, in order to believe that efforts are on the
right track, there must be upgraded assistance to the
Palestinian Authority. We must recognize this,
especially regarding the plans announced in August
2009 for building the institutions of a Palestine State
within two years. But we have continued to allow the
denigration of the Palestinian Administration and
economy. Many independent studies, including the
Economic Monitoring Report prepared by the World
Bank, have praised the performance of the Palestinian
Authority in institution-building and delivery of public
services. This has not found much voice in this
particular forum and it needs to be said.
The World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund have projected an 8 per cent growth rate in the
West Bank and Gaza. This is very creditable. This

10-59122

economic boom and entrepreneurship can be a solid
edifice for the Palestinian statehood and for its people.
And in fact, it can rebut violence. This holds immense
promise for a lasting peace in the region and beyond.
The economic and political momentum behind this
significant change must not be lost. A strong and
confident Palestine can better deliver peace, both at the
negotiating table and in the streets of the region.
For lasting peace in the wider Middle East, we
would also urge parallel progress on the IsraelLebanon and Israel-Syria tracks, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions. We must
encourage those negotiations to systematically move
forward, along with all that we are doing here. Pakistan
has always been supportive of lasting peace for all
inhabitants of the Middle East — I repeat, for all of the
inhabitants of the Middle East — irrespective of
religion, ethnicity and nationality.
We continue to look forward to substantive and
objective investigations by the Secretary-General’s
Panel of Inquiry on the freedom flotilla incident of
31 May 2010. We await a date for its publication. The
freedom flotilla had embarked on a noble mission, and
those killed aboard certainly deserve our attention. The
Panel must diligently pursue the matter and bring it
before this Chamber in a timely fashion, within the
year. Justice must prevail and those affected must be
compensated.
We share the common goal of the international
community to achieve an independent, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side and in peace with its
neighbours. Our prayer today is that this open debate
of the Council will bring us nearer to this peaceful
objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Rugunda. I would also like to congratulate
his country, which is presiding over the Security
Council this month, and him for the excellent way in
which he has conducted the work and deliberations of
the Council.
My delegation subscribes to the statements made
by the representatives of Egypt on behalf of the

17

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

Non-Aligned Movement, and of Tajikistan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
The international community has placed a good
deal of hope on the resumption of direct negotiations
between the Israelis and Palestinians, which were
launched in September under United States auspices.
Many countries, including my own, and various
international and regional organizations have expressed
their support for these negotiations, aimed at reviving
the peace process in the Middle East and at achieving a
solution to the issue of Palestine on the basis of the
well-known international terms of reference and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
We had hoped that we would meet today at a time
when negotiations were still ongoing. We encourage
the parties involved to continue to make all necessary
efforts to achieve the goals of resolving all pending
critical issues and ending a long-standing conflict.
Regrettably, these negotiations have been interrupted
by Israel’s refusal to extend the moratorium on
settlements and its decision to resume settlement
activity. Worse yet, the Israeli authorities have renewed
their colonial activities at a time when the region needs
dialogue and negotiations more than ever in order to
achieve a global, lasting and just peace, which is in
everyone’s interest.
Arab leaders met at an extraordinary Arab
summit conference in Sirte, Libya, on 9 October. The
Palestinian question was at the top of the Arab leaders’
concerns, especially in light of recent events. President
Ben Ali of Tunisia made a statement at the summit in
which he reiterated the steadfast support of Tunisia to
the brotherly Palestinian people with a view to
ensuring that they recover their legitimate rights over
their historic homeland, especially the right to establish
their own State on their national soil.
President Ben Ali called on the international
stakeholders, the parties to the conflict and the Quartet
to exert more pressure on Israel to end its policy of
settlement-building, the Judaization of Jerusalem and
its rejection of international legitimacy. The President
also called on the international community to pursue its
efforts to renew direct negotiations between the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government in
order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the region.
The situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territories has given rise to concern. The

18

settlement policy pursued by Israel tends to undermine
the Arab and Islamic character and identity of the city
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. It also causes additional
suffering to the brotherly Palestinian people, who have
been deprived of their basic legitimate rights, including
their right to create their independent State on their
own national soil.
The situation requires all parties to take a firm
stand and commit themselves to the principle of peace.
Tunisia is strongly committed to the principles of
international law, supports peace, and calls for a
renewal of dialogue and negotiations to that end.
However, Tunisia appeals to the parties to avoid
deadlock and tensions that would only increase the
threats to security and stability in the region and could
undermine the prospects for peace to which our nations
aspire.
As we discuss the situation in the Middle East
today, I would like to reiterate my country’s call for an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan and
the remaining occupied Lebanese territories, in
accordance with international law, so that all nations
can enjoy peace and security and devote themselves to
reconstruction and development and work for a better
future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Iran): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Uganda’s
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for convening this important
meeting.
The Middle East is at the crossroads of the main
divine religions of the world. It inspires a vast source
of spiritual and philosophical perfectionism. Its divine
spirit demands that it be a land of peace, justice and
compassion, and not one of conflicts and human
suffering.
It was in this spirit that the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr. Ahmadinejad, embarked
on a State visit last week to Lebanon and was warmly
welcomed by the people and the Government of
Lebanon in an almost unprecedented manner. This
warm reception of the President is indicative of the
constructive role that the Islamic Republic of Iran
plays in the region in general, and in Lebanon in
particular. This fact has been confirmed by Lebanese

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

officials and all influential political figures and groups
who are qualified to judge the positive effects of the
visit, unlike those who look at this important and
constructive regional event as an impediment to their
wrong expansionist political agendas in the region.
It is therefore necessary for the international
community, in particular the Security Council, and the
Secretary-General to take into account the important
and powerful role that the Islamic Republic of Iran
plays in the region and to take advantage of it to
maintain and consolidate peace and stability in
Lebanon and the region as a whole.
If the Middle East is to see the prosperity and
dignity it so deserves, the miserable plight and
sufferings of the Palestinian people must end. We must
not let the peace and stability of the region be
constantly threatened by a regime that has a dark
history of crimes and aggression. Clearly, more and
more Palestinians see little justification in pursuing
unequal peace with an unequal partner. The present
Zionist regime of blockades, separation walls and
checkpoints has led to the imprisonment of the entire
Palestinian population in Gaza and the West Bank.
As has been stated again and again, the
Palestinian issue is the core problem of the Middle
East. It is this conflict which has, over the past six
decades, spawned the ever-widening circle of Israel’s
confrontations with its neighbours and the Islamic
world. It is this conflict which has contributed most
significantly to the anger and frustration of the people
of the Islamic world.
The consequences of our collective failure to
bring peace, justice and compassion to the Middle East
are disastrous for the region and beyond. What adds to
the pessimism is the continuing grave situation on the
ground in terms of the humanitarian plight of the
Palestinians, in particular the people besieged in Gaza.
Amidst this human tragedy, the ongoing provocative
and aggressive actions of the Israel regime in the
occupied territories have compounded the plight of the
Palestinian people and made a just solution to the
conflict all the more difficult.
An immediate end to the illegal practices
affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people is
the most important prerequisite for building an
environment of trust and confidence. Trust and
confidence, together with the active engagement of the

10-59122

international community, are the only way forward to
peace.
In this context, there is an urgent need to address
the Israeli nuclear weapons programme. Nuclear
weapons in the hands of a regime with an unparalleled
record of State terrorism and resort to aggression and
to the threat or use of force against other countries
presents a real threat to regional and global peace and
security and the non-proliferation regime. This fact
was underlined at the third Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in New York in April. This threat
needs to be urgently and decisively addressed by the
international community, and initiative for the creation
of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East should be actively pursued.
In accordance with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a significant and crucial role to
play in supporting efforts to restore peace and justice
in the Middle East by ending the suffering of the
Palestinians and by putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian lands, Lebanese territories
and the Golan Heights. These are essential measures
that need to be taken in order to bring lasting stability
to the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation is
pleased to have this opportunity to address this Council
on this important issue at a crucial time for the Middle
East peace process. I also wish to extend our sincere
congratulations to Uganda on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council and for the work done by the
Ugandan delegation. We express our appreciation to
you, Sir, for convening this debate.
I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his
informative briefing on the situation in the Middle
East. We associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The resumption of direct talks between the two
leaders of Israel and Palestine on 2 September in
Washington, D.C., with the facilitation of President
Obama, indeed brought new hope to many who
sincerely await a comprehensive resolution of the

19

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

question of Palestine in order to achieve sustainable
peace in the Middle East. However, unfortunately, the
stalemate continues despite the relentless efforts of
many, including regional leaders, thus prolonging the
plight of millions of innocent Palestinian civilians who
have waited far too long for justice and their
inalienable rights. Peace in the Middle East would be a
major contribution to world peace.
We strongly believe that the ending of the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory and settlement
activities remains central to finding a viable and just
solution to the question of Palestine. Forty-three years
of immeasurable hardship and disruption of normal
civilian life would be a disturbing situation in any
circumstance. We earnestly hope that the resolutions
adopted by this body and the General Assembly will be
respected and implemented without delay.
Hatred and violence only beget hatred and
violence. Therefore, the consistent call by many
concerned on all parties to the conflict to stop violence
and exercise restraint needs to be heeded. It is the only
way forward to ensure an environment conducive to
lasting peace in the region. It is the most pragmatic
way to build confidence and ease the suffering of the
Palestinian people.
Once more, Sri Lanka renews its call on both
Israel and Palestine to exploit all avenues in their quest
for a lasting solution in which both sides could live
side by side as neighbours within secure and
recognized borders and bring Israel greater acceptance,
both within the region and beyond.
We reiterate our support for the Government of
President Abbas and commend the decision of the
League of Arab States to keep the doors open for peace
talks, despite the present deadlock. The Arab League
has demonstrated moral leadership and political
maturity with this decision. We believe that Palestinian
unity should be restored through peaceful means for
the sake of a strong and stable Palestine State. It is
important that the national and democratic institutions
of the Palestinian Authority be protected and
maintained, as they will form the bedrock of a future
Palestinian State, independent and self-sustaining.
It is therefore the earnest desire and hope of the
Government of Sri Lanka that both Palestine and
Israel, together with the major stakeholders of the
Middle East peace process, will overcome the current
impasse in their negotiations, and do so without delay.

20

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this open debate under your presidency on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. My delegation associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I also thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing.
We have observed and closely followed the
negotiations launched on 2 September. We did not have
to wait long before seeing once again which party
would continue to create obstacles to peace in the
Middle East. The occupying Power was quick to
announce its intention to hold a referendum clearly
aimed at creating conditions surrounding any outcome
and at violating the Palestinians’ right of return. In
addition, Israel made the illegal and provocative
decision to continue to build housing units in East
Jerusalem. The Israeli expansionist policy also
continues to include the demolition of Palestinian
homes. More serious still is the policy of violence and
xenophobia preached by the Israeli Government,
inciting its citizens to violence with the aim of
compelling the Palestinian Arab population to leave the
lands that are rightly theirs.
Nicaragua once again reiterates its condemnation
of the criminal blockade on the Gaza Strip and demands
that Israel meet its international obligations under
international
law,
in
particular
international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions. Israel
continues to collectively punish more than 1.5 million
Palestinians in Gaza, who live in that jail of 360 square
kilometres under an air, sea and land blockade.
After having murdered nine Turkish activists
aboard a humanitarian flotilla, the decision that Israel
took in June 2010 to reduce restrictions and allow the
entry of food and household goods was seen by some
as a good start. However, in the light of events, that act
was nothing more than a cosmetic touch-up of the
genocidal blockade and an attempt to divert public
attention from the situation.
The true aim behind the blockade is to keep the
people supposedly alive, but in reality keeping them
always on the brink of annihilation. The blockade also
cuts off a people’s right to sustainable development.

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

Proof of that, to give just two examples, is that since
the start of the blockade, half of the agricultural land
has become inaccessible and lies fallow. Also, most of
Gaza’s manufacturing facilities have closed their doors,
with unemployment estimated at 40 per cent.

Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): The resumption of direct
peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority earlier this autumn was a long-awaited
event, raising hopes around the world that the parties
might finally make progress on the final status issues.

Returning to the attack on the humanitarian
flotilla, with its characteristic impunity, Israel has
refused an international investigation and has qualified
the murder of those people as self-defence. Can the
illegal boarding of a humanitarian flotilla in
international waters be considered legitimate defence?
It not being enough to attack the humanitarian flotilla
in international waters, Israeli soldiers displayed the
most brutal violence and were not satisfied with
neutralizing their victims, but riddled them with
bullets.

Now, after a very short interval, there is a serious
risk that the peace process might stall once again.
Israel must assume the greatest part of the
responsibility for that, having refused to renew its
moratorium on settlement construction in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

Likewise, Nicaragua condemns the continued
violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty in open violation
of the Council’s resolutions, as well as all measures
and actions undertaken against the occupied Syrian
Golan, which must be returned immediately by the
occupying Power.
Nicaragua calls on all countries that have not
done so to recognize the State of Palestine, but in
particular on the Council’s permanent members and
those other States involved in the peace process, which
have the greatest responsibility in that regard.
The General Assembly and the Council should
take concrete steps to fully recognize the Palestinian
State and its entry into this Organization as a fullfledged Member. It is simply shameful that the
international community continues to favour the strong
over the weak and the occupier over the occupied. It is
unacceptable for the Organization to recognize a State
that resorts to violence as a national policy and not
recognize the Palestinian State, whose people have
sought for more than 60 years peace and freedom to
give their citizens a dignified life.
We must ask ourselves if Israel and its main ally
will really take the decision this time to bring about,
through dialogue and negotiation, the creation of a
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders or if,
respectively, they will continue to be victimizers and
accomplices to a genocide that has already lasted more
than six decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.

10-59122

It is important to recall that the settlements are
not simply a distraction or an obstacle to peace. They
are illegal under international law, a product of the
occupation and designed to further entrench the
occupation. To call on Israel to immediately cease all
settlement activity is therefore a legitimate request and,
indeed, the international community’s obligation.
Iceland remains deeply sympathetic towards the
plight of Palestinians, now in the public eye due to the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the raid on the
flotilla in international waters earlier this year. The raid
was condemned by my Government and drew strong
public reaction. Experts, mandated by the Human
Rights Council, have now concluded that Israel
violated international law by attacking the flotilla. We
urge the Israeli authorities to work with the United
Nations on the follow-up to the report (A/HRC/15/21).
Israel and the Palestinian side should also
conduct independent and credible investigations,
meeting international standards, into the serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law reported by the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48).
The Government of Iceland strongly believes that
the blockade of Gaza is contrary to international
human rights and humanitarian law, inflicting
collective punishment on the Gaza population.
Accordingly, the Government of Iceland calls upon the
Government of Israel to bring the blockade to an end
and to ensure that the overall needs of the population
are met.
Finally, Iceland firmly supports a peaceful
resolution to the conflict and the two-State solution. A
sustainable and just peace will not be achieved in the
Middle East without the realization of the two-State

21

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
security.

these settlements, which has been condemned around
the world, affects the borders of a Palestinian State.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.

The Israeli Government has again shown that it
does not have the political will to move forward with
direct negotiations with the Palestinian National
Authority. The United Nations should demand that the
State of Israel refrain from further violating the norms
of international law and from disrupting the
negotiations currently being conducted.

Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, for the work that you
undertaking as President of the Security Council. We
wish you success in your efforts.
We come here to reiterate our fervent desire for
the prompt establishment of the Palestinian State and for
peace in the Middle East. We associate ourselves with
the statement made today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the efforts of the League of Arab States
in support of the Palestinian people’s self-determination.
The Government of Israel has violated the United
Nations Charter on many occasions. The Permanent
Observer of Palestine has sent 374 letters to the
Secretary-General and the Security Council that relate
the excesses committed against the Palestinian people
by the occupying Power, Israel. Numerous reports by
United Nations rapporteurs also confirm the outrages
committed by the State of Israel. Thus there exists a
comprehensive criminal record of its assaults that has
moved and outraged the conscience of the world.
Venezuela demands that the Security Council take
charge in this matter and proceed without delay to
apply the measures outlined in the United Nations
Charter in order that the State of Israel complies with
international law.
Illegal settlements and the practice of occupation,
condemned by the Governments and peoples of the
world, are part of the State of Israel’s policy of
aggression, which is aimed at perpetuating its
occupation and depriving the Palestinian people of
their inalienable right to self-determination and
sovereignty. The occupying Power is carrying out an
ethnic war and a racist and xenophobic policy aimed at
the de-Arabization of Palestine.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
accordance with the views expressed by the Arab
League, believes that the revival of Israeli colonization
through the building of settlements on Palestinian land
is a sabotage of the negotiation process being
conducted by the Palestinian National Authority and
the Israeli Government. The continued construction of

22

Before the eyes of the world, the Government of
Israel has amassed a voluminous record of violations
of international law. Why does the Security Council
permit the impunity of this occupying Power? We
therefore request that the Security Council exercise the
powers invested in it by the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain and preserve international peace
and security.
The Charter states in its preamble that it is
necessary to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small and to respect
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela considers that the Security Council, by
allowing the impunity of the State of Israel, has not
complied with its obligations under the Charter. This
body, unfortunately, is a prisoner of the right of the
veto. That is why Venezuela has stressed the need to
rebuild the United Nations. Among other things, that
means eliminating the right of the veto in the Security
Council and granting binding force to the decisions of
the General Assembly, including those having to do
with international peace and security.
In conclusion, I note that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has been admitted as a full member of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. From that platform, or any
other, we will support the struggles of this people,
which seek to achieve their historical claims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bolivia.
Mr. Solón (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia would like to associate itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

The Plurinational State of Bolivia condemns
Israel’s continuing military occupation of Palestinian
territory, perpetrated through systematic violations of
international law and United Nations resolutions. In
that regard, we call on the international community to
show solidarity with the Palestinian people in the
tragedy they are experiencing. With courage and
dignity, they are continuing to cope with persecution,
closed areas, shortages of food and drinking water and
edicts by Israel that violate human rights and the
Geneva Conventions. Israel is also continuing to
impose widespread displacements that affect thousands
of Palestinian families.

We condemn Israel’s use of access to water as a
way to evict the Palestinian population from its
territories. The Plurinational State of Bolivia urges
Israel to end all its illegal settlement activities. We
demand that Israel halt its illegal practices against the
Palestinian people, put a definitive end to its illegal
blockade of Gaza and immediately allow the
permanent opening of all crossing points for the
movement of people and goods into and out of the
territory, which is necessary to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis and allow for immediate
reconstruction and the economic recovery of the
Palestinian people.

Since the last open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question (see
S/PV.6363), the international community has continued
to make various efforts to put a stop to violence,
terrorism and the loss of innocent Palestinian lives in
the region. Nevertheless, we continue to witness the
perverse consequences of the occupation by a foreign
Power. The serious economic effects of that occupation
have deprived the Palestinian State and its inhabitants
of their legitimate right to exist.

The international community has a responsibility
to ensure that the most reliable possible investigation is
carried out on all the violations and crimes committed
by Israel in the Gaza Strip. It is in precisely this
important framework that the Committee of
Independent Experts appointed in accordance with the
Human Rights Council resolution of March of this year
on the follow-up to the Goldstone Report can pursue its
work.

Along with the blockade and war in the Gaza
Strip, we also cannot remain indifferent to the alarming
direct and indirect costs of Israeli’s closure policy in the
West Bank. According to a report (TD/B/57/4) by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), that has led to a loss of $3.1 billion over
the past three years. The same UNCTAD report
highlights the fact that in 2009 the trade deficit with
Israel reached $2.6 billion. That figure exceeds the
value of all the assistance that the donor community
provides to Palestine.
These and other serious constraints in Gaza and
many areas of the West Bank, which serve to increase
disparities and fragmentation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, only highlight the unjust
practices of the occupying Power, Israel.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia would like to
express its strong solidarity with the pain of the
Palestinian people. We vehemently reject Israel’s
unnecessary destruction of thousands of Palestinian
homes, businesses and vital civilian infrastructure,
including water and sanitation facilities that are
essential for ensuring the fundamental right to water
and sanitation, which has been recognized by the
General Assembly as a human right.

10-59122

The negotiations that need to take place in the
framework of the peace process are often disrupted by
illegal settlement activity, which is obviously aimed at
the illegal acquisition and de facto annexation of more
Palestinian territory, thereby imposing a unilateral
solution, which has clearly been shown in the last few
days by Israel by refusing to extend a moratorium
settlement.
Bolivia considers that the conduct of the peace
process between the parties should be based on the
fulfilment of agreements and the cessation of
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, which is essential to establishing an
atmosphere of trust in the region.
In this context, the Plurinational State of Bolivia
would like to make an appeal for the international
community to take urgent measures to make sure that
Israel as an occupying Power comply with all of its
obligations under international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and United Nations
resolutions, as well as the advisory opinion and its
obligations under the Road Map.
Bolivia would like to place its hope in the
continued international efforts of the international
community to fulfil the just aspirations of the

23

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian people for whom we would like to
resolutely express our support and solidarity.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Mr. President, let me
begin by thanking you for chairing this very important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I also
would like to convey our appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for
his insightful and comprehensive briefing this morning.
I also wish to state that the delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
In addition, I wish to briefly make certain points that
Bangladesh believes to be of importance.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been a major concern
for the international community and the United
Nations. A durable and sustainable resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine,
which is the core of the long-lasting crisis, must
therefore be our collective strategic objective. All
Member States should pledge complete commitment to
this objective and throw their full moral, diplomatic,
political and economic support behind its early
realization. Bangladesh is always ready to play a
constructive role in this collective endeavour to
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on the two-State principle.
Bangladesh joins with the international community in
reaffirming its full support for the Palestinian people in
its just and legitimate struggle for self-determination
and freedom from continued occupation.
The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land. Displaced Palestinians have
been denied their right to return home and live in
dignity and safety. Unfortunately, it appears to have
been a collective failure on the part of the international
community and, even more so, of the people of Israel,
who despite having endured deprivation and sufferings
has failed to rise to the occasion and guarantee the
people of Palestine its fundamental rights to selfdetermination and a sovereign State of its own side by
side with Israel.

24

In order to achieve a lasting solution in the
Middle East, it is very important to address the key
issue, which is the prolonged and illegal occupation of
the Arab territories by Israel. The solution requires
Israel’s complete and unconditional withdrawal from
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab lands.
We are nevertheless heartened to see a new
beginning in the peace process. It is encouraging that
President Mahmoud Abbas met with the Israeli Prime
Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, last month and started
direct talks, which had remained stalled since 2008.
Let us hope that their meeting is a step in the right
direction towards the two-State solution. Let us hope
that they will adopt a mindset conducive to lasting
peace and that Israel will stop its illegal eviction of
Palestinian residents and end its settlement projects as
steps towards the realization of the two-State solution.
The international community is eagerly waiting
for a breakthrough. Can we be optimistic that this
modest beginning of direct talks will end up in
consolidating the peace process? My delegation
believes that direct negotiations will only be successful
if there is sustained regional and international support
for the talks, the parallel process of Palestinian Statebuilding and the pursuit of a just, lasting and
comprehensive regional peace, as envisaged in the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant General
Assembly
and
Security
Council
resolutions,
particularly resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), and
425 (1978), the principle of land for peace, and the
Madrid terms of reference, which provide for Israel’s
withdrawal from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories back to the 4 June 1967 line, the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which are the best guides
for achieving a two-State solution and for guaranteeing
Israel’s security and stability.
The two sides should, as soon as possible, settle
the core issues including the status of Jerusalem and
the return of the Palestinian refugees. Let me urge the
international community, especially the Quartet, to
ease the financial burden of the Palestinian Authority.
There should be renewed commitments to increase
financial assistance to the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s longstanding position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of the violence, unrest and destabilization in the

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

region. Let me also reiterate our full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region, both
Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace with all its neighbours,
including Israel.
The President: I shall give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
The situation in the Middle East and the conflict
between Israel and Palestine are matters that have
burdened the United Nations and the Security Council
for more than six decades now. For those who have
followed the events, and particularly the discussions in
the Organization, our attention is drawn to the
repetition of statements and denunciations not just by
the parties, but also by other participants. It is only
when leaders with the stature of true statesmen and
stateswomen have lifted their eyes above the
immediate disputes to look to the horizon, trying to put
into true perspective the material costs but especially
the human costs as well, in order to move beyond
nationalist and sectarian impulses, that we have seen
really meaningful steps being taken. It is thus that
today, more than 60 years after the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) and more than 10 years
after the deadline established in Oslo, we again see the
hope of a renewal of direct negotiations between the
parties, so that there can be a settlement of all matters
related to the final status within a year. We therefore
now need leaders who are willing to abandon business
as usual and thinking in terms of confrontation, and
who will instead think in terms of peace and
cooperation. There are some positive signs in that
regard. In the light of those events, my statement today
is different from the statements we customarily make
here.
Costa Rica is not unaware of the difficulties
facing Israeli and Palestinian leaders. We do not ignore
the goals, aspirations, rights, pressures and the weight
of history that lead each party to distrust the other and
to think that tomorrow, or in three or 30 years’ time,
they will be in a better position to achieve their
ultimate goals. But that is nothing but a mirage and has
shown itself to be just that — a mirage, not the way
towards an oasis.

10-59122

The current leaders of Israel and Palestine have
found a way to come to the table and reach agreements.
Moreover, above and beyond the pressures, both
parties are aware of the central features of what must
be a final agreement to the conflict. The basis for a
solution should be the acceptance of two States within
secure and recognized borders whose inhabitants live
free from threats of being pushed out of their homes
and lands or being kidnapped or subject of rocket
attacks — and who instead cooperate to increase
production, bolster access to health and education and
strengthen the prospects for a peaceful and hopeful
future.
There is a possible agreement on the table. It still
requires fine-tuning and necessary elements that
complement, and not substitute for, the crucial
conditions, namely, the establishment of a Palestinian
State and the signing of a genuine and secure peace.
As we have said on numerous occasions, Costa
Rica believes that the only sustainable solution to the
conflict in the Middle East is one based on absolute
respect for international law — not on force. Today, the
road to sustainable peace entails respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights. The
parties should focus on the central aspects of the
conflict. That was essentially the message that
President Laura Chinchilla brought to her meeting with
Israeli President Shimon Peres and Palestinian
Authority President Mahmoud Abbas here at
Headquarters in September.
I would like to express our satisfaction with the
implicit support expressed by the Arab League at its
meeting in Sirte, Libya, for President Abbas to
continue negotiations with the Israeli side, despite the
end of Israel’s unilateral moratorium on construction.
However, that hopeful sign is not open-ended. The
parties should find a way to relaunch a constructive
dialogue.
Costa Rica continues to support the efforts of
Palestinian officials to restore Palestinian unity on the
basis of the commitments of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. While President Abbas and his team have
used the guidelines to improve security conditions and
free their people from violence, Palestinian unity has
been systematically weakened by radical groups that
pose an obstacle to the well-being of the people they
claim to defend. Israel also needs to be able to count on
valid interlocutors who can negotiate and bring an end

25

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

to the conflict. In that context, Arab countries are also
strategic partners in peacebuilding. They should
therefore help the Palestinian Authority to prevent the
conflict from becoming a vehicle for the actions of
extremists.
We know that that is not an easy process. We also
know that the conflict has its roots in disputes both old
and new. Costa Rica does not ignore, nor are we
disingenuous about, the difficulties involved in
reaching agreements to disputes between countries and
peoples. But we also know that peoples and leaders
come to a moment when they understand that they
must put aside some of their aspirations and goals in
order to achieve others that are surely more important.
Human lives and the well-being of the children of
today and tomorrow are more important than promises
to defeat an enemy. In the face of a spirit of
confrontation and heated passions, Costa Rica calls for
a spirit of peace, understanding and good faith. Let us
remove obstacles from our path, be they large or small,
and call for agreement on what is necessary and
crucial.
If the Organization wishes to play its role in this
conflict, it is time that it speak up to encourage those
who are reasonable, those who want to find solutions.
It is time to silence fanatics and extremists, wherever
they come from. Their voices and their evil predictions
should be overcome by providing support, tranquillity
and confidence to those who in their very homes
distrust international diplomacy. We must give them
reasons to have faith and to trust. Costa Rica calls upon
the parties to give their best and seek a meeting of the
wills.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): As Chair of the Arab Group for October 2010,
I have the pleasure to address the Security Council at
this meeting on the item entitled “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”.
I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Uganda’s accession to the Council
presidency for this month. I also congratulate Turkey
on its outstanding presidency of the Council last
month. I also thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

26

The Council’s debate today is taking place at a
time when Israel is continuing its disregard for the
international community by its intransigent position of
choosing the policy of regular assassinations,
displacement, settlement construction and house
demolition on a daily basis. That behaviour is brutal,
criminal and illegal, and at the same time it constitutes
a blatant breach of international law, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Israel’s
disregard for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, constitutes a
grave danger, which makes it necessary for the Council
to shoulder its responsibility with regard to Israel’s
intransigence.
The Arab Group affirms that we cannot and
should not divorce reality on the ground from the
efforts being made to achieve peace through the twoState solution based on the borders of 4 June 1967, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), so as to enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their full and legitimate rights, establish a
sovereign independent Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and ensure the return of
Palestinian refugees to their lands. We welcome the
statement by American President Barack Obama to the
General Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see
A/65/PV.11), in which he talked about the
establishment of a Palestinian State in the course of
one year.
The peace efforts in the Middle East — including
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map adopted by
Security Council resolution 1515 (2003) and the efforts
of the Quartet, which command the full and complete
support of the international community — must be
bolstered by accelerating their implementation, for the
sake of terminating the Arab-Israeli conflict and
achieving genuine peace based on the principle of land
for peace. Peace will be achieved only with the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace side by
side with Israel.
In that connection the Arab Group calls on the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility for the
withdrawal by Israel, the occupying Power, from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
line with Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted at the Arab League Summit
held in Beirut on 28 March 2002.

10-59122

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

The Arab Group calls on the Security Council to
force Israel, the occupying Power, to apply the Fourth
Geneva Convention, on the protection of civilians in
time of war, to its Syrian prisoners, some of whom
have been in prison for more than 25 years. The Arab
Group would like to draw the Council’s attention to
Israel’s continued intransigence in refusing to comply
with resolution 497 (1981), on the Syrian Golan, in its
settlement policies, confiscation of land, diversion of
water resources and imposition of Israeli nationality on
Syrian citizens.
We call on the Council to force Israel, the
occupying Power, to withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from the Sheba’a farms and the
northern part of Al-Ghajar village, as well as from the
Kfar Shouba Hills.
With regard to occupied East Jerusalem and the
Gaza Strip, we would like to put an end to clear Israeli
violations of international law that aim at creating a
Jewish majority in East Jerusalem by evicting
Palestinian citizens, forcibly displacing them, revoking
their residency permits and replacing them with illegal
Israeli settlers.
The Arab Group emphasizes the dangers to which
occupied Jerusalem is subjected, particularly al-Haram
al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, given the persistent
Israeli violations. The continued attempts to demolish
the Al-Aqsa Mosque as well as the violations in the
city of Jerusalem are part of an Israeli plan to Judaize
occupied East Jerusalem, attempts that will undermine
peace efforts internationally and regionally.
International reports frequently emerge on the
situation in Gaza, all of which emphasize the gravity of
the situation inside the Gaza Strip, given the unjust,
inhuman, strangulating and illegal blockade that has
lasted more than three years, paralyzing Gaza’s
economy and destroying the health and living and
social conditions of more than 1.7 million Palestinians.
The Arab Group demands the unconditional and
immediate cessation of all settlement activities,
without exception, including those in Jerusalem, as a
sine qua non for the achievement of peace. We call
upon Israel to immediately, without delay, lift the
inhuman blockade of Gaza. Negotiations can never
resume as long as settlement activity by Israel, the
occupying Power, continues. The international
community, particularly the Security Council, must
grapple with the unjust stance of Israel and should

10-59122

decisively reject Israel’s provocative and destructive
position. Israel should abide by international law,
because the alternative threatens not only the peace
process but also international peace and security.
Last but not least, the Arab Group is of the view
that the international community, particularly the
Security Council, must strongly call upon Israel, the
occupying Power, to halt all its blatant violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Israel should cease
settlement activities and return to sincere negotiations
to establish an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by
side with Israel. It should completely and
unconditionally withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories. The Security Council should redouble its
efforts and take further concrete and effective measures
at this critical juncture in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador is pleased that the Security Council has once
again provided an opportunity for an update on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine, and congratulates you, Sir, on your conduct
of the debate. We also wish to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
Ecuador associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
I am pleased to confirm once again Ecuador’s
position on the conflict in the Middle East, and that is
total respect for the norms and principles of
international law, especially in matters of the peaceful
resolution of conflicts; condemnation of the use and
threat of use of force; and compliance with the
resolutions of the United Nations and its subsidiary
bodies. In that vein, we support all the resolutions of
the Security Council.
True to that commitment, my delegation
condemns the acts of violence that continue in the
region, because not only do they violate international
law, but they also make it difficult to reach
understanding between the parties.
The crisis in which we find ourselves forces us to
seek actions and decisions to achieve peace. That
requires that Israel respect the law and the resolutions

27

S/PV.6404 (Resumption 1)

of the United Nations. The people need the
international community, in accordance with
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions, to
demand, once and for all call in a clear and firm way,
that Israel cease all harassment activities in the region
and stop the settlement activity that it conducts by
force in the area, including in East Jerusalem.
The settlements are illegal and unjustifiable. They
exacerbate tensions, run counter to the principle of
land for peace, which has been supported by the
international community since 1979, and hamper the
peace process between the parties.
If Israel rejects the efforts, appeals and calls of
the international community in such a way as to
prevent the peace negotiations, then the Security
Council should take concrete action — as should all
the relevant organs of the United Nations — so as to
ensure that Israel suffers the consequences of the
violations and crimes it has perpetrated, especially in
Gaza and East Jerusalem.

28

My delegation renews its condemnation of the
acts being provoked in the region, not only because
they violate international law but also and most
importantly because they block understanding between
the parties.
The region cries out for a solution. We urge the
parties to come to a settlement of the conflict that is
peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive, and to make
efforts to re-establish the dialogue that will lead — via
the effective fulfilment of the Madrid commitments,
the Israeli initiative and implementation of the Road
Map — to achieving stability and peace in a region in
which two States, Israel and Palestine, must coexist
side by side within secure and recognized borders.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

10-59122
