A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/177
2 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.1)]
49/177.

Report of the Committee against Torture and status of
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/
and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 2/ both of which provide that no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from
Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of
9 December 1975 and contained in the annex to that resolution,
Recalling further its resolution 39/46 of 10 December 1984, by which it
adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
contained in the annex to that resolution, and called upon all Governments to
consider signing, ratifying and acceding to the Convention as a matter of
priority, its subsequent resolutions on the status of the Convention, most
recently its resolution 47/113 of 16 December 1992 and its decisions 46/428
and 46/430 of 17 December 1991, as well as the Commission on Human Rights
resolutions on the subject, most recently resolution 1994/38 of
4 March 1994, 3/

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
95-77041

/...

A/RES/49/177
Page 2

Mindful of the relevance, for the eradication of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, of the Code of Conduct
for Law Enforcement Officials 4/ and of the Principles of Medical Ethics
relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the
protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, 5/
Recalling the adoption of the Body of Principles for the Protection of
All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, 6/
Seriously concerned about the alarming number of reported cases of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment taking
place in various parts of the world, and concerned by the stagnation in the
number of ratifications to the Convention received during the past year,
Determined to promote the full implementation of the prohibition, under
international and national law, of the practice of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/32 of
28 February 1992, 7/ in which the Commission decided to extend for three
years the mandate of the Special Rapporteur to examine questions relevant to
torture,
Noting with appreciation the activities of the open-ended working group
of the Commission on Human Rights, while expressing its concern at the pace of
its progress in elaborating a draft optional protocol to the Convention,
1.
Commends the Committee against Torture for its excellent report,
in its modified presentation, 8/ and for the improvement in its working
methods;
2.
Notes the status of submission of reports by States parties to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment; 9/
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States
parties with their obligations under the Convention;
4.
Urges all States parties to the Convention to notify the
Secretary-General of their acceptance of the amendments to articles 17 and 18
of the Convention as soon as possible;

4/

Resolution 34/169, annex.

5/

Resolution 37/194, annex.

6/

Resolution 43/173, annex.

7/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A.
8/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 44 (A/49/44).
9/

Ibid., annex III.
/...

A/RES/49/177
Page 3

5.
Encourages the open-ended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights on the elaboration of a draft optional protocol to the Convention to
intensify its deliberations with a view to an early conclusion of its work;
6.
Stresses the importance of strict adherence by States parties to
their obligations under the Convention regarding the financing of the
Committee against Torture, thus enabling it to carry out in an effective and
efficient manner all the functions entrusted to it under the Convention, and
urges States parties whose arrears predate the provisions made by the
Secretary-General for financing the Committee from the regular budget to
fulfil their obligations forthwith;
7.
Invites States parties to consider contributing to the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture as a gesture reflecting the
determination of States to promote human rights;
8.
Welcomes the attention that the Committee against Torture has
given to the development of an effective system of reporting on the
implementation of the Convention by States parties, and especially its
revision of its general guidelines for the submission of reports by States
parties, as well as its practice of formulating concluding observations after
the consideration of such reports;
9.
Commends the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat for the
advisory services and technical assistance it provides to States, at their
request, in preparing national reports to the Committee;
10.
Welcomes the continuing close contacts and exchange of
information, reports and documents between the Committee against Torture and
the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on questions relating
to torture;
11.
Invites donor countries and developing countries that so agree to
consider including in their bilateral development cooperation programmes and
projects relating to the training of armed forces and police personnel in
matters relating to the protection of human rights and the prevention of
torture;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision of
appropriate staff and facilities for the effective performance of the
functions of the Committee against Torture;
13.
Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to
the Convention as a matter of priority;
14.
Invites all States ratifying or acceding to the Convention and
those States which are parties to the Convention and which have not yet done
so to make the declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the
Convention, and to consider the possibility of withdrawing their reservations
to article 20;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission on
Human Rights at its fifty-first session and to the General Assembly at its
fifty-first session a report on the status of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;

/...

A/RES/49/177
Page 4

16.
Decides to consider the reports of the Secretary-General and the
Committee against Torture at its fifty-first session under the sub-item
entitled "Implementation of human rights instruments".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
