UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3288
5 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 5 October 1993, at 6.15 p.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. BARBOSA
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MOTOMURA
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. BOHEMEN
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. de ZULUETA

Members:

Mr. Sardenberg

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER
Mr. BIVERO

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86764 (E)

S/PV.3288
2
The meeting was called to order at 6.45 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN RWANDA
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON RWANDA (S/26488 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter from the representative of Rwanda, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) took a
place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on Rwanda, documents S/26488 and Add.1.

Members

of the Council also have before them document S/26519, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of
the Council’s prior consultations.
The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Rwanda, His Excellency Mr. Anastase Gasana.

I

welcome His Excellency and invite him to address the Council.

S/PV.3288
3
Mr. GASANA (Rwanda) (interpretation from French):

I wish

on behalf of the Twandese Republic and the people of Rwanda to
congratulate you sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for October.

I am convinced

that, thanks to your vast experience as an able diplomat, the work
of the Council will be crowned with success under your leadership.
It gives me pleasure also to pay a well-deserved tribute to
His Excellency the Permanent Representative of Venezuela, who
guided the affairs of the Council last month with wisdom and
skill.

S/PV.3288
4
(Mr. Gasana, Rwanda)
On the occasion of the Security Council’s consideration of the
agenda item devoted to the situation in my country, Rwanda, I
should also like to express to the members of the Council the
Rwandese people’s thanks for their dedication and unswerving
support for the peace process in Rwanda.

We are also profoundly

grateful to the United Nations Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the indefatigable efforts he has
constantly exerted to achieve a definitive and lasting settlement
to the war situation our country has been facing since
1 October 1990.
Today, I speak to all the members of the Council as head of a
joint delegation that the two parties that only yesterday were
locked in conflict have decided to send here to the United Nations
Security Council to demonstrate their true interest in burying the
hatchet of war once and for all, in reaching a negotiated
settlement to the political problems underlying the war and in
engaging, sincerely and unequivocally, in the process of peace and
national reconciliation.

The dynamic created by the Peace

Agreement signed by the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front at Arusha, in the United Republic of Tanzania, on
4 August 1993 put an end to the war and provided the two parties
with the appropriate framework for setting up transitional
institutions designed to consolidate political pluralism and the
ongoing democratic process in Rwanda.
The Rwandese people can never find sufficient words to thank
all the countries and eminent personalities from all over the world
that stood with the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic
Front as they travelled the road of their peace negotiations.

In

this connection I have the honour to pay a special tribute to the

S/PV.3288
5
(Mr. Gasana, Rwanda)
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and to
their member States, especially those that agreed to act as
observers at the Arusha negotiations - France, the United States of
America, Germany and Belgium - as well as to the States that
dispatched contingents to Rwanda in the context of the OAU Neutral
Military Observer Group to encourage both sides to abide by the
agreed-upon cease-fire.

It is also my pleasant duty to pay a very

special tribute to the Republic of Zaire and the United Republic of
Tanzania, which generously agreed to act as mediators and
facilitators at the beginning of the conflict and continued to do
so down to the conclusion of the Peace Agreement.

Our gratitude

goes also to all the countries and international and
non-governmental organizations that spared no effort to help Rwanda
throughout the course of the war, particularly by furnishing
humanitarian assistance to those displaced by the war.
We remain deeply obliged to the Security Council for the
sustained attention it has constantly devoted to Rwanda.

The many,

diverse missions sent to Rwanda by the United Nations made it
possible to identify the ways and means best suited to bringing the
peace process to success, particularly after the dispatch of a
neutral international force with the task of backing up the
resolute determination of the United Nations to put into effect the
Peace Agreement in Rwanda.

In this connection, I should like to

tell the Secretary-General of the United Nations that the people of
Rwanda are deeply grateful for his concise and complete report,
which covers all aspects of the situation in the country and
establishes a solid foundation for the need to dispatch, a United
Nations assistance mission to Rwanda.

I am pleased to inform the

Security Council that this report is perfectly acceptable to the

S/PV.3288
6
(Mr. Gasana, Rwanda)
Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front.

Hence, on

their behalf, I ask the Council to be good enough to approve the
report and follow up the recommendations in it with the urgency
they deserve.
We Rwandans view the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda as a valuable tool for implementing the Peace Agreement for
the two belligerent parties that were yesterday pitted against each
other and are today represented here as part of a joint delegation.
Basically, this Mission will serve as an arbiter and facilitator as
we progress towards consolidating peace and achieving national
reconciliation and democratization throughout the country.Like the
OAU Neutral Military Observer Group, which that organization was
good enough to dispatch to Rwanda to monitor the implementation of
the cease-fire, the United Nations Assistance Mission will enjoy
complete security.

Thus, this United Nations operation guarantees

the success of the procress set in train for our country by the
Arusha Peace Agreement.

It is fully in keeping with the

expectations of the two parties.
I can therefore assure the Security Council that the
Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front will do all
in their power to abide strictly by the Peace Agreement and to see
to it that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda will
not encounter any problems.
My delegation has listened with care to the statements made in
recent days by eminent world personalities from the rostrum of the
General Assembly.

The positions taken by various speakers with

regard to peace-keeping operations throughout the world commanded
our attention.

We found them very encouraging, for the United

Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda is precisely in line with the

S/PV.3288
7
(Mr. Gasana, Rwanda)
prevailing philosophy.

The joint delegation of the Rwandese

Government and the Rwandese Patriotic Front is not unaware of the
financial constraints now facing the Organization and its Member
States.

We therefore subscribe to the approach recommended by the

Secretary-General in his report to ensure the progressive
deployment and withdrawal of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda.
On behalf of the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front, I thank the Security Council for the highly
important decision it is about to take to consolidate peace in
Rwanda by quickly deploying the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda.

We express in advance our gratitude to all the Member

States that will generously support the Organization to ensure the
success of that Mission and thus enable Rwanda to regain the peace
so necessary for the resumption of its development programmes.
With the Council’s permission, we should like to emphasize
that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda should be in
place as soon as possible, and we request that the deadlines set
forth in the Secretary-General’s report for its deployment be
advanced.

S/PV.3288
8
(Mr. Gasana, Rwanda)
There are indeed a number of reasons why we consider this to
be so urgent.

We have two armies, involving some 5,000 men, until

yesterday engaged in conflict, now face to face, under the
cease-fire of course; but everything must be done to see to it that
they are immediately disengaged and that this process will lead
quickly to the establishment of a joint national army.
The political will demonstrated by the two parties which,
yesterday, were at war, deserves the international community’s
support, which should facilitate the establishment of political
institutions as envisaged in the peace agreement.
Nearly one million people displaced by war impatiently await
the deployment of the United Nations mission so that they may
return home safely before the next growing season, which begins
soon, and so that the spectre of famine now hanging over them may
be banished.
Hundreds of thousands of students have not been able to go to
school for three years and are awaiting the restoration of
conditions of security in the areas stricken by war so that they
may be able to return to school without any danger.

Many refugees

from Rwanda around the world are also counting on the United
Nations mission to guarantee the security they need for their
return to their country.

Finally, war has seriously ravaged the

economy of Rwanda, and by re-establishing conditions of security
the United Nations mission will further the recovery of our economy
and will establish confidence in the countries of our sub-region,
furthering the re-establishment of the regional economic aid
programmes dislocated by war.
You will understand the importance of the political, military,
humanitarian, economic and social missions that make the United

S/PV.3288
9
(Mr. Gasana, Rwanda)
Nations mission to Rwanda both necessary and urgent.

We will

continue to be grateful to you for the positive follow-up that we
hope you will give to the recommendation by the Secretary-General
of our Organization for the urgent dispatch to Rwanda of a United
Nations assistance mission.

Once again I reconfirm that the

Rwandese Government and the Rwandese Patriotic Front, for which I
have the honour of heading a mission, a joint delegation, will
spare no pains to see to it that this will indeed be a successful
mission.
Finally, I could not possibly complete my remarks without
first, on behalf of the Rwandese people, and on behalf of the joint
delegation I am heading, addressing a word of thanks and of
profound gratitude to France, to the Government of France and to
the Permanent Mission of France here at the United Nations for
their having sponsored the draft resolution on Rwanda now before
the Council for adoption at this evening’s meeting.
All the Rwandese people, as beneficiaries of the important
decision that you are about to take, of the important resolution
you are about to adopt, this people of Rwanda will be forever
grateful to you.

I thank you.

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs

and Cooperation of Rwanda for his kind words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear

any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now call upon those members of the Council who wish to
make statements before the voting.

S/PV.3288
10
Mr. SNOUSSI (Morocco) (interpretation from French):

It is

a pleasure for me to extend to you, on behalf of the delegation of
Morocco, my sincere congratulations on your election to the
Presidency of the Security Council for the current month.

I am

convinced that your competence, your skill and your wisdom will
guide us to certain success in our deliberations.

I would like to

assure you of the availability of my delegation to cooperate fully
with you in order to guarantee the success of your task.

I am also

duty-bound to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Taylhardat,
the Permanent Representative of Venezuela, for the excellent way in
which he conducted our work during a particularly difficult and
loaded month, that of September.
It is with deep interest that my delegation has considered the
excellent report of the Secretary-General (S/26488) issued on
24 September.

We fully subscribe to the relevant recommendations

in that report, and especially those for establishing a peacekeeping force of the United Nations in Rwanda.

We are deeply

convinced, in fact, that the decision by the Security Council to
launch this operation will on the one hand contribute to the
establishment of an environment conducive to peace and a smoothly
functioning transitional Government, as provided for in the Arusha
Peace Agreement of 4 August; and will on the other hand help to
implement the provisions of that agreement and the protocols
attached to it.
My delegation is among those who feel that the Security
Council must meet quickly in order to proceed to the launching of
this operation jointly wished for by the parties involved.

As the

Secretary-General indicated in his report, we feel that any delay
in establishing the transitional arrangements in Rwanda would
jeopardize the peace process begun there and would annihilate all

S/PV.3288
11
(Mr. Snoussi, Morocco)
of the efforts made over so many months to come up with a solution
to the crisis in Rwanda.

We are therefore pleased to see that the

Security Council, having realized the urgency of this situation,
has decided to react quickly in order to avoid any possible
regrettable occurrence.

We would like in this connection to

congratulate most wholeheartedly the two parties, which have
demonstrated patience and maturity and have thus shown their
sincere will to cooperate and their desire to achieve
reconciliation.
Rwanda has suffered enough from the consequences of a
fratricidal war which has devastated the country and reduced
thousands of individuals to flight, famine and exile.

My country,

which has always advocated dialogue and the peaceful reconciliation
of conflicts, can only express its pleasure at the positive
developments in the political situation in Rwanda.

We hope that we

will see a successful outcome of the peace process that has begun,
and that it will lead to the consolidation of democracy in that
fraternal African country.
It is encouraging, furthermore, to see that, thanks to the
initiative taken by the Secretary-General and to the efforts made
by the international community, the humanitarian situation in
Rwanda has improved considerably.

The inter-agency appeal launched

by the United Nations last April to bring international assistance
to some 900,000 persons displaced by the war - 13 per cent of the
Rwandan population - has led to tangible results:

600,000 refugees

have now returned home following the signature by the parties, of
the Agreement of 30 May 1993 concerning the return of displaced
persons.

S/PV.3288
12
(Mr. Snoussi, Morocco)
Nevertheless, we should acknowledge that, despite the progress
achieved, the humanitarian problem is far from being resolved.

We

feel, therefore, that humanitarian activities must be undertaken on
a large scale in order to meet the immediate needs of the Rwandan
people and most particularly of the 300,000 individuals who have
not yet been rehabilitated.
The international community, moreover, must provide all
necessary economic, financial and technical assistance to Rwanda to
help this fraternal country to begin the reconstruction and
rehabilitation work necessary to bring prosperity and peace to the
Rwandan people.
Anxious to see Rwanda live in security and peace and overcome
this terrible period of crisis that it has gone through, my
delegation can only support the draft resolution in which we have
participated actively, in the hope that the parties will respect it
in good faith for the future good of their country.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Morocco for

his kind words addressed to me.

S/PV.3288
13
Mr. BARBOSA (Cape Verde) (interpretation from French):

I

greet most warmly His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Rwanda and
thank him deeply for his contribution in the form of the statement
he has just made before this Council.
Allow me first and foremost, Mr. President, to congratulate
you most warmly on your noteworthy election to the presidency of
the Security Council.

Indeed, it is a source of deep satisfaction

for my country to see Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg - a
skilled and experienced diplomat representing a country with which
Cape Verde has very special ties based on common language, culture
and history - presiding over the work of the Council this month.
I should like also to place on record our deepest appreciation
for the efficacy displayed by Ambassador Adolfo Taylhardat of
Venezuela in guiding our work last month, when he had just assumed
his functions as Permanent Representative of his country to the
United Nations and also at a time when we had to grapple with very
difficult issues.
It is not every day that we have the opportunity to welcome
here in the United Nations the official delegation of a country
ravaged by a national conflict made up of those who only yesterday
were pitted against each other in war.

This bears eloquent witness

not only to the dedication of both parties to finding a definitive
solution to the conflict in Rwanda but also to the unshakeable
determination of an entire people regarding the imperative need for
United Nations forces in Rwanda in order to preserve the moment of
confidence and optimism and for the peace plan to be implemented as
quickly as possible.

We therefore welcome this Council’s ability

once again to display keen awareness of the facts and to exercise
the responsibilities assigned it by the United Nations Charter.

S/PV.3288
14
(Mr. Barbosa, Cape Verde)
By adopting the draft resolution before us, the Council will
be lending its approval to the proposals contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/26488) of 24 September 1993, aiming
at the phased implementation of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda.

The proper and rapid implementation of this

consensus draft resolution is, in our view, a sine qua non for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda to carry out its work
successfully in the context of the cease-fire; in terms of
establishing various cantonment areas and areas where military
personnel and weapons are to be gathered; in mine-clearing; in
humanitarian aid; in the return of refugees and displaced persons;
in disarmament and the demobilization of the armed forces; and,
finally, in the restructuring of the Rwandese defence forces.
This decisive contribution of the United Nations to the
resolution of the conflict unleashed in Rwanda is, at the same
time, in the eyes of many - and especially the small countries - an
assurance that now more than ever the United Nations is, during
this turbulent phase of the transition to a new international
order, the main instrument at the service of the peoples of the
world in questions relating to the promotion and preservation of
international peace and security.
We could not possibly overestimate the importance of
international humanitarian assistance to this country, where, ever
since hostilities broke out in 1991, more than a million people
have found themselves refugees or displaced persons.

Economic and

social progress have been jeopardized, and vast numbers of mines
have been scattered over the national soil.
We hope that the political will of the international community
to help the Rwandese people, which is referred to in paragraph 17

S/PV.3288
15
(Mr. Barbosa, Cape Verde)
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/26488), will be speedily
translated into concrete acts of support for national
reconstruction and that the international round table on aid to
Rwanda will be held as envisaged at the beginning of 1994.
At the very moment when we are adopting this important

draft

resolution, we deem it timely to call to mind the history of the
conflict in Rwanda and the process leading to its settlement in
order to highlight the decisive role played then and still being
played by the Organization of African Unity (OAS) and by Tanzania,
a facilitator country.

Indeed, the action of the OAU shows the

importance of correctness of the Secretary-General’s proposals in
"An Agenda for Peace", dealing with the role of organizations and
regional arrangements in the realm of conflict resolution in
concert with the United Nations.

For this reason, while

appreciating the magnificent actions of the OAU in the service of
the international community, we cannot but encourage it from this
lofty forum to pursue its efforts along the same lines, to avail
itself more and more of the help of the entire international
community and to arm itself with more mechanisms and necessary
means for the accomplishment of the noble task of preventing and
resolving conflicts in Africa.
We should like to conclude by sending out an urgent appeal to
the Rwandese parties to maintain in the future the same attitude
they have displayed today, because with them lies the most
important key to the resolution of the conflict in their country.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Cape Verde

for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

At the outset, Sir, I wish to

congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the presidency

S/PV.3288
16
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
of the Council for this month.

Indeed, your intense probing,

intellectual capacity and extensive experience will be of immense
benefit to this Council.
I wish also to express our deep gratitude to Ambassador
Taylhardat of Venezuela for his leadership of the Council during
the past, important, month.

We have all come to respect the high

level of ability he has demonstrated.
I cannot fail to acknowledge the presence in our midst of the
honourable Foreign Minister of Rwanda and the strong, joint
delegation he is heading.

We are very impressed by the way they

have convincingly presented their case to us and for their
perseverance in seeing this draft resolution become a reality
before their departure for home.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his detailed and comprehensive report on the
situation in Rwanda.

It is evident that there is a genuine desire

for peace on the part of the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front.

The period of time during which they have

negotiated together over the many aspects of the peace accord they
have discussed and agreed upon bear witness to this.

Hopefully,

this will allow the United Nations to return to its classic role in
peace-keeping, that of implementing an agreement desired and
accepted by both parties.

For this reason my delegation fully

supports the draft resolution before us authorizing United Nations
participation in this process.

Hopefully, United Nations peace-

keepers and monitors can be placed in a timely manner, the most
urgent of which appears to be the termination of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) monitor’s mandate on 31 October this year.
We should note with appreciation the constant supportive role
played by the OAU, the Government of Tanzania as a facilitator and

S/PV.3288
17
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
the Government of France, to name only a few, towards the
achievement of a meaningful political settlement in this terrible
drama.

The Secretary-General and his staff are to be praised for

the way they have followed this event and the steps they have taken
to bring the sides together with others to bring peace.

It is

another example of United Nations regional cooperation which should
end on a positive note.

S/PV.3288
18
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
We have often expressed our deep concern at the situation in
Rwanda and the violations of the Peace Agreement cease-fire
stipulations.

In addition to the mounting human toll and desperate

refugee situation, there is also the fear that the impact of this
conflict could become pervasive in the region, certainly with
disastrous consequences for all.
While all these fears have abated for the moment, it is
critical for all of us to seize this opportunity for peace as
quickly as possible and begin the implementation process.

The

rival military elements must be separated and disarmed with all
haste and reintegrated armed forces and police instituted in due
course.
One of the aspects of the Secretary-General’s report which
deserves praise is the very logical way in which the activities of
the United Nations have been considered and goals and timetables
set.

There seems to be general agreement that a transitional

Government is needed to handle affairs until elections are
arranged, and that none of this can take place without the presence
of the United Nations.

This again underscores the timeliness of

this draft resolution and the need for us to be established in
Rwanda as soon as possible.
My delegation also appreciates the emphasis placed in the
report on the humanitarian situation and the return of nearly two
thirds of the displaced persons to their homes.

We cannot

overemphasize the need to work out the dire refugee situation and
we strongly commend the vital roles played by the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

S/PV.3288
19
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
Finally, we note that the increasingly alarming problem of
mines will be dealt with, as that seems to pose a serious threat to
the civilian population.

The call for continued support for Rwanda

is therefore well taken.

We support the present draft resolution

calling for the creation of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda and the Secretary-General’s desire to move as quickly as
possible to be in place while the spirit of all involved is
positive.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Djibouti for

his kind words addressed to me.
The Council will now take a decision on the draft resolution
contained in document S/26519.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 872 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. MÉRIMÉE (France) (interpretation from French):

My

delegation welcomes the adoption of this resolution by our Council.
In taking this step, the Council has met the expectations of
Rwandans which have been repeatedly expressed to the United Nations
through representatives of the Government and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front and which were reiterated a moment ago by the
Foreign Minister of Rwanda.

We welcome his presence among us.

S/PV.3288
20
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
Moreover, in acting promptly the Security Council has made it
possible to establish an element essential to the full
implementation of the Arusha Peace Agreement signed on 4 August.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) will
make it possible truly to set in motion the peace process by
installing in the Rwandese capital provisional institutions which
will be able, in turn, to launch the process of economic
reconstruction and organize the repatriation of many refugees and
displaced persons.

That is why the Secretary-General is authorized

to deploy a contingent in Kigali as soon as possible.

This

deployment will then be followed by the dispatching to Rwanda of
other elements to be put gradually into place.
However, in establishing this operation, the Security Council
does not intend to wait passively for the peace process to
conclude.

Our Council clearly indicates that the United Nations

does not intend to remain in Rwanda indefinitely.
fact been set up with a specific deadline.

UNAMIR has in

Furthermore, our

Council will soon be considering a report reviewing the
implementation of the Arusha Peace Agreement, on which may hinge
the successive deployments being foreseen.
These precautions amount to a number of elements that must
prompt the Rwandese Government and the Patriotic Front to work
together to restore peace to Rwanda after a conflict that, sadly,
has had too many victims.

The example they are setting - an all

too rare example - of the coming together of two parties long
opposed must lead our Council to recognize that this is a special
case of United Nations intervention, in the success of which my
country believes.

S/PV.3288
21
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

My Government would

like to congratulate the parties involved in concluding the Arusha
Peace Agreement.

We would also like to add our congratulations to

the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania, which kept the
parties talking even when it seemed unlikely that agreement could
be reached.

I think its role as a facilitator is one which the

Council should recognize.
We regard the Arusha Peace Agreement as a good example of the
way in which a regional organization can contribute to conflict
resolution.

In a sense, an African solution was found to an

African problem.

We would like to encourage regional

organizations, and in particular the Organization of African Unity,
to build on this experience in the spirit that was set out in the
communiqué to the Cairo summit.

It is important, in our view, that

the Organization of African Unity should remain engaged in the
implementation of this settlement.
We recognize that the roots of this dispute, which has caused
so much damage and so much loss of life, go back many years.
Ultimately, it is for the Rwandese themselves to bring about a
solution and to create an atmosphere which will enable the safe
return of the refugees from neighbouring countries and the
resettlement of displaced persons within Rwanda.

But it is of

course right that the international community should help them in
this task.
My Government attaches importance to the early logistical and
administrative integration of the United Nations Observer Mission
Uganda-Rwanda (UNOMUR) into the force now being set up in Rwanda.
But I should make it clear that we regard that as without any
prejudice to the continuing validity of the different mandates of
these two forces, the mandate of UNOMUR being set out in resolution
846 (1993) and not changed in any way by this present resolution.

S/PV.3288
22
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
Peace agreements such as this are only a success if they are
pursued in good faith and sincerity by all the parties involved.
As recent events elsewhere have demonstrated, the United Nations
cannot impose peace where there is no willingness to sustain
compromise.

It is therefore, in our view, essential that the

parties continue to cooperate fully and stick firmly to the
timetable that they have set for themselves for national
reconciliation and elections.
Mr. WALKER (United States of America):

Let me take this

opportunity to congratulate both the Government of Rwanda and the
Rwandese Patriotic Front for their successful efforts to negotiate
a peace accord, which resulted in the signing of the Arusha Peace
Agreement on 4 August, 1993.

We congratulate the farsighted

leaders of both parties who had the courage to put aside their
differences and opt for peace over war.

Also, we should commend

both the Organization of African Unity and the Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania for their roles in bringing the two
parties together.
The resolution just adopted by the Security Council is another
major step in resolving the conflict in Rwanda.

We have every hope

that our action today will reinforce peace - a crucial prerequisite
which allows both parties to build on the trust they have created.
We support the deployment of this force because it will advance the
goals of peaceful conflict resolution and democratization, and
allow the return of hundreds of thousands of those who have fled
their homes.

It is now up to the Rwandese themselves to ensure

that the transition to democracy moves forward.

S/PV.3288
23
(Mr. Walker, United States)
As the Council knows, my Government is deeply concerned about
the increasing burden - both in terms of manpower and financial
resources - which the United Nations is being asked to shoulder.
For that reason we are pleased to note that this resolution has a
tightly focused mandate.

This body’s continued support will depend

in large measure on the demonstration of substantive progress
towards the implementation of the peace agreement and the
establishment of transitional institutions in advance of national
elections.

My Government will continue to monitor and work to

reduce costs and personnel levels throughout this peace-keeping
operation, and we look forward to the report by the SecretaryGeneral called for in the resolution on ways to reduce the levels
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) and to
contain costs.
Now that the resolution has passed, let me stress the need for
the United Nations and all member States to take prompt action to
take advantage of the present climate of cooperation.

Let us help

Rwanda begin the process of disarmament and demobilization in order
to allow Rwandans to rebuild their country and their livelihoods.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China)(interpretation from Chinese):

The

Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Rwanda at the Council meeting.

We would also like to thank him for

the important statement he has just made.
On 4 August this year the Government of Rwanda and the
Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF) signed in Arusha a peace agreement
which has laid a solid foundation for ending the tragic war and
restoring peace and stability in the country.

This is the result

of the joint efforts of the two Rwandese parties, the United
Nations Secretary-General, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)

S/PV.3288
24
(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
and Tanzania.

For this we wish to express our welcome and

appreciation.
At present, as the peace process in Rwanda has entered a
crucial stage, the key to peace and stability in Rwanda lies in
whether the two parties will fully cooperate with the United
Nations and the OAU, adopt effective measures, overcome their
difficulties, comprehensively implement the Arusha Peace Agreement
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and start forthwith
the cantonment and demobilization of their troops so as to create
the necessary conditions for the establishment of the transitional
institutions and the holding of the general election on schedule.
At the repeated request of the two parties, the SecretaryGeneral has recommended the establishment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR).

This will help the two

parties build mutual trust and contribute to the realization of
national reconciliation and lasting peace in the country.
The Chinese delegation supports the above-mentioned
recommendation of the Secretary-General and voted in favour of the
resolution the Council has just adopted.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

My delegation joins others in

welcoming the Foreign Minister of Rwanda.
My delegation is also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his most comprehensive and lucid report on Rwanda, which has served
to considerably facilitate our deliberations on future United
Nations involvement in that country.
We congratulate the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese
Patriotic Front (RPF) on the foresight they displayed in arriving
at an Agreement in Arusha on 4 August.

S/PV.3288
25
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
There is no doubt that the people of Rwanda, its institutions
and its infrastructure have suffered profoundly due to the
political tussle and the resulting turmoil.

According to the

report of the Secretary-General, by March this year about 900,000
people, or approximately 13 per cent of the Rwandese population,
had been displaced.

This is a very high percentage by any

standard. The good news is that around two thirds of the displaced
persons have already returned to their homes, but this still leaves
a significant number in refugee camps and in need of assistance.
We have been impressed by the determination and vigour with
which the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front are
pursuing the objective of national reconciliation and the
establishment of a transitional mechanism that would lead to
general elections and, hopefully, a democratically elected
Government.

This transformation in the Rwandese polity after years

of tension and turmoil indeed augurs well for that country.

We

wish the people and the leaders of Rwanda every success in this
regard.
The Secretary-General’s proposal to establish a United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), the concept of operations,
the proposed force structure and the deployment schedule spelled
out by him, are cogent and well-considered.

In view of the

keenness shown in this context by the Rwandese parties concerned,
the Council’s response could be none other than positive.
We also deeply appreciate the helpful role played by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and its Secretary-General, as
well as by the President of Tanzania, in bringing the situation in
Rwanda to its present hopeful stage.
My delegation appeals to all concerned to operate strictly
within the time-frame provided in the report of the Secretary-

S/PV.3288
26
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
General and the resolution just adopted.

A sense of urgency should

remain paramount.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation)(interpretation from
Russian):

We also welcome the presence here at today’s meeting of

the Foreign Minister of Rwanda.
Russia welcomed the signing on 4 August this year of the
Arusha Peace Agreement, as it demonstrated the ability of the
regional machinery of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to
unravel the intricate knots of conflict on the African continent by
political methods.
The Russian delegation believes that the establishment, in
accordance with the resolution the Security Council has just
adopted, of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) should promote effective compliance with the terms of the
Peace Agreement by the Rwanda sides.

It should help to resolve

this long-drawn-out conflict and restore peace and stability.
Russia has consistently advocated, and continues to advocate
both here in the Security Council and elsewhere, the pooling of
United Nations efforts and the efforts of regional organizations in
the resolution of conflicts.

In that connection, we believe that

the experience of effective interaction between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity in the Rwanda settlement
could also be utilized in other areas of the world where there are
hotbeds of tension that require determined intervention by the
international community.
Russia for its part is also prepared in future, together with
the international community, to support United Nations efforts and
efforts of regional organizations aimed at seeking peaceful ways to
resolve military conflicts and crises.

S/PV.3288
27
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now make a statement in my

capacity as the representative of Brazil.
The signing of the Arusha Peace Agreement and its protocols by
the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF) was
a most welcome and encouraging development.

It brought with it the

promise of a lasting peace and national reconciliation for the
people of Rwanda.

It opened the way for a definitive solution of

serious humanitarian problems resulting from the conflict,
including the return and resettlement of the hundreds of thousands
of Rwandese refugees and displaced persons.
Brazil values the efforts made by African States, and most
particularly by Tanzania, in facilitating and promoting the
negotiations that led to that significant achievement.

The role of

the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in strengthening the peace
process and in contributing to the implementation of the Arusha
Agreement will continue to be extremely important.

S/PV.3288
28
(The President)
Aware of the pressing tasks of peace and reconstruction in
Rwanda, we examined the recommendation submitted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/26488), for which we are thankful, in
particular the recommendation for the establishment of a new peacekeeping mission to assist in implementation of the Arusha Peace
Agreement.
The two Rwandese parties agreed to call for the assistance of
a neutral international force, to be deployed in Rwanda.

The

Brazilian Government is convinced that the presence in that country
of neutral troops on the basis of a multilaterally established
mandate could indeed be of assistance by contributing to greater
security, especially in the city of Kigali, by monitoring the
cease-fire and by promoting compliance with the provisions of the
Peace Agreement.

Brazil therefore supports the proposal of sending

to Rwanda a peace-keeping mission, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral.
The mandate of the mission is set out in the resolution we
have just adopted.

It is clear and it is realistic.

believe, the elements necessary for success.

It has, we

The participation in

our deliberations of representatives of the joint Rwandese
delegation, led by the Foreign Minister of Rwanda himself, is a
clear sign of the willingness of both parties to work towards
peace, and it reassures the United Nations that the two parties are
committed to the concepts of disarmament, demobilization and
reconciliation that form the framework for building a peaceful and
prosperous future for the Rwandese people.
The Brazilian Government lends its support to their joint
endeavours, and we strongly encourage them to continue to work hard
to put into effect the provisions of the Peace Agreement.

We look

S/PV.3288
29
(The President)
forward to a successful and undelayed conclusion of the peace
process with the holding of national elections and the ensuing
installation of the new Government in 1995.
The conflict in Rwanda has lasted for too long, as all
conflicts do.

As all conflicts do, it leaves behind a trail of

humanitarian and economic problems that will no doubt pose a
difficult challenge to the Rwandese people.

We trust that by

placing all their hopes in the construction of peace and by
building an ever-broader basis of confidence and reconciliation,
the people of Rwanda, with appropriate assistance by the
international community, will soon succeed in their effort.

The

new world that they are building will, we trust, prove to be one
that is irreversibly oriented towards a future of peace and
development.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.
